NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event “a bittersweet day for NASA.” The spacecraft, NASA’s “gamma-ray equivalent” of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellite’s control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASA’s efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns,” news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, “Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth,” news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, “A Satellite’s Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project,” Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiter’s solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileo’s magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelson’s team had measured the moon’s magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings “best explained by a thick layer of water⎯about as salty as Earth’s oceans⎯hidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath” the moon’s surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared “to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface.” Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiter’s intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Solar System’s Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean,” news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, “Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiter’s Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life,” Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundation⎯now a part of Illinois Institute of Technology⎯had directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: “There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being ‘military high ground’.” The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, “Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project,” Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 13−14; Associated Press, “Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon,” 18 May 2000.)
As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
Arianespace, the France-based European satellite launch company, announced that it had won a contract to launch three more satellites for INTELSAT, the international satellite corporation based in Washington, DC. Arianespace already held a contract to launch three other satellites in the INTELSAT IX series. INTELSAT had scheduled six of the series’ seven spacecraft for launch from mid-2001 through the end of 2002, on Ariane 4 or Ariane 5 launch vehicles, from Europe’s spaceport in French Guiana. California-based Space Systems/Loral was building the 4.7-tonne (4,700-kilogram or 5.2-ton) satellites. In 1965 INTELSAT had launched the world’s first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird.(Reuters, “France: Arianespace in Deal To Launch 3 INTELSAT Satellites,” 27 September 2000.)
NASA’s Office of Earth Sciences selected Gencorp Aerojet to build the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), a spaceborne instrument for measuring microwave energy emitted and scattered by the atmosphere. NASA intended the ATMS to replace instruments currently used on polar-orbiting weather satellites. NASA planned for the ATMS, working alongside an infrared sounder instrument, to produce daily global atmospheric temperature, humidity, and pressure profiles, essential for accurate weather forecasting and long-term climate research. Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that the advanced technology would improve the accuracy of weather forecasting, from the current three-to-five day forecast span to seven-to-ten day predictions. NASA planned to fly the first unit as part of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project Bridge mission, intended to ensure continuity of research-quality data through the bridging of sounding data between NASA’s Earth Observing System research missions and future NPOESS operational missions. Goddard Space Flight Center would provide oversight of the contract, worth US$206.6 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Build Next Generation Weather Instrument,” news release C00-q, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-q.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented awards to three minority contractors at NASA’s annual Minority Business and Advocates Awards Ceremony. RS Information Services (RSIS), based in McLean, Virginia, won Minority Contractor of the Year; Rigging and Welding Specialists Inc., a Native American–owned business, won Minority Subcontractor of the Year; and Pace and Waite Inc. won Women-Owned Business of the Year. In addition, NASA recognized advocates for innovative approaches to using minority- and women-owned businesses, awarding NASA’s Exceptional Achievement Medal to Kenneth Martindale and Rodney J. Etchberger of Johnson Space Center and to Shantaram S. Pai of Glenn Research Center. Furthermore, NASA recognized five individuals for outstanding achievements and three NASA field centers for meeting or exceeding all socioeconomic business goals for FY 1999.(NASA, “NASA To Honor Minority Businesses,” news release 00-148, 25 September 2000, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-148.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The mission’s crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission,” 8 September 2000; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASA’s second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatch’s failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissom’s claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Grissom’s Capsule Back at Space Center,” 14 June 2000.)
Jason Allen Diekman of Mission Viejo, California, pled guilty to federal charges of computer crimes after negotiating a deal with prosecutors. Prosecutors had charged Diekman in September with illegal hacking and with using stolen credit card numbers to purchase US$6,000 worth of computer equipment and other items. He had confessed to investigators that he had hacked into “hundreds, maybe thousands” of computers over two years, including systems at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, Cornell University, the University of California at San Diego, and California State University at Fullerton. Diekman’s most serious confessed invasions had occurred at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where he had gained root-level access to two computer systems, and at Stanford University, where he had gained control over 24 systems, two of them owned by NASA and containing flight-control software for NASA’s satellites. The U.S. District Judge set sentencing for 5 February 2001.(David Rosenzweig, “Hacker Pleads Guilty to Invading JPL, Stanford Computers Crime: Mission Viego Man, 20, Accepts Federal Plea Bargain. He Had Gained Control of NASA Computers at Both Sites,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 2000.)
Princeton University graduate student Xiaohui Fan discovered a distant quasar that scientists believed to be the oldest object ever observed by a human being. Fan had worked as part of a team using the 32-foot (10-meter) W. M. Keck Telescope. Estimating that the quasar was (Associated Press, “Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks,” 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, “Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal,” news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americom’s fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four others⎯the GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4⎯to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide “service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.”(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site,” news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
New NASA research published in the 1 October issue of the American Meteorological Society’s Journal of Climate warned that clouds might not help counteract climate-warming trends. Anthony D. Del Genio, of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York City, had analyzed observations of low clouds over land, collected between 1994 and 1997 as part of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Atmospheric Radiation Measurement program. Del Genio had found that clouds are thinner when temperatures were higher, a phenomenon occurring in any weather condition or season and at any time of day. Some climate theories had predicted that high temperatures would cause thicker clouds because of an increase in water vapor, but Del Genio explained that during warmer temperatures, the bottoms of clouds rise and become thinner. This occurs because clouds that form over a warm, dry air mass must rise higher before becoming sufficiently saturated with water to form a cloud base. Thinner clouds are less capable of reflecting sunlight back into space and are, therefore, unable to act as a “natural sun shield.” Del Genio’s findings corroborated long-term, worldwide satellite observations, published using the NASA-funded International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) database. The ISCCP, a global composite of cloud observations from international weather satellites, began showing a link between cloud thinning and temperature in 1992.(NASA, “Revised⎯NASA Scientist Predicts Less Climate Cooling from Clouds,” news release 00-151, 3 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-151.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
At the American Astronomical Society convention, scientists Karl Gebhardt and Douglas O. Richstone announced that an extensive survey of more than 30 galaxies had revealed that black holes reach their large size through gradual growth. Previously, some research had suggested the opposite⎯that black holes were simply “born” big. Using the HST, Gebhardt and Richstone had led a team of astronomers in determining the size of black holes in different galaxies. They found that, although small galaxies tend to have smaller black holes, the largest known galaxies have mammoth black holes. The astronomers suspected that the black holes had “grown up” along with the galaxies where they resided, feeding on gas and stars to acquire increasing mass. Although further research must determine the precise correlation between black hole and galaxy size, the scientific community greeted news of the discovery with great interest. The HST had not only made the discovery possible but had provided the opportunity for scientists to continue “black hole hunting,” to tabulate more exact answers.(NASA, “Black Holes Shed Light on Galaxy Formation,” news release 00-88, 5 June 2000. 267)
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARC’s chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASA’s astrobiology program and to establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffen’s two loves, and that “the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.”(NASA, “NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies,” news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, “Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official,” 27 November 2000.)
The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASA’s special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Voss’s mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the class’s trip to NASA to watch Endeavour’s launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.”(Billy Cox, “Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
The National Aviation Hall of Fame inducted four new members at a black-tie dinner and formal enshrinement ceremony at the Dayton Convention Center in Dayton, Ohio. Apollo astronaut Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. joined fellow Apollo 11 astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in the Hall of Fame. Aviators previously inducted to the Hall of Fame included Eugene A. Cernan, the last Apollo astronaut to walk on the Moon; Laurence C. “Bill” Craigie, the first U.S. military aviator to fly a jet aircraft; and Thomas B. McGuire Jr., the second-leading fighter ace in U.S. Air Force history. The National Aviation Hall of Fame’s Class of 2000 joined 166 award-winning aviators already chosen for the honor.(Dayton Daily News (OH), “Astronaut Meets a Fan; Aviation Hall of Fame Enshrines 4 More,” 16 July 2000.)
Astronomers using images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered what they believed to be the first examples of “isolated stellar-mass black holes adrift among the stars of our galaxy.” They announced their discovery at a convention of the American Astronomical Society. The findings supported a long-standing theory that black holes could form with the collapse of just one massive star, although an opposing theory had concluded that multiple stars must collapse in tandem. Moreover, the researchers’ contribution was the latest in a string of recent findings illuminating the relatively commonplace nature of black holes.(NASA, “Lone Black Holes Discovered Adrift in the Galaxy,” news release 00-4, 13 January 2000.)
Scientists at the American Astronomical Society convention also unveiled the first detailed map of the region of the universe inhabited by Earth. Using an Australian robotic telescope, which measured distances between more than 100,000 galaxies, researchers had charted the locations of galaxies, dark regions, and cosmic clusters. Perhaps most significantly, the new map supported a long-standing theory regarding the size limits of cosmic structures. Because of the relatively small scope of previous mapping surveys, scientists had questioned whether the known standards of cosmic size were representative. The newest map, however, did not reveal any cosmic structure outside of previous standards. Therefore, scientists could support with greater conviction the idea that size limits existed as the universe evolved. The researchers termed the limits the “end of greatness.”(James Glanz, “Robotic Telescope Affirms Assumption on Universe’s Birth,” New York Times, 7 June 2000. 933 Mark Carreau, “Rocket Gives Space Station a Life,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 2000.)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) selected Space Systems and Applications Inc. of Lanham, Maryland, to provide engineering, science, and technology support for NASA’s Space and Earth Science Directorates. The value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract was US$204.5 million over a period of five years. Under the contract, NASA required Space Systems and Applications to provide research and information technology services including scientific data analysis, modeling and simulation of physical processes, development of flight-project data systems and large-scale data management, archival and delivery systems, and systems analysis and programming. These services would support a broad range of scientific disciplines⎯astronomy and astrophysics, climatology and atmospheric science, geodynamics, land processes, oceanography, planetary studies, solar and space plasma physics, and solid earth geographics.(NASA, “Contract for Goddard Space Center Support Awarded,” news release C00-j, 6 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-j.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA released the research results of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic 1998 voyage aboard Shuttle Discovery. The report detailed the 88 experiments conducted on Mission STS-95, the most of any Shuttle mission. NASA responded to some critics, who called the mission a publicity-driven flight with little scientific value, disclosing that Glenn himself had participated in 10 experiments during the mission. After becoming the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962, Glenn had returned to space 36 years later to achieve another record⎯the oldest man to fly in space.(Associated Press, “Scientific Results of Glenn’s Mission Released by NASA,” 28 January 2000.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft set an astronomical record by facilitating the discovery of 102 comets. The spacecraft featured a Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument that allowed astronomers to observe comets that previously would have been invisible. Douglas A. Biesecker, an astronomer at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, was responsible for making 45 discoveries on his own. According to the researchers working on the project, SOHO had revealed far more suicidal comets (those plunging into the Sun’s atmosphere) and sungrazers (those that pass by the Sun) than scientists had previously expected to find. The findings had practical implications as well. By observing the patterns of comets as they circled, collided, and split, scientists hoped that they might be better prepared to predict the behavior of a comet headed for Earth.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Bags 102 Comets,” news release 00-23, 8 February 2000.)
President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum for “its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built.” NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists’ knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners,” news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
Two Earth-monitoring satellites launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Boeing Delta II rocket, successfully reaching orbit. NASA launched its Earth Observing I (EO-I) satellite, part of its New Millenium Program, to test several advanced technologies for possible use in future missions. NASA planned to fly the US$193 million craft within 2 miles (3 kilometers) of the Landsat 7 satellite to collect the same images, with the Landsat 7 images serving as the benchmark for the new imager aboard the EO-I. The second satellite⎯the multinational SAC-C satellite, a joint venture of NASA, Argentina, Brazil, Denmark, France, and Italy⎯carried 11 instruments for studying the Earth’s surface, atmosphere, and magnetic field, including an instrument to observe the migration of the Franca whale.(Associated Press, “Two Earth-Monitoring Satellites,” 21 November 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discovery’s crew⎯Commander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthur⎯was transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
Engineers completed a weeklong series of tests on the U.S.-built Destiny laboratory, planned to launch to the ISS in 2001, ensuring that the module had no leaks and would provide a safe, vacuum-sealed environment in which the ISS astronauts could conduct research. NASA and the Boeing Company had worked together to test the 32,000-pound (14,500-kilogram) research laboratory. Placing Destiny in a pressurized chamber, engineers had monitored gas levels inside the module over the course of the week. Tip Talone, Director of the ISS Payload Process at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), characterized the results as “a large step in meeting the lab’s ‘Destiny’,” stating that the laboratory had “exceeded expectations.”(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space State Laboratory Exceeds Expectations in Vacuum Chamber Test,” 7 July 2000.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report discussing workforce and safety issues of NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. The report assessed the impact of workforce reductions on the Shuttle program; the challenges that NASA would face as it addressed its workforce issues; and the status of planned safety and supportability upgrades to the Space Shuttle. GAO identified 26 technical skills needed at JSC in Houston, Texas, as well as at other facilities in Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi. In addition, GAO found that the decrease from 3,000 to 1,800 federal employees in the Shuttle program workforce since 1995 had placed NASA at a “critical juncture.” The Shuttle launch rate had dropped from eight launches in 1997 to three in 1999, a trend on the cusp of reversing itself in the aftermath of the July 1999 launch of Russia’s Zvezda module. Moreover, GAO reported signs of overwork and stress among NASA staff. Worker demographics⎯twice as many workers over age 60 as under age 30⎯had compounded the problem of a declining workforce. NASA officials welcomed the report, although the results reflected “a much harsher assessment of [S]huttle safety issues [than the assessment] prepared by NASA itself in response to an electrical short that accompanied the July 1999 launching of the [S]huttle Columbia.” GAO also reported that NASA had terminated downsizing plans in December 1999 and had initiated efforts to begin hiring new staff. Although it was developing safety and supportability upgrades, which it would implement over the next five years, NASA still faced programmatic and technical challenges, such as a demanding schedule and undefined design and workforce requirements.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Shuttle: Human Capital and Safety Upgrade Challenges Require Continued Attention” (report no. GAO/NSIAD/GGD-00-186, Washington, DC, August 2000), http://www.gao.gov/ archive/2000/n200186.pdf (accessed 9 May 2008); Mark Carreau, “Undersized Work Force Puts NASA at ‘Critical Juncture’,” Houston Chronicle, 31 August 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-97, carrying to the ISS Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Joseph R. Tanner, Marc Garneau, and Carlos I. Noriega. The purpose of STS-97, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 4A, was to connect solar arrays, to prepare a docking port for the U.S.-made Destiny module, to install Floating Potential Probes, to install camera cable outside the Unity module, and to transfer supplies, refuse, and equipment between the ISS and the Shuttle.(NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-97, International Space Station Assembly Flight 4A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-97.html (accessed 30 October 2008). 1054 Chicago Tribune, “20-Year-Old Pleads Guilty to Hacking into NASA Computers,” 3 December 2000.)
Robert R. Gilruth, “an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo,” died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics’s Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, “his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.”(NASA, “Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies,” news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
The U.S. Department of Justice filed a lawsuit against Rockwell International Inc., Boeing North American Inc., and United Space Alliance for concealing millions of dollars in fraud committed by a subcontractor. According to the suit, the subcontractor had used funds from the Shuttle program to purchase homes, jewelry, and vacations. The subcontractor accused of the fraud had pled guilty to all charges five years earlier, and the culpability of the major aerospace companies in concealing the theft was the last significant legal matter to come to trial. The three companies claimed that they had cooperated with government investigations into the 180 felony fraud violations and were not liable for the actions of the rogue subcontractor.(Associated Press, “Government Sues Three Companies, Including Boeing North American, over Space Shuttle Program Fraud,” 12 January 2000.)
In the wake of the failure of the Mars Polar Lander Mission, an independent assessment team appointed by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin assembled for the first time to begin a review of NASA’s approach to the exploration of Mars. The 16-member team included aeronautics experts from NASA, aerospace industries, the U.S. Air Force, and academia. Although NASA officials held out hope that Lander would eventually respond to signals from Earth, Goldin tasked the team with evaluating NASA’s successful and unsuccessful missions to Mars. The independent investigation continued NASA’s pattern of scrutinizing all failures to improve its proficiency in the exploration of space.
The “Love Bug” computer virus infected the computer system of NASA, along with those of the Pentagon, the CIA, Microsoft Corporation, Ford Motor Company, and other major business and government offices. Considered one of the most damaging and costly computer viruses in history, “Love Bug” spread primarily through e-mail messages, corrupting files on millions of computers. Four of NASA’s 10 space centers suffered from the attack, causing both Johnson Space Center (JSC) and Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to shut down e-mail and other communication between computers.(Los Angeles Times, “Fast Moving Virus Hits Computers Worldwide,” 5 May 2000.)
Responding to a 25 January 2000 article in the New York Times, alleging that grants in the mid- 1990s had benefited the Russian civilian agency Biopreparat, NASA’s Office of Inspector General published a report stating that NASA had not followed the U.S. Department of State’s guidelines for administering biotechnology grants to Russia, thereby inadvertently funding germ- warfare laboratories. The Russian government owned 51 percent of Biopreparat, the organization that had conducted most of the Soviet Union’s biological warfare research since the 1970s. At the time of the article’s publication, Biopreparat was continuing to research pathogens that had been included in the Soviet biological warfare program. The Inspector General found that “almost three-fourths of US$1.68 million in NASA grants intended for space biotechnology work found its way to ‘institutions that had been affiliated with Russia’s biological warfare program’.” Therefore, the Inspector General asserted that NASA had not followed the Department of State’s guidelines requiring NASA to “regularly visit and participate in the research it was funding at Russian institutes that had been part of the Soviet biological warfare program.” NASA agreed with the Inspector General’s sole recommendation: to practice “invasive collaboration” in the future, when funding biotechnology research in countries with known or suspected biological weapons programs.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “NASA Oversight of Russian Biotechnology Research 1994–1997” (NASA report no. G-00-07, Washington, DC, 13 October 2000), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-00- 007.pdf (accessed 8 April 2008); Frank Morring Jr., “NASA Seen Funding Russian Germ-Warfare Labs Through Lax Oversight,” Aerospace Daily, 18 October 2000.)
At a ceremony at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs, Colorado, U.S. Air Force General Ralph E. Eberhart succeeded General Richard B. Myers as the nation’s top military space official, overseeing the U.S. Space Command, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, and the North American Aerospace Defense Command, in addition to thousands of troops and more than 100 satellites. Eberhart took over the U.S. space operations post after having led the Air Force’s Air Combat Command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.(Tom Breen, “U.S. Gets New Military Space Chief,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 February 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending the 100th mission of the Shuttle program. Poor weather conditions had prevented the Shuttle’s scheduled landing in Florida on 22 October. Edwards had opened as a backup site on 23 October, but wind and rainy weather had prevented a landing at either site until 24 October. The landing was the first Shuttle landing at Edwards since poor weather had prevented a Shuttle landing in Florida in March 1996. In the early years of the program, Shuttles had typically landed at Edwards Air Force Base, but later, both launches and landings became the functions of KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida.(Washington Times, “Shuttle Lands at Edwards for First Time since 1996: Marks 100th Mission of U.S. Program,” 25 October 2000; Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Discovery Lands in California,” 25 October 2000.)
NASA released a comprehensive new study, which found that the levels of ozone in the Arctic stratosphere were declining rapidly. In some parts of the stratosphere, the atmosphere had lost 60 percent of its ozone over the course of one year. The report, compiled by hundreds of European and American scientists, also demonstrated that changes in the global climate (primarily global warming) threatened to delay the recovery of the ozone layer. The scientists were optimistic that the ozone layer would recover eventually, but perhaps not until the mid-21st century. The study had cost NASA more than US$20 million, and the European scientists contributed US$10 million. The researchers had gathered data using satellites, airplanes, and hundreds of weather balloons.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Thinning Ozone over Arctic Raises Concerns,” 6 April 2000; William K. Stevens, “New Survey Shows Growing Loss of Arctic Atmosphere’s Ozone,” New York Times, 6 April 2000.)
billion years old, astronomers expressed their excitement that the benchmark discovery would enable them to observe the universe in its formative stages.(Associated Press, “Quasar Discovered by Student May Be Most Distant Ever Seen,” 15 April 2000; Kevin Coughlin, “Young Princeton Expert Finds Piece of a Fledgling Universe,” Star-Ledger (Newark, NJ), 14 April 2000; Washington Post, “Most Distant Object Observed,” 17 April 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
The American Museum of Natural History’s new Hayden Planetarium, which had used information gathered from NASA and the European Space Agency to compile a database containing billions of stars, opened to the public. From 1935 to 1997, the New York City museum had hosted thousands of visitors annually with a less elaborate planetarium. The new planetarium was only one part of the sparkling US$210 million Rose Center for Earth and Space, which museum curator Michael M. Shara hoped would inspire future scientists. The facility, resembling a spacecraft on the outside, featured informative programming hosted by celebrities, such as actors Tom Hanks and Jodie Foster. As they walked through the new facility, visitors could observe displays demonstrating how scientists believed the universe had evolved over a period of 13 billion years.(Associated Press, “Museum Unveils Planetarium for the 21 Century,” 2 February 2000.)
NASA dedicated a new aerospace laboratory at Anne Beers Elementary School in Washington, DC, featuring a simulated Shuttle cockpit and Mission Control Center. NASA had named the facility, designed to encourage student interest in space exploration, for U.S. Representative Louis Stokes (D-OH), who had proposed legislation to fund the endeavor in 1998. NASA’s GRC and Goddard Space Flight Center had worked with the Orchard Glenn School of Cleveland, Ohio, and the University of the District of Columbia to construct the innovative facility.(NASA, “Aerospace Laboratory Encourages Students To Reach for the Stars with NASA Help,” news release m00-051, 15 March 2000.)
As a part of its “Celebrate the Century” program, the U.S. Postal Service unveiled a stamp commemorating the Space Shuttle Program. The stamp with the Shuttle’s image joined 12 other stamps with images recalling significant American memories of the past century, such as video games, the fall of the Berlin Wall, personal computers, and Cabbage Patch Dolls. The Space Shuttle stamp was part of the celebration of the 1980s portion of the millennium. Kennedy Space Center Director Roy D. Bridges Jr. issued a statement thanking the Postal Service for the honor.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Joins American Icons in Commemorative Stamp Collection,” news release 00- 12, 12 January 2000.)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezda’s living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crew’s radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, “Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler announced that NASA had decided to send two large scientific rovers to Mars in 2003, rather than a single craft. The new plan called for the two craft to launch within weeks of each other, reaching Mars in January 2004 after their respective seven and one-half-month-long journeys. The two 300-pound (136- kilogram) rovers, exact duplicates of each other and similar to the highly successful Sojourner rover of 1997, would head to different locations on Mars. Mars Program Director G. Scott Hubbard explained that NASA had undertaken an extensive study of the two-rover option, weighing the excellent launch opportunity in 2003 against resource requirements and schedule constraints. The study teams concluded that it would be possible to successfully develop and launch identical packages, and that the new plan would not only double NASA’s scientific return but also add resiliency and robustness to the Mars exploration program. Although NASA had yet to select the two landing sites, Mars Program Scientist James B. Garvin suggested that possible locations included those with evidence of the existence of water in the past. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Principal Investigator for the rovers’ Athena science package, explained that the goal of each rover would be to learn about ancient water and climate conditions on Mars. Each craft would operate as a robotic field geologist, reading the geological record at its landing site to discover what conditions had formed the local rocks and soils.(NASA, “NASA Plans To Send Rover Twins to Mars in 2003,” news release 00-124, 10 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-124.txt (accessed 7 May 2008).)
Following a 24-hour delay caused by a computer anomaly, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) successfully launched the Lockheed Martin–built, NOAAL spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base, aboard a Titan II rocket. Ground controllers confirmed that the craft had deployed its solar array and verified a power-positive condition. NASA and NOAA had designed the satellite, the second in a series of five polar-orbiting spacecraft, to collect meteorological data and to transmit the information to users worldwide. NOAA’s National Weather Service planned to use the craft’s data for long-range weather and climate forecasts. Although NASA had managed the project of building and launching the satellite, it intended to transfer operational control to NOAA 10 days following the launch.(NOAA, “NOAA-L Weather Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release 2000-069, 21 September 2000, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2000/sep00/noaa00069.html (accessed 29 April 2008); Associated Press, “Weather Satellite Launched After Delay,” 21 September 2000.)
