The United States, Russia, and other partners and sponsoring agencies of the ISS released a nine- page document, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers,” defining the partners’ agreed-upon procedures for staffing the ISS. Among the acceptable categories of ISS crew members, the international partners included nonprofessional spaceflight participants, such as American space tourist Dennis A. Tito, who had reportedly paid the Russian Space Agency US$12 to US$20 million to visit the ISS. Tito’s visit had created tension among ISS partners, who hoped that the new agreement would clarify the selection criteria for individuals traveling to the ISS, while continuing to enable space programs to raise funds from nonprofessional space travelers.(ESA, Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers”; William Harwood, “NASA Approves Space Visitor Rules,” Washington Post, 1 February 2002; Mark Carreau, “New NASA Policy Opens the Way for More People To Go into Space,” Houston Chronicle, 1 February 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs’ budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle,” news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post,” 16 May 2002.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Frederick D. Gregory as NASA’s Deputy Administrator, making Gregory the first African American to serve as NASA’s second-in-command. Before becoming Deputy Administrator, Gregory had served as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Flight from December 2001 to August 2002 and as Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance from June 1992 to December 2001. In addition, Gregory had been an astronaut on three Shuttle missions and had served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years.(Kelly Young, “Senate Names New NASA Official,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 August 2002; NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory,” http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/gregory_bio.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
Two astronauts from Space Shuttle Endeavour undertook an extravehicular activity (EVA) to repair the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2. American astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz and French astronaut Philippe Perrin replaced one of seven joints on the US$600 million, Canadian- built robotic arm, which was critical to the continued construction of the ISS. To repair Canadarm2, the astronauts first removed its 450-pound (205-kilogram), hand-like, latching-end effector (LEE); loosened six bolts connecting the problematic “wrist roll” joint to the arm; and disconnected power, data, and video lines. They then installed the replacement joint, tightened the bolts to secure the new joint to the arm, restored the power and other lines, and reaffixed the LEE. Subsequent tests of the Canadarm2 confirmed the success of the repairs. The EVA, lasting 7 hours and 17 minutes, was the third for Mission STS-111.(William Harwood, “Spacewalkers Continue Space Station Repairs; Joint on Robotic Arm Is Replaced,” Washington Post, 14 June 2002; NASA JSC, “STS-111, Mission Control Center Status Report no. 18,” 13 June 2002, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts111/STS-111-18.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:58 p.m. (EDT), ending a mission of 13 days, 20 hours, and 35 minutes. During STS-111, the crew had used the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2, to move the MBS from Endeavour to the Mobile Transporter (MT) on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. In addition, crew members Franklin R. Chang- Diaz and Philippe Perrin had performed three EVAs lasting a total of 19 hours and 31 minutes. During the first EVA, the astronauts had installed a Power and Data Grapple Fixture to the ISS’s P6 Truss, the sixth truss segment on the port side of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, and moved six micrometeoroid debris shields from the Shuttle to a portion of the ISS called the PMA-1 (Pressurized Mating Adapter-One) for eventual installation on the Russian-made Zvezda service module. During the second spacewalk, the crew had connected data, power, and video cables between the MT rail car and the MBS; positioned the Payload Orbital Replacement Unit Accommodation (POA) on the MBS; and completed the installation of the MBS platform. In the final EVA, Chang-Diaz and Perrin had performed repairs on the ISS’s Canadarm2, restoring the instrument to full operational status. In addition, STS-111 had returned the members of Expedition 4Daniel E. Bursch, Yuri I. Onufrienko, and Carl W. Walzto Earth.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-111,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-111.html (accessed 18 August 2008); NASA, “Continuing the Human Presence in Space: STS-111,” press kit, 16 May 2001, 24–29, http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/history/shuttle_pk/ pk/Flight_110_STS- 111_Press_Kit.pdf (accessed 2 January 2009).)
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
The GAO submitted a report to Congress examining the reasons for the increasing costs of the ISS and the potential effects of those costs on the station’s ability to conduct scientific research. The report stated that changes in the program, scheduling delays, and other issues had substantially increased the program’s costs, and that NASA’s management had not taken steps to address cost growth. Consequently, the ISS’s scientific research capabilities had diminished, raising concerns among the station’s international partners. Although GAO made no formal recommendations, it cited NASA’s own newly established management and cost-estimation reforms, noted challenges NASA faced in implementing those reforms, and suggested that NASA develop a credible budget to complete the ISS. NASA formally responded that the report reasonably portrayed the problems with the ISS, as well as NASA’s efforts to address them.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Actions Under Way To Manage Cost, But Significant Challenges Remain” (report no. GAO-02-735, Washington, DC, 17 July 2002), www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO- 02-735 (accessed 26 September 2008).)
The Earth observation satellite Aqua launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite Aqua was a component of the Earth Observing System (EOS), which also included the Terra satellite launched in December 1999. Aqua’s primary purpose was to acquire information about the effects of climate change on the water cycle. The satellite would also collect data to help scientists examine biological systems dependent upon water and improve long-term forecasts of weather and climate. Brazil, Japan, and the United States planned for their joint project Aqua to continue for six years.(NASA JPL, “Aqua Launched To Study Earth’s Water Cycle,” news release, 4 May 2002; Warren E. Leary, “NASA To View Interaction of Earth’s Water and Climate,” New York Times, 30 April 2002.)
The GAO submitted a report to the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics on NASA’s progress toward developing a reusable launch vehicle (RLV), under the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) program, to replace the Space Shuttle. According to GAO, NASA needed to complete ongoing reassessment of its overall space transportation plans and of the future of the ISS. NASA also needed to determine whether it would develop the SLI program in cooperation with the DOD. To address these concerns, GAO recommended that NASA reassess the schedule for defining the SLI’s requirements and reach a consensus with the DOD on the program’s priorities and objectives. The report also recommended that NASA finalize the SLI’s basic requirements before implementing management controls on the program’s costs and risks. In its response, NASA concurred with GAO’s recommendations and outlined plans to implement them.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Transportation: Challenges Facing NASA’s Space Launch Initiative” (report no. GAO-02-1020, Washington, DC, 17 September 2002), http://www.gao.gov/ new.items/d021020.pdf (accessed 10 October 2008).)
The American Association for the Advancement of Science named Senior Research Scientist David Halpern of NASA’s JPL a fellow, in recognition of his work on air-sea interactions in tropical oceans and on satellite measurements of ocean-surface quantities.(NASA JPL, “JPL Researcher Honored by Largest Scientific Discovery,” news release, 28 February 2002.)
The Office of Space Flight at NASA Headquarters decided that Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California would no longer perform major modifications to Space Shuttle orbiters. Instead, NASA’s KSC, already responsible for preparing the Shuttles for launching, would also provide the modifications. The Palmdale facility had served as the manufacturing site for all orbiters since the Space Shuttle program’s inception, as well as providing periodic maintenance and safety upgrades. Based on cost and risk assessments, the Office of Space Flight had determined that maintaining two modification facilities for four Shuttle orbiters was no longer financially feasible, and that performing such work at KSC would minimize associated costs and risks. The change was part of NASA’s effort to absorb President George W. Bush’s proposed budget cuts. Because it overhauled one of the four Shuttle orbiters every two to three years, NASA estimated that transferring this work to KSC would save approximately US$30 million per overhaul.(NASA, “Kennedy Space Center To Perform Shuttle Modifications,” news release 02-22, 5 February 2002; Mark Carreau, “NASA To Overhaul Shuttles in Florida,” Houston Chronicle, 6 February 2002.)
A combined U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin crew engaged in the first flight of a C-5 Galaxy modified under the Avionics Modernization Program (AMP). AMP was the first phase of an overall C-5 modernization program to upgrade the plane’s communications, navigation, and air-traffic-control surveillance equipment. The program’s objectives were to improve the C-5’s reliability and to satisfy emerging air-traffic-management requirements, so that the C-5 would be able to operate in global airspace without restrictions. During the 5-hour test flight, the crew demonstrated the craft’s basic flying qualities and navigational system, verified new primary flight displays, and engaged in initial testing of stability-augmentation operations. Lockheed Martin planned to introduce additional components of the new, automatic flight-control system and the Global Air Traffic Management–compliant systems. After completing installation of the AMP components, Lockheed Martin planned to commence the second phase of the C-5 modernization, known as the Reliability Enhancement and Re-engining Program.(Lockheed Martin, “Initial C-5 Upgraded Under the Avionics Modernization Program Makes Its First Flight,” news release, 23 December 2002, http: //www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/ InitialC5UpgradedUnderAvionicsModer.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Knight and Christopher Bolkcom, “Strategic Airlift Modernization: Analysis of C-5 Modernization and C-17 Acquisition Issues,” (report, Congressional Research Service, Washington, DC, 15 April 2008), CRS-4–CRS-5.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
The United States launched the fifth Milstar satellite on a Titan 4B-Centaur from Cape Canaveral, Florida, completing a fleet of communications satellites designed to provide government leaders and military troops with jam-resistant transmission nearly anywhere on Earth.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002 Activities (Washington, DC, 2002), p. 114, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2002.pdf (accessed 29 July 2002); Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002: The Year in Review,” NASA, http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2002/yearinrev/ 02YearReview.html (accessed 23 July 2002).)
Boeing successfully launched its first Delta 4 rocket, which the U.S. Air Force would use in 2003 in the EELV program. The purpose of the EELV program was to develop reliable and cost- efficient launch capabilities for commercial and government payloads. The launch occurred at 5:39 p.m. (EST) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Delta 4, a “Medium+” configuration of Boeing’s five-member Delta 4 family of rockets, deployed Eutelsat’s (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s) commercial telecommunications satellite W5 into geosynchronous transfer orbit. During the next scheduled Delta 4 launch―the first mission for the EELV program―the Air Force planned to use a Delta 4 Medium rocket to deploy the DSCS III A3 satellite for the Defense Satellite Communication System.(The Boeing Company, “Successful First Launch for Boeing Delta IV,” news release, 20 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021120s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U. S. Air Force, “U.S. Air Force Fact Sheet: Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle,” http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/space/factsheets/eelv.htm (accessed 28 October 2008).)
NOAA’s Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES), NOAA-M, launched on a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA intended the satellite, which was renamed NOAA-17 upon reaching orbit, to collect meteorological data to improve weather forecasting. The satellite was the third in a series of five satellites collectively referred to as the POES system. NOAA planned to transmit the satellite’s data to its National Weather Service, as well as to organizations in other countries. Lockheed Martin Space Systems had built and launched the satellite for NOAA, with NASA’s GSFC managing the project and providing technical guidance.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 46; NOAA, “NOAA-M Environmental Satellite Successfully Launched,” 24 June 2002, http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories/s929.htm (accessed 18 August 2008); NOAA, “Polar Operation Environmental Satellite: Polar Orbiting Satellites,” http://www.oso.noaa.gov/poes/ (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. became the eighth Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Acting Director Roy S. Estess, who resumed his position as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC). Before assuming the post, Howell had worked for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) administering its safety, reliability, and quality-assurance contract with NASA, to provide safety and mission assurance for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs.(NASA JSC, “Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. Named as Johnson Space Center Director,” news release J02-17, 12 February 2002.)
NASA announced the assignment of three crew members to begin training for the ninth expedition to the ISS. The three were Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. NASA assigned American astronaut Daniel M. Tani to serve as backup for his fellow compatriot Fincke and selected cosmonauts Alexander F. Poleschuk and Roman Y. Romanenko to serve as backups for fellow Russians Kononenko and Padalka.(NASA, “Astronauts Assigned for Space Station Expedition Training,” news release 02-55, 18 March 2002.)
Scientists from California Institute of Technology announced that they had used NASA’s HST to measure the true size of an orbiting, planet-like body beyond Pluto. The sphere was the most distant object that a telescope had measured within Earth’s solar system. Like its neighbor Pluto, the object, which is nearly 4 billion miles (6.4 billion kilometers) from Earth, lies in the Kuiper Belt, an icy debris field that extends 7 billion miles (11.3 billion kilometers) beyond the orbit of Neptune. Using the HST, scientists Michael E. Brown and Chadwick A. Trujillo were able to determine several properties of the sphere, including its diameter of 780 miles (1,250 kilometers). Although too small to be a planet, the sphere, which Brown and Trujillo named Quaoarafter a creation deity of the Native American Tongva peoplehas planet-like traits that Pluto lacks. For example, Brown and Trujillo found that Quaoar has a circular orbit around the Sun and is in the same plane as the other planets in Earth’s solar system. Brown and Trujillo announced their findings at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society’s Division for Planetary Sciences.(NASA, “Hubble Spots an Icy World Far Beyond Pluto,” news release 02-190, 7 October 2002; Usha Lee McFarling, “Pluto’s Not So Alone Out There, It Appears,” Los Angeles Times, 8 October 2002.)
NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced that they had agreed with a study team’s recommendation that NASA and the Air Force continue to assess the construction of a joint reusable launch vehicle (RLV) demonstrator. After spending 120 days examining the two organizations’ shared requirements and their technologies to access space, the team’s most critical recommendation had been that NASA and the Air Force should cooperate in assessing the construction of an RLV demonstrator for their joint operations. In addition, the study team had recommended that engineers eventually develop the demonstrator into a crew-operated vehicle for NASA and a cargo vehicle for the Air Force. NASA and the Air Force also agreed that experienced Air Force personnel should continue to work with NASA in joint study efforts, to refine their concepts of operations, requirements, and figures of merit, and to design reference missions.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Forge Ahead with Reusable Launch Technology,” news release 02-87, 21 May 2002.)
NASA announced the release of the first test images from the HST’s recently reactivated Near- Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS). The test images of galaxies in various stages of development included the NGC 4013 and the Cone Nebula galaxies. The NICMOS had remained inactive for three years, until the crew members of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 had installed a new cooling system for the instrument on 3 March 2002 as part of HST Servicing Mission 3B. The new NICMOS Cooling System (NCS) had been a joint project of NASA and the U.S. Air Force; NASA’s GSFC and the Creare Corporation had built the NCS.(NASA, “Hubble’s Infrared Camera Is Back in Business―New Images Released,” news release 02-104, 5 June 2002; NASA, “SM3B,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/missions/sm3b.php (accessed 17 August 2008).)
The first Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), the product of a long-term program designed to provide military and other satellites with enduring, reliable access to space, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Lockheed Martin had developed the rocket, called the Atlas 5. The EELV placed the European television satellite Hot Bird 6 in its preliminary orbit 31 minutes after its launch, and the satellite’s thrusters later maneuvered it into its final orbit. The EELV program had resulted from the U.S. government’s research into the 1986 Challenger disaster. The U.S. Air Force had reportedly paid Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company more than US$500 million each to design an EELV. The U.S. Air Force had requested an EELV that was an advanced version of existing rockets, rather than an entirely new system, estimating that, through 2020, the EELV could reduce the cost of placing military satellites into orbit by approximately US$10 billion. France-based Eutelsat (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization) owned the Hot Bird 6 broadcast satellite, which Alcatel Space had built.(William Harwood, “Into Space, A New Kind of Rocket,” Washington Post, 22 August 2002; Lockheed Martin, “Inaugural Atlas V Scores Success for ILS, Lockheed Martin,” news release, 21 August 2002, http://www. lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/InauguralAtlasVScoresSucceslForILSL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearingNASA Workforce and Management Challengesto garner information about NASA’s efforts to address concerns regarding its human capital, competitive sourcing for the Space Shuttle program, and other matters. Committee members heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe; David M. Walker, Comptroller General of the United States; and Mark D. Roth, General Counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees. O’Keefe discussed NASA’s Strategic Human Capital Plan, a systemic method of managing human capital according to NASA’s vision and mission. In addition, O’Keefe announced the termination of the comprehensive Strategic Resources Review initiated during the Clinton administration to create a blueprint for NASA’s future facility, missions, and workforce requirements. Roth argued that, because NASA expected a high number of retirements in the near future, its existing and proposed personnel policies were inadequate to address the resulting loss in human capital. Walker discussed methods NASA could use to strengthen its human capital and to address its difficulties with contract management, as well as the increasing expense of the ISS program and of space exploration.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Workforce and Management Challenges, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 18 July 2002, http://science.house.gov/publications/hearings_markups_details.aspx?NewsID=1424 (accessed 21 August 2008 through Lexis-Nexis Congressional); Larry Wheeler, “O’Keefe Scraps Review of NASA,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 July 2002.)
The U.S. House Government Reform Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management, and Intergovernmental Relations held a hearing, “Financial Management at NASA: What Went Wrong?” Stephen Varholy and Alan Lamoreaux of NASA and Gregory D. Kutz and Allen Li of GAO provided testimony to the Subcommittee. The hearing focused on NASA’s methods of financial accounting and on the role of its former auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP, in assessing those methods. Kutz reported that NASA’s system of accounting had made it difficult for GAO to assess NASA’s financial records and questioned Arthur Andersen LLP’s ability to assess those records accurately.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “National Aeronautics and Space Administration: Leadership and Systems Needed to Effect Financial Management Improvements” (testimony of Gregory D. Kutz and Allen Li before U.S. House Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management, and Intergovernmental Relations; report no. GAO-02-551T, Washington, DC, 20 March 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02551t.pdf (accessed 12 August 2002).)
167Inside Wallops, “Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees,” 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement,” news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, “Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy,” news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad O’Connor, “Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader,” New York Times, 14 January 2002.)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the world’s leading professional society in the field, elected Charles Elachi, Director of NASA’s JPL, as a fellow in the society. In his research concerning geological analysis of Earth, Elachi had developed 45 flight missions and instruments, including radar remote-sensing techniques used to study Venus.(NASA JPL, “JPL Director Honored by Leading Aeronautic Institute,” news release, 25 February 2002. 60)
Boeing and the U.S. Air Force signed a US$9.7 billion contract for 60 C-17 Globemaster III transport aircraft. The contract, an extension of previous agreements between the Air Force and Boeing, would increase the number of C-17s in the Air Force fleet to 180. The Air Force had been using C-17s to transport personnel, equipment, and supplies in support of combat and humanitarian missions.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing and U.S. Air Force Sign $9.7 Billion C-17 Contract,” news release, 15 August 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q3/nr_020815m.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
The ReMAP Task Force of NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) presented its final report to the NASA Advisory Council. NASA had charged the ReMAP Task Force with evaluating the research productivity and priorities of NASA’s OBPR and with providing a framework for prioritizing a research program for the OBPR and the ISS. ReMAP’s 173-page report identified two major goals of these programs: research enabling human exploration of space and basic research of intrinsic scientific interest. In addition, the report made several recommendations, for example, that NASA increase the ISS’s facilities and equipment for scientific research, as well as the amount of time that ISS crew members dedicated to scientific operations. The report stated that, if NASA did not make these and other enhancements to the ISS, then NASA “should cease to characterize the ISS as a science driven program.”(NASA ReMAP Task Force, “Report by the NASA Biological and Physical Research Maximization and Prioritization (ReMAP) Task Force to the NASA Advisory Council” (report, Washington, DC, August 2002).)
The U.S. Air Force chose Boeing Integrated Defense Systems to produce the first three satellites for the GPS IIF satellite program. The U.S. Air Force had designed the GPS IIF program to provide new capabilities for civilian and military GPS users―a new civilian signal within the protected Aeronautical Radio Navigation System frequency band and secure operational military codes for military aircraft. The Air Force had also intended the GPS IIF to be compatible with the U.S. Air Force’s Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV). Boeing had designed the GPS IIF to accommodate incremental technology upgrades, enabling the satellites to serve both the immediate needs of the GPS IIF program and the long-term needs of the planned next generation satellite system, GPS III.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Receives GPS IIF Production Approval,” news release, 11 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021111t.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U.S. Coast Guard)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although O’Keefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
George W. S. Abbey, Special Assistant to NASA’s Administrator and former Director of NASA’s JSC, announced his retirement from NASA effective 3 January 2003. Abbey had begun his career at JSC in 1964 as a U.S. Air Force officer. He had served as Director of JSC and had become a high-level manager for the ISS project. In 2001 he had left the post because of the soaring costs of the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Statement by General Jefferson D. Howell Jr. on the Retirement of Former JSC Director George W. S. Abbey,” news release J02-111, 7 November 2002; Houston Chronicle, “Longtime NASA Official Retires,” 8 November 2002.)
