The U.S. Air Force Space Command announced its planned elimination of 1,125 positions over the next seven years, as part of a service-wide, post-September 11 initiative to reduce staffing levels. The move would free it to “pour more resources into the Air Force’s ‘highest priority missions’,” such as special operations and intelligence. The plan called for the elimination of 314 civilian and 442 military positions by October 2004, at both senior and lower levels. U.S. Air Force Major Sean McKenna, a Space Command spokesperson, commented that the reductions did not indicate that the Air Force had assigned lower priority to space.(Jeremy Singer, “Air Force Space Command To Cut Staff,” Space News, 13 March 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched an Atlas 2-AS rocket carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), marking the final launch of the II-AS model from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch cleared the way for officials from the military and from Lockheed Martin to begin renovating Launch Complex 3 to accommodate the Atlas 5 rocket. Renovation plans included raising the mobile service tower 30 feet (9.14 meters) to accommodate the taller launch vehicles, building a fixed launch platform, modifying the umbilical tower, and enlarging the flame trench. The Lockheed Martin Atlas team planned to launch the first Atlas 5 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2005.(Associated Press, “Air Force Sends Spy Satellite into Space,” 2 December 2003; Justin Ray, “Atlas Soars on Secret Mission Under Cover of Darkness,” Spaceflight Now, 2 December 2003.)
A 66-foot-high (20-meter-high) VLS-1 O3 rocket exploded on its launchpad during tests at Alcântara Launch Center in Brazil, delivering “a serious blow to Brazil’s nascent space program.” Brazil had hoped to be the first Latin American nation to place a satellite in orbit. According to the Brazilian Ministry of Defence, the accident, which occurred three days before a scheduled launch, killed 21 people, mostly civilian technicians, injured 20 others, and destroyed two research satellites. The rocket had successfully completed two days of tests before the explosion. Brazil’s Minister of Defence José Veigas Filho stated that, for unknown reasons, one of the four main motors of the US$2.2 million rocket had ignited, leading to the explosion that destroyed the launchpad. The accident was Brazil’s third failed attempt to launch a rocket with a research satellite.(“Brazil’s Rocket Test Kills 21,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 August 2003; Stan Lehman, “Brazil Mourns Dead, Vows to Reinforce Space Program,” Houston Chronicle, 25 August 2003.)
American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit undertook a 61⁄2-hour spacewalk at the ISS to finish preparing the station for the arrival of a new crew. In the second spacewalk of their four-month mission, Bowersox and Pettit worked on power connections, replaced lighting for a transport trolley, reconfigured cables on a navigational gyroscope, and secured covers on the station’s thermal control system. Cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin monitored the astronauts’ work from inside the ISS.(Reuters, “Astronauts End Space Walk from Orbiting Station,” 9 April 2003. 126)
NASA announced that it had positively identified the remains of all seven members of STS-107 at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, and that officials in Angelina County, Texas, had signed the death certificates. Eileen Hawley, spokesperson for NASA’s JSC in Houston, said that officials had released the crew members’ remains to their families for private memorial services. NASA had already returned the remains of Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon to Israel, where burial services had taken place on 11 February.(NASA JSC, “Columbia Astronaut Remains Identified,” news release H03-070, 13 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/2003/h03-070.html (accessed 14 August 2008); Associated Press, “Remains of All Shuttle Astronauts Identified,” 14 February 2003.)
Chinese taikonaut Yang Liwei successfully completed his 21-hour mission of 14 orbits around Earth aboard the Shenzhou 5, landing safely in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From aboard the ISS, American astronaut Edward T. Lu, speaking in Chinese, had welcomed Yang to space and wished him a safe journey and success. Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko had told Mission Control in Houston that he was glad to have someone else in space besides himself and Lu, congratulating the great accomplishment of thousands of people in the People’s Republic of China who had worked together to send Yang into space. After emerging from his capsule, Yang stated that Shenzhou 5 had operated very well, that he felt well, and that he was “proud of the motherland.”(John Pomfret, “China’s First Space Traveler Returns a Hero: Craft Made 14 Orbits in 21-Hour Mission,” Washington Post, 16 October 2003; Ching-Ching Ni, “China Completes Spaceflight: Nation’s First Astronaut, Lt. Col. Yang Liwei, Returns from Earth Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2003.)
Japan merged its three space agencies with the goal of saving US$89.8 million a year. According to the new configuration, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) would manage the unified entities of the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, NASDA, and the National Aerospace Laboratory. Modeled on NASA but about one 10th of the size of its American counterpart, JAXA had 1,800 employees and an initial annual budget of US$1.66 billion.(Reuters, “Japan Streamlines Its Space Effort: Three Agencies Merged into JAXA; Tokyo Keeps Its Eye on Beijing,” 2 October 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force 45th Space Wing transferred operation of Launch Complex 47 at Cape Canaveral Air Station to the Florida Space Authority (FSA) by means of a licensing agreement under the Commercial Space Transportation Act. J. Gregory Pavlovich, Commander of the 45th Space Wing, stated that the transfer of operations was a positive development, remarking that, although the Air Force had previously scheduled the launchpad for deactivation, licensing it to the FSA would enable Launch Complex 47 to remain available for educational use for years into the future. Under the agreement, Brevard Community College could offer as many as 200 educational launch opportunities over the following five years, allowing for hands-on technical education that would help motivate students to join the aerospace workforce.(Jim Banke, “Florida Space Authority Will Run Cape Launch Pad for Education,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/fsa_cx47_031107.html (accessed 17 March 2009).)
In its first launch since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in February, NASA launched its Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) research satellite aboard a Pegasus XL rocket released from an L-1011 cargo plane that had flown out of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. GALEX carried a telescope measuring 19.7 inches (50 centimeters) in diameter, designed to provide a wide-angle view of the ultraviolet light that distant galaxies emit. NASA had planned the mission, which would survey the light emitted by a million galaxies over 28 months, to learn more about galaxies dominated by hot, short-lived stars that give off a great deal of energy as ultraviolet light. The mission cost US$103.7 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Associated Press, “NASA in 1st Launch Since Columbia Breakup,” 28 April 2003. 427 Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “BeppoSAX Satellite Falls Harmlessly into Ocean,” 30 April 2003.)
After a series of delays, a Titan 2 rocket carried into orbit the U.S. military’s Coriolis research satellite, launching from the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The refurbished Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missile placed the spacecraft in orbit 51⁄2 minutes after launch, and the rocket’s second stage deployed its payload approximately 1 hour later. The US$224 million Coriolis mission carried the Navy’s Windsat microwave polarimetric radiometer and the Air Force’s Solar Mass Ejection Imager. The U.S. military had designed Windsat to measure wind speed and direction at or near the surface of Earth’s seas, providing improved weather forecasting to assist in planning naval operations. The Air Force intended the Solar Mass Ejection Imager to provide “an early warning of coronal mass ejections from the Sun that impact Earth, disrupting communications and power grids.”(Justin Ray, “Coriolis Launched To Track Ocean Winds, Solar Storms,” Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2003. 105)
Hellas-Sat, a geostationary communications satellite jointly owned by Greece and Cyprus, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard an Atlas 5 rocket with a Russian RD-180 motor. The 3.45-tonne (3.8-ton or 3,450-kilogram) Astrium Eurostar 2000+ model carried 30 Ku-band transponders to provide voice, video, data, and broadcast services to Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. The launch, the second for the Atlas 5 series, was the 65th consecutive successful flight for the Lockheed Martin–built Atlas rocket and for mission provider International Launch Services (ILS).(Lockheed Martin, “ILS Launches Hellas-Sat on Atlas V―65 Successes in a Row for Atlas,” news release, 13 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/ILSLaunchesHellasSat)
The U.S. Air Force launched a Titan 4B rocket with a Centaur upper stage carrying USA 171, an Orion classified satellite serving the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The Air Force provided no comment on the payload’s destination or its whereabouts following the separation of the second stage of the Centaur. The Air Force had delayed the launch of USA 171 since April 2002 because of a series of technical problems and issues with the payload. The launch was likely the last of the Titan-Centaur launches, with only three Lockheed Martin–built Titan 4 rockets and one Titan 2 remaining to launch. The Air Force had contracted with Boeing and Lockheed Martin to replace the Titan 4 family with the Boeing Delta 2 and the Lockheed Martin Atlas 5, to provide the Air Force with cheaper, more reliable access to space for military payloads.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 599, 1 October 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx599.html (accessed 3 February 2009); Associated Press, “Air Force Launches Titan 4B Rocket Carrying Secret Military Payload,” 9 September 2003; Chris Kridler, “Titan Carries Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 2003.)
NASA launched the first of two Mars Exploration Rovers from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The destination of the 384-pound (174-kilogram) rover Spirit was the Gustev Crater, a site that scientists believed had been a crater lake. NASA intended the second of the identical rovers, called Opportunity, to launch later in June and to land on the opposite side of Mars from the Gustev Crater at a site called Meridiani Planum, which had a large deposit of a type of mineral (gray hematite) that usually forms in wet environments. NASA had designed the rolling rovers to capture sharper images, explore wider regions, and examine rocks better than any previous craft that had landed on Mars, searching for evidence of wet environments on the planet.(NASA, “NASA Prepares Two Robot Rovers for Mars Exploration,” news release 03-189, 4 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03189_ROVERS.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “First of NASA Rovers En Route to Mars,” 11 June 2003.)
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
NASA released the first pictures from its Space Infrared Telescope Facility and officially renamed the craft Spitzer Space Telescope. NASA had named the telescope for one of the 20th century’s most influential scientists, Princeton University astronomer Lyman Spitzer Jr., who in 1946 had first proposed placing telescopes in space. Spitzer had been a major force behind the 1990 launch of the HST, the first of NASA’s Great Observatories. With the release of the Spitzer Space Telescope’s first observations―a glowing stellar nursery; a swirling, dusty galaxy; a disc of planet-forming debris; and organic material in the distant universe―Project Scientist Michael Werner of NASA’s JPL remarked that the telescope was working extremely well. The fourth of its Great Observatories, NASA had designed the craft with powerful infrared detectors to capture never-before-seen cosmic features. Unlike its predecessor Great Observatories, which circle Earth, NASA had deployed the Spitzer Space Telescope in a novel trajectory that placed it in an orbit closely trailing that of Earth.(NASA, “NASA Releases Dazzling Images from New Space Telescope,” news release 03-411, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03411_newly_named_prt.htm (accessed 23 March 2009); Patty Reinert, “Stargazer’s Delight: NASA’s New Space Infrared Telescope Puts On a Dazzling Show,” Houston Chronicle, 19 December 2003.)
Russia’s Space Forces launched a Molniya 3-53 military communications satellite aboard a four- stage Molniya-M rocket from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region of Russia. Molniya 3-53 was the second Molniya communications satellite launched in 2003.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, “Russia Lofts Military Payload from Plesetsk, Makes Plans for Commercial South American Shots,” 20 June 2003; Stephen Clark, “Molniya Satellite Deployed from Plesetsk Spaceport,” Spaceflight Now, 20 June 2003.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
NASA appointed two veteran astronauts―Apollo Commander Thomas P. Stafford and Space Shuttle Commander Richard O. Covey―to lead the task force assisting NASA’s return-to-flight team. The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), composed of distinguished experts and industry professionals representing a wide range of disciplines, would help the NASA team implement the CAIB’s findings following the release of its final report. Stafford, a retired Lieutenant General in the U.S. Air Force who had flown four missions during the Gemini and Apollo programs, had also chaired the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on ISS Operational Readiness. Covey, a retired U.S. Air Force Colonel, had piloted the 1988 Shuttle Mission STS-26, the first flight following the Challenger accident. He had also piloted Mission STS-51I in 1985 and had commanded STS-38 in 1990 and STS-61 in 1993.(NASA, “Former Apollo and Shuttle Commanders Lead Columbia Accident Report Task Force,” news release 03-196, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03196_covey_lead.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA announced that a two-year collaboration between researchers at Stanford University and NASA’s ARC had resulted in a successful test of an alternative paraffin-based rocket fuel intended to increase operational safety, reduce costs as compared to solid fuels, and, eventually, to provide the fuel in Space Shuttle booster rockets. The researchers had developed a nontoxic, easily handled fuel, producing as by-products carbon dioxide and water, rather than the aluminum oxide and acidic gases that conventional rocket fuel produces. Arif Karabeyoglu had led Stanford University’s contribution to the fuel research, developing the theory of a fast- burning, low-cost, paraffin-based fuel in his doctoral thesis, which Stanford and NASA had partially funded. The testing series had begun on 24 September 2001 at ARC’s Hybrid Combustion Facility, a heavy-duty test chamber capable of accommodating pressures of up to 60 atmospheres. The first phase of the testing program had consisted of approximately 40 runs.(NASA, “NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel,” news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
A Delta 2 rocket launched, carrying a GPS-2R8 satellite and an Experimental Spacecraft System (XSS-10) microsatellite into orbit. The U.S. Air Force was launching the GPS-2R8 to replace the 22nd GPS satellite, which had launched 10 years earlier, joining a constellation of 26 operational GPS spacecraft. Although the military GPS created in the 1970s had generated a commercial industry with sales in excess of US$6 billion, the system had continued to exist primarily to serve the U.S. military. The U.S. Air Force was launching the 62-pound (28-kilogram) XSS-10 spacecraft to test new guidance and navigation software and to demonstrate new technologies, such as a miniature communications system, a lightweight propulsion system, and advanced lithium polymer batteries.(Jim Banke, “Delta 2 Rolls, Launches GPS and Experimental Satellites,” Space.com, 29 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030129.html (accessed 23 July 2008).)
Undersecretary of the U.S. Air Force Peter B. Teets testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Environment, Technology, and Standards that the National Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) System spacecraft would not be available until late 2009 or 2010, at the earliest. The U.S. Air Force and NOAA had jointly funded the system, the first of its kind, originally planning to deliver it in early 2008. The Bush administration had decided to request less money for the project in the near term than it had previously planned, and that decision had reportedly caused the delay. Because of the postponement of the delivery date, the Air Force and NOAA would need to restructure the contract to account for anticipated cost growth. The new system would replace the polar-orbiting systems that the agencies had previously operated separately. Greg Withee, NOAA’s Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, stated that the delay could result in a 21-month gap in coverage if NOAA encountered problems with its existing fleet.(Jeremy Singer, “Delay Means Cost Growth for New Weather Satellites,” Space News, 17 July 2003.)
The Canadian Space Agency successfully launched its scientific satellite SciSat 1 aboard a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet flying out of Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The 330-pound (150-kilogram) atmospheric-research satellite carried two instrumentsthe Fourier Transform Spectrometer and the Measurements of Aerosol Extinction in the Stratosphere and Troposphere Retrieved by Occultation (MAESTRO)intended to monitor atmospheric ozone and dust composition in an altitude range of 4 to 100 kilometers (2.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program,” 11 January 2001; Associated Press, “Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth,” 16 January 2001.)
Officials from Boeing and Finmeccanica, an Italian aerospace corporation, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in a joint ceremony held in Rome and at the Italian Embassy in Washington, DC. The purpose of the MOU was to explore joint initiatives and to pursue growth opportunities in aerostructures and commercial aircraft, aircraft modification, UAVs, satellite systems, navigation, launch services, missile defense, space infrastructure, and avionics. The MOU called for the creation of an executive steering committee to investigate the possibilities of collaborative activity in space navigation, satellite services, launch services, and services to the ISS. The committee would make the final decision about which activities the partnership would pursue.(UV Online.com, “Finmeccanica and Boeing To Collaborate on UAVs,” 23 January 2003, http://www.shephard.co.uk/news/category/1/uvonline/.)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced an agreement between NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which provided for NIMA to capture detailed satellite images of Space Shuttles in orbit. NASA had sought this agreement with NIMA because of critics’ “pointed questioning” of NASA’s decision not to capture satellite images that it could have used to check for damage to Columbia’s heat shields while the Shuttle was in orbit. The agreement would enable NASA to “employ NIMA assets during targets of opportunity” without requiring NASA to make a specific request for imaging. Before the disaster, NASA had turned down a NIMA offer to capture images of Columbia, and NASA officials had withdrawn an unofficial request for U.S. Air Force telescopes to capture images. O’Keefe stated that the agreement did not represent any NASA decision “about whether those images might have helped determine damage” to Columbia.(Associated Press, “Military To Capture Future Shuttle Flight Images,” 29 March 2003. 123)
The newest Boeing Delta rocket, the Delta 4, launched the USA 167also known as the Defense Satellite Communications Systems Phase 3 (DSCSIII-A3), or Discus satelliteinto orbit, from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The American geostationary military communications satellite was the first U.S. Air Force craft launched atop Boeing’s newest Delta rocket, as well as the first mission for the U.S. Air Force’s Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program. The craft, a triaxially stabilized spacecraft with solar power of 1.24 kilowatts, operating at six superhigh frequencies between 40 and 85 megahertz, joined the DSCS III constellation of eight similar craft to provide very secure global links to the U.S. military. The launch of the Discus satellite featured the smallest of the Delta 4’s several possible configurations, with two stages and no booster rocket.
An American GPS satellite, GPS 2R-9, launched atop a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS 2R-9also known as NAVSTAR 52 and USA 168replaced the aging GPS 2-5, which had been in orbit since 1989. The fleet of GPS satellites consisted of 28 spacecraft.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Kelly Young, “Delta 2 To Carry GPS Satellite into Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 2003.)
Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASA’s plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, “Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, “Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives,” http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
The ISS marked its 1,000th consecutive day of human residency aboard the station. The first crew had arrived 2 November 2000, and since then, seven crews had lived and worked on the ISS. During that time, the living and working area had increased by 6,000 cubic feet (170 cubic meters) to the current area of 15,000 cubic feet (424.8 cubic meters), and ISS partners expected the station would eventually more than double its size. The seven ISS crews, consisting of 10 American and 10 Russian crew members, had conducted 12 spacewalks and had welcomed 11 visiting Space Shuttles, 4 Soyuz taxi crews, and 10 Progress cargo vehicles. Crews had added to the ISS the largest solar arrays ever produced for use in space, the first track-mounted railcar in space, and a science facility described as the most sophisticated space laboratory to date.(NASA, “Milestone Marked in Space1,000 Days of Human Presence on Station,” news release 03-251, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03251_iss1000_days.html (accessed 23 December 2008). 491 William Glanz, “NASA Outlines Cost of Columbia Probe,” Washington Times, 1 August 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched its Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F16 craft aboard a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, marking the final launch of the Lockheed Martin launch vehicles. In keeping with its 1986 agreement with the U.S. Air Force, Martin Marietta had converted 14 Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) into space launch vehicles. The Air Force had used the converted missiles to launch weather and spy satellites into low Earth orbit; the first such converted missile launched in September 1988. The Titan 2 that launched the DMSP F16 satellite was the 13th of the 14 converted ICBMs to launch; the Air Force had no plans for the 14th converted ICBM except to hold it as a spare. The successful launch of the satellite marked the end of the 33 months of postponements of the US$450 million mission that had resulted from technical problems. The Air Force intended for the craft to track clouds, storm systems, and hurricanes, planning to use the data that the satellite collected to forecast weather and to monitor ice and snow coverage, pollution, and fires. The constellation of two primary DSMP satellites and older backups provided meteorologists with information for generating forecasts, which commanders and troops relied upon for strategic and tactical planning. DSMP F16 replaced DSMP F15, which had launched in December 1999, as the lead craft in the constellation’s mid-morning orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Justin Ray, “US Weather Satellite Finally Escapes Grasp of Hard Luck,” Spaceflight Now, 14 October 2003; Roger Fillion, “Titan II Rocket Soars into Retirement,” Rocky Mountain News (Denver, CO), 21 October 2003.)
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
NASA announced the release of the first scientific product of the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) mission, a joint effort of NASA and the German Aerospace Center. The GRACE mission had produced the most accurate map to date of Earth’s gravity field, using preliminary data collected over 111 days. Project scientists had created the map from selected data, which they had used to calibrate and validate the instruments of the pair of American and German satellites comprising GRACE. The satellites had measured Earth’s gravitational force from orbits 500 kilometers (310.7 miles) high, with 220 kilometers (136.7 miles) separating them, making a pass of the entire planet once each month, and producing measurements of unprecedented accuracy. The measurements provided precise views of ocean currents and tidal changes, enabling scientists to better understand how the oceans affect climate. Although the data was preliminary, NASA had released it to oceanographers immediately, months in advance of the scheduled start of routine GRACE scientific operations, underscoring the mission’s importance and the data’s value.(NASA, “Oceanographers Catch First Wave of Gravity Mission’s Success,” news release 03-244, 21 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03244_gravity_success.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Larry O’Hanlon, “Gravity Map Shows Earth Is Very Lumpy,” Discovery News, 29 July 2003.)
NASA awarded its Kennedy Space Center Integrated Communications Services (KICS) contract, valued at approximately US$190.7 million, to InDyne Inc. of McLean, Virginia. Under the cost- plus-award fee/firm-fixed price, indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity contract, InDyne would provide communications services at NASA’s KSC in support of the Space Shuttle Program, ISS Program, Payload Carriers Program, and Launch Services Program Office payloads. The KICS contract was the first of five work packages in NASA’s space mission communications and data services solicitation, which succeeded the NASA consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) and incorporated the requirements of the visual information technical contract as well as the telephone service requirements of the outsourcing desktop initiative.(NASA, “First Contract in SMCDS Solicitation Awarded To InDyne, Inc.,” contract release c03-ff, 17 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_c03ff_indyne_contract.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
NASA announced its selection of Allied Aerospace Industries of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to manufacture three flight-ready experimental demonstrator vehicles for the X-43C project, a NASA-led initiative. NASA’s LaRC had led the team, comprising members from the U.S. Air Force and from the aerospace industry, to design and develop the X-43C demonstrator vehicle and propulsion system. Following the example of the Hyper-X (X43-A), a vehicle designed to demonstrate short-duration, scramjet-powered flight at Mach 7 and Mach 10, the creators of the X-43C intended it to demonstrate free flight of a scramjet-powered vehicle, with acceleration capability between Mach 5 and Mach 7. Allied Aerospace Industries had also developed the X43-A vehicle. The Air Force had provided a dual-mode scramjet capable of operating as a ramjet or scramjet for the X-43C vehicles. The cost-plus-fixed-fee completion-type contract that NASA awarded to Allied Aerospace Industries was valued at US$150 million over 66 months, covering all work through completion of the Preliminary Design Review; options covered the final design, hardware fabrication, and all support activities. X-43C Project Manager Paul L. Moses remarked that the demonstrator vehicle would validate advanced technologies, design tools, and test techniques for designing reusable space-access vehicles in the future.(NASA, “NASA Selects Allied Team To Provide Hypersonic Vehicles,” contract release C03-ll, 8 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_c03ll_x43c.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Brian Berger, “Hypersonic Efforts Get an Extra Boost: NASA, Air Force Providing $150 Million for Test Program,” Space News, 21 October 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
A Delta 2 rocket carried NASA’s Ice Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) into orbit, launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. ICESat was one in a series of Earth Observing System (EOS) spacecraft to follow the Terra satellite, launched in December 1999, and the Aqua satellite, launched in May 2002. NASA had designed the 661-pound (299.8- kilogram) craft to measure the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica, so that scientists could determine whether global sea levels were rising or falling. The craft’s only instrument, the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System, would beam rapid pulses of laser light to the icy surface, and the ice sheets would reflect the light back to the satellite, acting like radar. The GPS would determine the ICESat’s location as it fired its laser, enabling program scientists to measure the ice sheets’ topography. The rocket also carried a second, smaller craft into orbitCHIPSat, NASA’s 131-pound (59-kilogram), University Explorer Class probe, the Cosmic Hot Interstellar Plasma Spectrometer. CHIPSat would gather data on the origin, physical processes, and properties of the hot gas between stars. The CHIPSat mission was the first U.S. mission to use end-to-end satellite operations over the Internet, treating the craft “something like a node on the Internet.”(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches ICE and CHIPS Satellites,” news release 03-011, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-011.txt (accessed 22 July 2008); Associated Press, “Rocket Carrying NASA Satellites Launched,” 12 January 2003; Jim Banke, “Boeing Launches Pair of Science Research Satellites for NASA,” Space.com, 12 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030112.html (accessed 22 July 2008).)
The GAO presented testimony to the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space regarding the impact of the Shuttle fleet’s grounding on ISS construction and maintenance. Based on a GAO report published in September, a report that the full Senate committee had requested, GAO testified that the grounding of the Shuttle fleet would increase the cost of completing the ISS and could expose the station’s two-person crew to additional risk. NASA had originally estimated the cost of the ISS at US$10 billion, but since 1985, the U.S. Congress had appropriated US$32 billion to the project. The Bush administration had cancelled several planned ISS modules in 2001, to offset US$4 billion in cost overruns. Since the grounding of the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, several components of the station―completed and ready to launch―had reached their storage limit, necessitating their replacement or refurbishment. The inability to ferry heavy items to the ISS had hampered NASA’s ability to correct known safety concerns, such as the delivery of additional shielding to protect the ISS crew dormitory from orbital debris. Furthermore, NASA had estimated that the probability of space debris penetrating ISS living quarters increased by 1.6 percent for each year that the ISS partners postponed installing new shielding. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had requested the report from GAO. Members of Congress had repeatedly asked NASA to provide financial details about the effect of the Columbia accident on the ISS program. However, GAO’s September report stated that neither NASA nor GAO could accurately estimate the costs associated with the grounded Shuttle fleet. GAO testified that it would be able to make such an estimate once NASA had identified precisely when Shuttle flights would resume. NASA officials agreed with GAO’s findings.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Shuttle Fleet’s Safe Return to Flight is Key to Space Station Progress” (report no. GAO-04-201T, Washington, DC, 29 October 2003), 1–11, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04201t.pdf (accessed 8 May 2009); Marc Carreau, “Costs Up for Space Station, Report Says,” Houston Chronicle, 15 October 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Report: Shuttle’s Absence Hurts ISS, GAO Claims Station Is in ‘Survival Mode’,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 October 2003.)
Missile Defense Agency (MDA) officials announced that the flight test in December 2002 of the Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system had been unsuccessful, because a faulty computer-chip connection in the Raytheon exoatmospheric kill vehicle (EKV) had prevented the EKV from separating from its booster during flight. Although the MDA had not recovered the EKV, engineers had determined the problem with the chip’s connection using laboratory simulations, concluding that no significant underlying problem with the EKV technology had caused the failure. The December test, the third unsuccessful GMD intercept attempt, had been the second attempt in which the EKV had failed to separate from the booster. U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Ronald T. Kadish, Director of the MDA, remarked that quality-control problems had likely caused the test failure and announced the formation of an office to improve the MDA’s performance.(Marc Selinger, “Test Failure of GMD System Blamed on Problem with Computer Chip,” Aerospace Daily, 5 March 2003.)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the Boeing-built AsiaSat 4 satellite aboard a Lockheed Martin–built Atlas 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, marking 64 consecutive successful launches for the Atlas rocket over 10 years. The mission was ILS’s third launch for AsiaSat, the dominant satellite operator in its region. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed the AsiaSat 4 craft, a high-power 601HP spacecraft, to provide 15 years of direct-to-home communications and broadband services to customers in Asia and Australia.(Lockheed Martin, “Atlas III Launch of Asiasat 4 Successful in 1st ILS Mission of 2003,” news release, 11 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/AtlasIIILaunch OfAsiaSat4)
NASA’s ARC in Mountain View, California, closed three wind tunnels until the end of FY 2003 because of budget cuts, fewer defense contracts, and the increased use of computer simulations. NASA reported that, unless it received major contracts from the DOD or from the private sector within a year from October 2003, ARC would close the wind tunnels permanently. Two of the wind tunnels, the largest and second-largest wind tunnels in the world, had operated for nearly six decades, testing dozens of aircraft and spacecraft, including Korean War–era fighter planes, helicopters, and the Space Shuttle. The largest wind tunnel, known as “80 by 120” in reference to its height and width, was the only wind tunnel in the world that could accommodate full-size aircraft. With the closure of the three tunnels, ARC dismissed 23 contractors and reassigned 23 employees, changes that would save ARC US$12 million per year in operational costs.(Joshua L. Kwan, “NASA/Ames Center Shuts Wind Tunnels,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 19 May 2003.)
The National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron, Ohio, inducted 17 aviation and aerospace inventors, among them Harold A. Rosen, recognized for his pioneering work in developing the world’s first 24-hour commercial communications satellite and for his subsequent contributions to satellite communications. Rosen had led the Boeing Satellite Systems team that had begun developing the geostationary Syncom in 1959. The team had planned for Syncom to communicate directly and continuously with any ground station in its line of sight, in contrast to the communications satellites in use at the time, which required expensive tracking computers. The first Syncom had failed to launch successfully, but Syncom 2 had reached its synchronous orbit on 26 July 1963. Later that year, Syncom 2 had relayed by satellite the first live two-way call between heads of state―a phone call between President John F. Kennedy in Washington, DC, and Nigerian Prime Minister Abubaker Balewa in Africa. Syncom 3 had brought live coverage of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics to U.S. viewers. The satellites had remained active through 1966, surpassing their one-year design life. David L. Ryan, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Satellite Systems, remarked that contemporary satellites that deliver video, voice, and data communications are all descendants of Syncom, and “when Harold Rosen and his colleagues launched Syncom, they launched a revolution and changed the world.”(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Satellite Pioneer Harold Rosen Inducted to National Inventors Hall of Fame,” news release, 1 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030501n.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale, living aboard the ISS, set a new U.S. space record―Foale had spent more time in orbit than any other American had achieved. During four Shuttle missions, an expedition aboard Russia’s former space station Mir, and his current residence at the ISS, Foale had spent more than 231 days in space, surpassing Carl E. Walz’s previous record for an American in space―230 days, 13 hours, 3 minutes, and 37 seconds. Walz had participated in four Shuttle missions and one ISS expedition in 2002. Along with astronaut Daniel W. Bursch, Walz continued to hold the U.S. record for the longest, single spaceflight―196 days.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Breaks U.S. Space Endurance Record,” news release 03-400, 9 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03400_Foale_record.html (accessed 23 March 2009); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Michael Foale’s 231 Days in Orbit Sets Record,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 December 2003; Associated Press, “Astronaut Sets Record for Time in Space,” 9 December 2003.)
In the CAIB’s third public meeting, U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Aloysius G. Casey, a retired three-star general and former Director of the Space Division of Air Force Systems Command, presented his opinions about the Columbia disaster, based on his decades of experience with missiles and rocket systems. Casey shared with the Board his knowledge of high-speed impacts, referring to the insulating foam that had fallen from the Shuttle’s external tank 81 seconds after the 16 January launch. He also shared his knowledge of the level of testing necessary to determine whether a system is qualified to fly. Casey stated that NASA needed to “do a better job in quantifying the safety margins for all of the shuttle’s various systems and be more sensitive to clues the hardware may be offering when things don’t work as designed.” Board Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr., remarking that the “subject of ‘successful flights don’t re-establish margins’ has come back again and again,” called Casey’s insight very helpful. However, Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, noted that he had never considered falling foam to be a safety issue and that it had never caused “any significant damage in the program to date.” Rather than a safety issue, Bridges had considered the foam a maintenance concern. Bridges commented that if he had been aware of the safety implications, he would have recommended a stop to flying.(Jim Banke, “NASA Missed Trouble Signs, Expert Tells Columbia Board,” Space.com, 25 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030325.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
Northrop Grumman Corporation, Raytheon Company, and the Boeing Company formed a team to develop the U.S. Air Force E-10A Multi-Sensor Command and Control Aircraft (MC2A), a next-generation aircraft that could replace the Airborne Warning and Control System and the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System aircraft. The initial agreement called for the production of five MC2A craft for the U.S. Air Force, but the program could increase to allow for production of as many as 50 such aircraft. Boeing would provide its twin-jet 767-400 transport aircraft as a platform for powerful multifunction radar with the capability of detecting enemy forces on the ground, as well as low-flying cruise missiles. Northrop Grumman and Raytheon would develop a radar and electronic self-defense system to integrate with a Battle Management Command and Control System produced under a separate contract.(Northrop Grumman, “Northrop Grumman, Boeing and Raytheon Announce Teaming Agreement for Next- Generation Air Force Surveillance System,” news release, 12 May 2003, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=40216 (accessed 8 December 2008); Congress Daily, “Aerospace Giants To Team Up On Air Force Project,” 12 May 2003.)
NASA announced that Administrator Sean O’Keefe had appointed three new members to the CAIB in compliance with a request from CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. The new members were Douglas D. Osheroff, the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Physics and Applied Physics at Stanford University and a 1996 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics; Sally K. Ride, a physicist and professor of Space Science at the University of California, San Diego, as well as a former NASA astronaut and the first American woman in space; and John M. Logsdon, Director of the George Washington University Space Policy Institute. O’Keefe had also appointed NASA astronaut retired U.S. Air Force Colonel Michael J. Bloomfield, in response to Gehman’s request that Bloomfield replace former astronaut Bryan D. O’Connor as Astronaut Advisor to the Board. O’Connor would return to NASA Headquarters in his role as NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “New Members Added to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board,” news release 03-097, 5 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03097.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
Soyuz TMA-3/ISS-9S launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan transporting to the ISS the Expedition 8 crew―American Mission Commander C. Michael Foale, Russian Flight Engineer Alexander Y. Kaleri, and Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque. Foale and Kaleri were traveling to the ISS for a 200-day mission, replacing American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko who were completing a six-month stay aboard the orbiting station. Duque would conduct 10 days of scientific experiments on the ISS and would return to Earth with Lu and Malenchenko.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Dmitry Solovyov for Reuters, “ISS Crew Blasts Off at Baikonur,” 20 October 2003; Justin Ray, “New Station Residents Arrive at Their Orbiting Home,” Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
NASA released the final report of the Hubble Space TelescopeJames Webb Space Telescope (HST-JWST) Transition Plan Review Panel, an advisory panel assembled to review NASA’s plans for removing the HST from service as early as 2011, when NASA was preparing to launch the JWST. John N. Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, had chaired the independent panel of astronomers. The panel recommended three options to NASA: 1) to launch two additional Shuttle-servicing missions to the HST in 2005 and 2010, to maximize the scientific productivity of the telescope; 2) to launch one Shuttle-servicing mission before the end of 2006, to replace gyroscopes and, possibly, to install a propulsion device to de-orbit the craft once scientific operations had become impossible, or, alternatively, to de-orbit the craft using an autonomous robotic system; and 3) if no Shuttle missions were possible, to launch a robotic mission to install a propulsion module to bring down the HST in a controlled descent once scientific operations had become impossible. The panel also described various ways to extract maximum scientific return from the HST if NASA opted for any of the recommended three scenarios.(NASA, “Panel Identifies Three Options for Space Telescope Transition,” news release 03-264, 14 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03264_telescope_transition.html (accessed 23 January 2009); NASA Space Telescope Transition Plan Review Panel, “Report of the HST-JWST Transition Panel: Executive Summary” (report, Washington, DC, August 2003), http://www.nasa.gov/ audience/formedia/features/ MP_Public_Reports.html (accessed 23 January 2009); Sam Silverstein, “Hubble Review Panel Urges Second Extra Servicing Mission,” Space News, 19 August 2003.)
NASA announced the completion of tests, which had taken place on 27 August at Edwards Air Force Base in California, demonstrating the possibility of reducing the impact of sonic booms. The research team showed that modifying an aircraft’s shape alters the shape of its sonic boom, thus reducing the sound level. Northrop Grumman Corporation had modified the fuselage and nose of an F-5E fighter jet for the demonstration. The modified jet and a regular F-5E had each flown at Mach 1.36 from the same supersonic corridor. The two aircraft had demonstrated no difference in performance except that the modified jet’s sonic boom was 33 percent less intense than that of the unmodified F-5E. Analysis and wind tunnel tests had predicted the outcome, but NASA had never before flight-tested the theory. Richard Weizman of NASA’s Office of Aerospace Technology remarked that the demonstration was the culmination of 40 years of work by visionary engineers. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had managed the Shaped Sonic Boom Demonstration (SSBD) program under its Quiet Supersonic Platform Initiative. NASA’s LaRC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC), as well as Northrop Grumman Corporation, had been partners in the SSBD program under a US$7 million cooperative agreement.(NASA, “NASA Opens New Chapter in Supersonic Flight,” news release 03-283, 4 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03283_supersonic_flight.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Irene Mona Klotz for United Press International Science News, “Test Shows Shape Sheds Sonic Boom’s Bang,” 22 September 2003.)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
NASA announced that 12 new teams would join the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), a research consortium studying the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life on Earth and in the universe. The new teams, with members from the Carnegie Institution of Washington, DC; Indiana University in Bloomington; Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts; SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California; and NASA’s ARC and GSFC would join the four lead teams that NASA had selected in 2001. The five-year awards, with annual funding levels of US$1 million, would commence in the autumn of 2003 when the agreements with the NAI’s 11 founding teams had concluded. Six of the new teams were among the founding member teams.
The U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin launched the Milstar II military communications satellite into orbit aboard a Titan 4B launch vehicle with a Centaur upper stage. The satellite joined four other Milstar satellites already in orbit, completing the constellation. The Milstar constellation provided secure, global communication links for U.S. military joint forces, transmitting voice, data, and imagery, as well as providing video-teleconferencing capabilities. Milstar II was the third satellite to carry the Boeing Satellite Systems–built, medium-data-rate payload, which had 32 channels, each capable of processing data at speeds of 1.5 megabits per second. The craft carried a low-data-rate payload as well, built by Northrop Grumman Space Technology.(Lockheed Martin, “U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin Team up to Successfully Launch Final Milstar II Satellite on a Titan IV B Rocket,” news release, 8 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/USAirForceLockheedMartinTeamUpSucce.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
NASA announced that scientist David Atlas of NASA’s GSFC and University of Colorado scientist Christopher Williams had created the first “full-body scan” of an evolving tropical thunderstorm, using data collected from an unusual storm over the Amazon rain forest, which had occurred in February 1999. At that time, a team of scientists from NASA, NOAA, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, and several universities had used sensitive radar equipment, such as scanning Doppler and vertically oriented Doppler, to detect and measure different types of particles from the storm’s base to its top, approximately 8.7 miles (14 kilometers) above the rainforest floor. Participants from the University of North Dakota had operated a jet aircraft to gather some of the data. One of the study’s goals had been validating the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite measurements, to help plan the TRMM’s successor, the Global Precipitation Mission. TRMM had provided data about how such storms operate, thus enabling scientists to understand how wind circulates in the upper atmosphere. The research, which Atlas and Williams had published in the American Meteorological Society’s Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, provided new insight into the intense and hazardous conditions within storms. Scientists expected the research to improve forecasts, helping aircraft avoid dangerous storms and making air travel safer, and to improve satellite measurements of precipitation.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “NASA Scientists Take First ‘Full-Body Scan’ of Evolving Thunderstorm,” news release 03-07, 15 January 2003, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/2003/03- 07.htm (accessed 28 July 2008); Reuters, “NASA Takes First ‘Full-Body Scan’ of Thunderstorm,” 15 January 2003; Lee Bowman for Scripps Howard News Service, “Probing the Inner Workings of Storm Clouds,” 16 January 2003.)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, to head NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a “natural selection to lead the Agency’s premiere center for aviation and space research,” according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred,” 13 June 2003.)
