NASA launched its MESSENGER spacecraft on a seven-year mission to study Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun. MESSENGER―Mercury Surface, Space Environment, Geochemistry, and Ranging―launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:16 a.m. (EDT). Six countries had provided equipment for the spacecraft, which would photograph Mercury’s surface and analyze the planet’s magnetic field and mineral composition. Project scientists planned to use the resulting data to determine whether Mercury’s composition is similar to that of Earth, Mars, and Venus. Although the spacecraft was not the first to photograph Mercury―NASA’s Mariner 10 had photographed the planet during flybys in 1974 and 1975―MESSENGER was the first spacecraft designed to examine Mercury while orbiting the planet.(Mark Carreau, “Messenger Leaves on 7-Year Voyage,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 2004; NASA, “NASA Sending a Messenger to Mercury,” news release 04-215, 15 July 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 10 left for the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-5/ISS-9S, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 11:06 p.m. (EDT). The crew members were American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonauts Yuri G. Shargin and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Chiao and Sharipov would stay at the ISS until April 2005, and Shargin would spend eight days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew of Expedition 9.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-035,” news release SS04-035, 13 October 2004. 212)
NASA launched its Gravity Probe B (GP-B) on a Boeing Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 12:57 p.m. (EDT). NASA had designed the satellite to test two fundamental aspects of Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity. According to Einstein’s theory, time and space create a veritable fabric in space. When massive objects, such as Earth and other planets, distort the fabric of space, causing relatively smaller objects to move towards them, they create gravity. Einstein’s theory of relativity also states that large objects twist the fabric of space around them as those objects spin on their axes. Gravity Probe A, which NASA had launched in 1975, had tested the former part of the theory, and GP-B would test both aspects. GP-B contained some of the most accurate scientific instruments ever constructed, including the most precise gyroscopes ever built.
American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka successfully completed repairs to the ISS during a much-delayed spacewalk lasting 6 hours. Among the numerous repairs that Fincke and Padalka completed were the replacement of a faulty circuit breaker and the restoration of power to a gyroscope that helped stabilize the ISS. The ISS partners had rescheduled the spacewalk from 24 June 2004 because of problems with the crew members’ spacesuits.(Mark Carreau, “Finally, Spacewalk a Success,” Houston Chronicle, 1 July 2004; NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-018, 1 July 2004.)
Commercial airlines Air France and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines announced that they would merge, creating the world’s largest airline, in terms of revenue. Under the terms of the merger, the two companies would trade stock shares, with KLM shareholders tendering almost 42 million sharesnearly 90 percent of the company’s capital. Air France would issue approximately 46 million new shares to KLM shareholders, reducing the French government’s interest in the airline from 54 percent to less than 45 percent of total shares. The combined annual revenue of the two companies would be nearly US$23 billion, eclipsing the US$17.4 billion annual revenue of American Airlines, which had previously received the highest revenue of any airline.(Los Angeles Times, “Air Frances Completes Deal with KLM Royal Dutch,” 5 May 2004.)
Astronomer Fred Lawrence Whipple, a pioneering comet researcher, died at the age of 97. Whipple, born on 5 November 1906 in Red Oak, Iowa, had begun his research at Harvard University in 1931, studying meteors and Earth’s atmosphere. During his career, Whipple had contributed to many significant scientific achievements, including a meteor bumper known as the Whipple shield―a device that protects spacecraft from meteor collisions. However, Whipple was best known for research defying conventional scientific theories about comets: whereas many scientists had suspected that comets were composed of sand and rock bound by gravity, Whipple had theorized that comets are discrete bodies with a frozen nucleus that heats up and emits propulsive jets of gas and dust. Later spacecraft missions to comets had proven his theory correct.(Adam Bernstein, “Fred L. Whipple, 97, Dies; Comet Research Pioneer,” Washington Post, 1 September 2004. 679 NASA, “NASA Selects Contractors for Vision for Space Exploration Studies,” news release C04-s, 1 September 2004.)
NASA launched an Earth-observation satellite called Aura from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 3:01 a.m. (PDT). The spacecraft was one of three satellites in NASA’s Earth Observing System (EOS)―the two others were Terra, which monitored land, and Aqua, which monitored the planet’s water cycle. NASA had created Aura to collect scientific data on global air quality, ozone recovery, and climate change, equipping the satellite with four instruments: the High Resolution Dynamics Limb Sounder, the Microwave Limb Sounder, the Ozone Monitoring Instrument, and the Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer. Project engineers hoped that the instruments would enable the spacecraft to collect the most detailed measurements to date of atmospheric pollution, climate change, and the ozone layer.(NASA, “Aura Launched, To Better Understand the Air We Breathe,” news release 04-217, 15 July 2004; Eric D. Tytell, “Satellite To Study Atmospheric Pollutants,” Los Angeles Times, 16 July 2004.)
The GAO released its assessment of NASA’s efforts to upgrade the Space Shuttle fleet in the wake of the Columbia tragedy. NASA planned to implement the recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, as well as those of its own Space Shuttle Service Life Extension Program (SLEP). The GAO report stated that before NASA determined the upgrade requirements and priorities for the Shuttles, it should first determine the Shuttles’ operational life and the requirements for meeting the objectives of the Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP). Before the announcement of the new Vision for Space Exploration, the ISTP had encompassed the space policy of the United States. However, GAO noted that the establishment of President Bush’s new Vision for Space Exploration, which formally changed the duration of operations for both the Space Shuttles and the ISS, had largely invalidated the recommendations offered in GAO’s assessment.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Shuttle: Further Improvements Needed in NASA’s Modernization Efforts” (report no. GAO-04-203, Washington DC, 15 January 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04203.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA’s X-43A research vehicle established an unofficial world speed record for aircraft of nearly 7,000 miles per hour (11,265 kilometers per hour) or Mach 10―10 times the speed of sound. The X-43A contained an experimental engine―called a supersonic combustion ramjet or scramjet. The scramjet engine had no moving parts and did not use fuel from an on-board tank, as is the case with rockets. Instead, the engine used oxygen from the atmosphere, passing through the vehicle, to ignite fuel. NASA had explored the use of scramjets as an alternative to rocket power for space-access vehicles, with the hope that scramjet vehicles would operate more like an airplane than a rocket. The mission lifted off from NASA’s DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:30 p.m. (PST). A NASA B-52 carried the unpiloted X-43A to an altitude of 40,000 feet (7.6 miles or 12.2 kilometers). Before the X-43A had attained at an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers), a Pegasus rocket booster launched from the B-52, providing an initial acceleration that enabled the X-43A to attain an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers). The experimental aircraft flew for nearly 10 seconds at that altitude before descending into the Pacific Ocean as planned, nearly 800 miles (1,287 kilometers) off the coast of California.(John Johnson, “X-43A Aircraft Sets Speed Record at 6,500 MPH,” Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2004; NASA, “NASA’s X-43A Scramjet Breaks Speed Record,” news release 04-373, 16 November 2004.)
Former astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper died at age 77 in Ventura, California. One of the original seven astronauts for the Mercury program, the United States’ first human spaceflight program, Cooper was born in Shawnee, Oklahoma, on 6 March 1927. He had joined the U.S. Air Force in 1949, and NASA had selected him as a Mercury astronaut in April 1959. In May 1963, Cooper had piloted the program’s last mission, which lasted 34 hours and 20 minutes―longer than all the combined duration of all previous Mercury missions. Cooper had made his second and final trip to space on Gemini 5 in August 1965, in a two-person mission that had set a record for space endurance of 191 hours. The mission had demonstrated that humans could survive in a weightless environment and, therefore, that a trip to the Moon was feasible. In addition, Cooper had been the first American astronaut to make two spaceflights, to sleep in space, and to appear in a televised broadcast from space. After retiring from the Air Force in 1970, he had run several companies, including a consulting firm specializing in projects ranging from aerospace to hotel development.(John Johnson, “Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr., 77,” Los Angeles Times, 5 October 2004; Matthew L. Wald, “Gordon Cooper, Astronaut, Is Dead at 77,” New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
NASA launched the Swift satellite from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA and an international team of participants had designed the spacecraft to detect and analyze gamma-ray bursts (GRBs)―ephemeral explosions that occur throughout the universe, usually far from Earth. GRBs may indicate a number of significant cosmological events, such as the collision of extremely dense celestial bodies or the formation of black holes. Swift was equipped with three telescopes to study GRBs, including the Burst Alert Telescope, which could detect and locate GRBs, and the X-ray Telescope (XRT) and Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope (UVOT), two telescopes that could study the bursts’ afterglows. Among the many participants in the Swift mission were the Italian Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Swift Satellite,” news release 04-382, 22 November 2004; New York Times, “NASA Starts Hunt for Celestial Bodies,” 21 November 2004.)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 11, a six-month mission set to launch in April 2005. Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would serve as Station Commander, and American astronaut John L. Phillips would serve as Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer. In 2000 Krikalev, who had experienced the most spaceflights of any Russian cosmonaut, had served as a member of the first ISS crew for Expedition 1. Phillips also had ISS experience as a member of Mission STS-100 in 2001. The backup crew members for Expedition 11 were American astronaut Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin.(NASA JSC, “Next International Space Station Crew Named,” news release H04-383, 23 November 2004.)
NASA’s X-43A Hyper X plane set a new record for flight speed, traveling at Mach 7, which is nearly 5,000 miles (8,050 kilometers) per hour and seven times the speed of sound. The flight was also the first free flight of an aircraft powered by a supersonic combustion ramjet enginea scramjeta type of engine that provides thrust by funneling air and fuel into a hollow chamber at extremely high speed. The 12-foot-long (3.7-meter-long) unpiloted, experimental aircraft flew for approximately 11 seconds over the Pacific Ocean, at an altitude of 95,000 feet (approximately 29,000 meters), before NASA deliberately landed the aircraft in the ocean. NASA used a modified B-52 aircraft to carry the X-43A into the sky, launching the X-43A into flight using a Pegasus rocket mounted to the B-52. The test flight, which took place near San Nicolas Island off the California coast, originated from NASA’s DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California.(Peter Pae, “Fast Times at 12 O’Clock High: 5,000 MPH,” Los Angeles Times, 28 March 2004; NASA, “X-43A Soars on Scramjet Power,” 27 March 2004.)
The GAO published an assessment of the efforts of the DOD and the military services to develop personnel for space-related national security matters and to integrate those personnel into their forces. In the National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2004 (Pub.L.No. 108-136), the U.S. Congress had required the DOD to create a strategy to develop and integrate personnel who were capable of operating space-based systems and of developing space-related concepts, doctrine, and technology. In addition, Congress had required GAO to assess those efforts. In its report, GAO stated that the DOD did not have a plan to implement its strategy for developing and integrating space personnel. GAO also found that the military services varied in the extent to which they had implemented plans to develop and manage their space personnel. The report included recommendations to address these issues.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Defense Space Activities: Additional Actions Needed to Implement Human Capital Strategy and Develop Space Personnel” (report no. GAO-04-097, Washington, DC, 11 August 2004).)
A NASA-funded study found that artificial surfaces in urban areas often cause temperatures to increase, enabling longer growing seasons in cities than in surrounding rural areas. Using data from NASA’s Terra satellite, a team of Boston University scientists led by Xiaoyang Zhang compared the growing seasons of 70 North American cities with those of adjacent rural areas. The scientists discovered that the growing season in urban areas lasted nearly 15 days longer than the growing season in rural areas. In addition, the data revealed that urban climates affect vegetation located up to 10 kilometers (6 miles) from urban land cover. According to the scientists, high concentrations of artificial surfaces in urban areas cause surface temperatures to be relatively higher in urban areas than in surrounding rural areas. In addition, the scientists suggested that their findings demonstrated how land use and other human activities affect Earth’s environment.(NASA, “NASA Plays Key Role in Largest Environmental Experiment in History,” news release 04-242, 27 July 2004; X. Zhang et al., “The Footprint of Urban Climates on Vegetation Phenology,” Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 12 (25 June 2004): L12209.)
The crew of Expedition 9 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:36 a.m., local time. American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka had spent 188 days at the ISS, where they had performed four spacewalks. Returning with them was Russian cosmonaut Yuri G. Shargin, who had traveled to the ISS on 13 October 2004 with the crew members of Expedition 10.(Mark Carreau, “Station Crew Returns to Earth,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2004; Stefano S. Coleman, “Two Safely Back After 6 Months on Space Station,” New York Times, 24 October 2004.)
The U.S. Air Force awarded the Boeing Company a US$472 million contract to develop a military satellite system capable of secure, high-capacity global communications for NASA, the U.S. intelligence community, and the DOD. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would lead a team of companies that would conduct risk-reduction and system-definition studies for the Transformational Communications MILSATCOM (Military Satellite Communications) Space Segment, which uses laser communications, advanced processors, and other advanced technologies to provide communications for airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The companies selected to conduct research on the project included Ball Aerospace, Cisco Systems, and Raytheon.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Awarded $472 Million for Next-Generation Military Satellite System,” news release, 23 January 2004, http//www.boeing.com/news/releases/2004/q1/nr_040123s.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
NASA announced it would undergo an internal reorganization to meet its new objectives under the Vision for Space Exploration, the blueprint for American space policy that President George W. Bush had released one day before. The reorganization included the creation of a new office to develop a new CEV and other technologies for future missions to the Moon and Mars. NASA named Craig E. Steidle to oversee the new Office of Exploration Systems. Furthermore, NASA renamed its Office of Aerospace Technology, which had previously been responsible for spacecraft development. Under its new nameOffice of Aeronauticsit would have responsibility for developing aviation technologies. J. Victor Lebacqz, former Acting Associate Administrator of the Office of Aerospace Technology, became Associate Administrator of the new Office of Aeronautics.(Patty Reinert, “New NASA Office To Focus on Advancing Bush Space Agenda,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2004; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Creating Office for Missions to the Moon and Beyond,” New York Times, 16 January 2004.)
In a newly released survey, U.S. federal government employees ranked NASA as the best place to work in the federal government. The Office of Personnel Management had collected the data during a 2002 survey of federal employees, and the nonpartisan Partnership for Public Service and American University’s Institute for the Study of Public Policy Implementation had produced the rankings. According to the survey, in eight out of 10 categories related to employment satisfaction, federal employees had ranked NASA first―federal employees had ranked NASA as the best place to work for women, for racial minorities, and for individuals under 40 years of age.(Stephen Barr, “NASA Soars to Top of Satisfaction Ratings Among Various Workers,” Washington Post, 16 April 2004.)
