The U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the December 2004 inaugural launch of Boeing’s Delta 4 Heavy Rocket, which had failed when engines shut down prematurely. The Air Force and Boeing had intended the launch of the rocket, which was transporting a dummy payload, as a full dress rehearsal. The plan had been to test the newest and largest member of Boeing’s next-generation rocket series before critical national security satellites began using it. Boeing had designed the rocket with three Common Booster Cores, each with a cryogenic main engine. The three cores, secured together, formed a craft capable of launching large cargo into space. The investigation had determined that each booster’s engines had undergone premature shutdown during the launch, after internal sensors incorrectly determined that the engines had exhausted their liquid-oxygen fuel supply. Investigators had concluded that cavitationbubbles in the liquid oxygen plumbinghad caused the glitch. Major Rodney Houser, the lead investigator for the Air Force, stated that the investigating team would focus on determining the cause of the cavitation within the liquid-oxygen feed system and on implementing corrective measures to prevent the problem’s repetition.(Justin Ray, “Delta 4-Heavy Investigation Identifies Rocket’s Problem,” Spaceflight Now, 17 March 2005. 235)
The National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) in Hampton, Virginia, released a report commissioned by the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice and Science, which had concluded that, to keep pace with Europe, the U.S. government would need to spend more on aeronautics, not less. The report, “Responding to the Call: Aviation Plan for American Leadership,” recommended that, over the next five years, the U.S. government should restore NASA’s aeronautics funding to 1998 levels, a goal that implied a spending level approximately twice that of President George W. Bush’s proposal for FY 2006. The study team comprised more than 250 of the nation’s top aviation experts representing industry and academia. NIA President and Executive Director Robert Lindberg remarked that the United State’s aviation capabilities had eroded, despite the position of aviation as a critical component in the U.S. balance of trade. The report of more than 1,000 pages provided detailed investment plans, budgets, and needs assessments for seven aeronautics sectors: airspace systems, aviation safety and security, subsonic aircraft, supersonic aircraft, hypersonic technologies, rotorcraft, and workforce and education.(National Institute of Aerospace, “NIA Releases Congressionally-Requested Aviation Plan,” 3 May 2005, http://www.nianet.org/pressreleases/AviationPlan_050305.php (accessed 16 September 2009); Allison Connolly, “Survey: NASA Can’t Afford To Fall Behind in Aeronautics,” Virginian Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 4 May 2005. 788 BBC News, “First Marsis Radar Boom Deployed,” 6 May 2005; Maggie McKee, “Mars Express To Deploy ‘Divining Rod’ at Last,” New Scientist, 4 May 2005.)
NASA and the FAA brought a demonstration of the Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) to Foley Square in downtown New York City. SATS represented one aspect of a public- private partnership focused on developing technology that would enable more people to fly directly to their destinations at their own convenience. The ultimate goal of the SATS project was for people to be able to access air travel in much the same way that they hail a cab. NASA’s SATS Project Manager Jerry N. Hefner described a scenario in which a person would board a plane in his or her neighborhood to fly to a destination 500 miles away, without changing planes and without going through a hub. Instead, SATS would fly into and out of underused rural and suburban airports, reducing congestion at larger airports and easing traffic on interstate highways across the country. SATS Project Manager for the FAA Peter C. McHugh commented that those involved in the project believed that, as the travel population using SATS aircraft grew, minimal interference or intersection with the larger airline system would occur.(Roger Clark for NY1 Cable TV, “NASA Tries To Change the Way Americans Fly,” 16 March 2005. 234)
NASA launched its Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) at 7:43 a.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida on an Atlas 5 launch vehicle. The occasion marked the first time that NASA had used an Atlas 5 to launch an interplanetary mission. NASA had designed the MRO to conduct highly detailed analyses of Mars’s atmosphere, surface, and subsurface. From low orbit, the MRO would evaluate landing sites for future Mars missions and search for sites where water might have previously existed. NASA planned to examine the MRO data to seek evidence of previous life on the planet and to study planetary climate change. After two years of gathering data, the MRO would relay the information to Earth, using two robotic probes scheduled to arrive on Mars in 2008 and 2010.(NASA, “NASA’s Multipurpose Mars Mission Successfully Launched,” news release 05-218, 12 August 2005; Thomas H. Maugh II, “New Mars Orbiter Embarks on Ambitious Fact-Finding Mission,” Los Angeles Times, 13 August 2005.)
USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASA’s Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probes―Viking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, “Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral,” Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the crew of ISS Expedition 12 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 11:55 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 12 were American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 11, comprising Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to remain at the station for nearly six months. The launch also included American executive Gregory Olsen, who would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with the Russian Space Agency. Olsen planned to return to Earth with the Expedition 11 crew on 10 October 2005.(NASA, “Expedition 12 on the Way to International Space Station,” news release 05-292, 30 September 2005. 843 NASA, “Langley Center Director Lesa B. Roe,” 3 October 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/ about/roe_bio.html (accessed 13 July 2009); NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-042, 13 June 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched two military satellites aboard an Atlas 3B, the last of Lockheed Martin’s Atlas 3 rockets. The launch marked the 145th and final launch from Complex 36 at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after 43 years of operation. NASA had built the complex in the early 1960s, specifically for its Atlas-Centaur program, which included the launches of NASA’s historic Surveyor, Mariner, and Pioneer missions. Launches from the site had proved highly successful; the launch of the last Atlas 3B marked the 75th consecutive successful Atlas rocket launch, including all six Atlas 3 flights. Launch Complex 36 was one of the United States’ oldest continuously operating launch sites and the last of the U.S. launch sites to use a traditional blockhouse to control the launch. The final Atlas 3B carried a pair of formation-flying, classified satellites, which analysts believed were part of the Naval Ocean Surveillance System (NOSS) of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). Satellites in the NOSS, a network for monitoring ships around the globe, were reportedly capable of detecting radio transmissions from ships to pinpoint their locations precisely.(Justin Ray, “Last Atlas 3 Rocket Launches a Pair of Spy Satellites” and “Atlas Rocket Workers Say Goodbye to Complex 36,” Spaceflight Now, 4 February 2005; Todd Halvorson, “Atlas 3 Climbs Through Fog to Final Successful Mission,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 February 2005.)
The Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft, a NASA technology demonstrator, launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, aboard a Pegasus-XL HAPS rocket released from an L-1011 cargo aircraft. NASA intended the launch to test the 360-kilogram (793.76-pound or 0.4-ton or 0.36-tonne) satellite’s video-guidance-system technology, which would enable DART to rendezvous with an experimental military communications satellite and maneuver around it. The technology would allow future spacecraft to approach and dock with another craft automatically.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
The crew of Expedition 11 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 9:09 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 11 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The two men had spent 179 days in space, during which time they had performed a variety of scientific experiments and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Accompanying Krikalev and Phillips on their return was American contractor Gregory Olsen, who had spent eight days on the ISS performing research under a commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency.(NASA, “Expedition 11 Safely Returns from International Space Station,” news release 05-340, 10 October 2005.)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASA’s workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administration’s 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASA’s efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttle’s retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASA’s failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASA’s ability to accomplish this, such as NASA’s near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the President’s Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement” (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 1–19, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-112, the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which effectively allowed U.S. astronauts to continue flying on Russian spacecraft, thereby maintaining the United States’ access to the ISS. The terms of the original act, passed in 2000, did not permit U.S. government agencies to make “extraordinary payments” to Russia, including purchasing space on Soyuz spacecraft, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. However, at the time that Congress had passed the original act, Russia had an agreement with the United States to provide 11 free voyages on Soyuz spacecraft to U.S. astronauts, so that NASA did not have to purchase space on Soyuz. In September 2005, American astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. had become the 11th U.S. passenger on a Soyuz, and, subsequently, Russia had required payment for any carriage of U.S. astronauts. Therefore, NASA had asked Congress to amend the act so that it could buy space on Russian spacecraft.(Guy Gugliotta, “U.S. Access to Space Station Is Preserved,” Washington Post, 11 November 2005.)
NASA announced the successful completion of flight tests above a virtual forest fire to evaluate new flight-control software on board two small UAVs. The software experiment had sought to guide the UAVs simultaneously around obstacles, using principles derived from studies of the movements of fish and birds. Engineers and technicians from NASA’s ARC and DFRC had conducted the flight tests over a remote area of Edwards Air Force Base in California, to investigate cooperative flight strategies for atmospheric sampling and for airborne monitoring and surveillance of natural disasters. John E. Melton of ARC, Principal Investigator for the Networked UAV Teaming Experiment, explained that his team had used two autopilot-equipped APV-3 UAVs, each with a 12-foot wingspan, to flight-test several novel approaches for assisting wildfire-suppression crews. The two craft had flown along computer-generated paths to demonstrate their ability to avoid obstacles in a cooperative and synchronized manner, without the assistance of flight personnel. Melton commented that the technology could eventually enable swarms of aircraft to move safely from one area to another as a group, collecting air samples on scientific missions or helping ground personnel monitor natural disasters.(NASA, “New Software Allows UAVs to Team Up for Virtual Experiments,” news release 05-078, 17 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05078_UAV_Software.html (accessed 6 June 2009).)
NASA’s implementation of its Integrated Financial Management Program (IFMP)NASA had begun implementing the IFMP in 2000 as a single accounting system to replace 11 separate accounting systems. At the request of the U.S. Congress, in 2003 GAO had examined NASA’s progress on IFMP implementation and had recommended that NASA make 45 changes to the program. In its assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement those recommended changes, GAO stated that NASA had made slow progress and still needed to implement most of the recommendations. The report also stated that NASA’s financial management problems were in danger of threatening its capacity to manage its programs and to allocate its budget to projects and programs. NASA responded that it had made significant improvements under the IFMP and had made progress on more of GAO’s recommendations than GAO had indicated in its report.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Business Modernization: Some Progress Made Toward Implementing GAO Recommendations Related to NASA’s Integrated Financial Management Program” (report no. GAO-05-799R, Washington, DC, 9 September 2005); Tamara Lytle, “NASA Still Can’t Balance Its Books, Auditors Say,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 October 2005.)
Soyuz TMA-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying the Expedition 11 crew of three to the ISS. Russian Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American Flight Engineer John L. Phillips would replace Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Italy’s Roberto Vittori, also aboard, would conduct scientific experiments at the ISS before returning to Earth with Chiao and Sharipov.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Soyuz Rocket Blasts Off to Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 April 2005.)
NASA announced the inauguration of SERVIR, an innovative regional monitoring system designed to provide early warnings to Central American decision makers about various ecological and climatic changes. SERVIR, Spanish for “to serve,” is the acronym for the Spanish phrase, Sistema Regional de Visualización y Monitoreo (Regional Visualization and Monitoring System). The purpose of the system was to aid the governments and industries of the seven countries of Central America and the southern Mexican states. NASA scientists had developed the system to track weather, climatological, and ecological eventsfor example, to monitor wildfires, red tides, and toxic algae bloomsusing NASA’s research in Earth sciences and space-based observations. Daniel E. Irwin, SERVIR Project Manager at NASA’s MSFC, remarked that the system was an excellent tool for gauging slow or periodic shifts in climate that could lead to drought or other long-term problems, in addition to identifying quick-forming weather phenomena that threaten human lives.(NASA, “NASA Develops Central American Monitoring System,” news release 05-038, 4 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05038_panama.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
The Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios launched Cosmos 1, the first solar-powered spacecraft, at 3:46 p.m. (EDT), on a Volna rocket from a Russian submarine in the Barents Sea. Russian Space Agency officials, however, were not certain that the spacecraft had attained orbit. The spacecraft’s sponsors, the Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios, are U.S. nonprofit organizations that seek to increase the public’s knowledge of and involvement in space exploration. The late American scientist Carl Sagan had helped found the Planetary Society, and Ann Druyan―Sagan’s widow―had founded Cosmos Studios. The two organizations had designed the craft and launched the mission to demonstrate the feasibility of solar power technology as an effective means of space travel. The pressure of solar light particles―photons―on the spacecraft’s large, triangular, mirror-like “solar sails” were to propel the engineless, fuel-free Cosmos 1.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Solar Sail Spacecraft Launched from Russian Submarine,” 21 June 2005; The Planetary Society, “Projects: Solar Sailing,” http://planetary.org/programs/projects/ solar_sailing/ (accessed 10 August 2009).)
The Expedition 10 crew, American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov, returned to Earth from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-5 after almost 193 days in space. Together with Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, who had conducted scientific experiments at the ISS after his arrival on 17 April with Expedition 11, the crew landed on target in north-central Kazakhstan. Although the crew and recovery team encountered no major problems, weeks of heavy snow and rain had caused flooding in the steppes, complicating the recovery. Only three of the 10 recovery helicopters were able to land in the wet conditions. During their mission, Chiao and Sharipov had maintained ISS systems and conducted scientific research. They had replaced critical hardware in the Joint Quest Airlock, repaired U.S. spacesuits, completed two spacewalks to prepare the ISS for the arrival of a new European cargo spacecraft during the next year, and submitted a scientific research paper on the use of ultrasound in space. Chiao had voted in the U.S. presidential election the previous November, the first astronaut to do so in space. Vittori had spent 10 days in space, eight of them aboard the ISS, and had performed 22 experiments, including tests of astronaut fatigue, research on the durability of components of microsatellites, research into the electromagnetic waves that emanate from Earth and may be related to earthquakes, and experiments growing shoots as a potential food source for people in orbit.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report SS05-020a, 24 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020a_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Shamil Zumatov for Reuters, “Russian, U.S., Italian Space Crew Return to Earth,” 25 April 2005; Agence-France Presse, “Astronauts Home Safely from International Space Station,” 26 April 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force launched the most technologically advanced GPS satellite ever developed, the GPS IIR-14, on a Delta-2 rocket at 11:37 p.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS IIR-14 was the first of eight satellites planned for the new GPS, which the Air Force had created to provide improved encryption and GPS antijamming capabilities for the U.S. military, as well as an improved GPS signal for civilian users. At the time of the launch, the GPS constellation consisted of 28 satellites, which the Air Force was operating for both civilian and military users.(Lockheed Martin, “First Modernized GPS Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully by the U.S. Air Force,” news release, 26 September 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/ FIRSTMODERNIZEDGPSSATELLITEBUILTBYL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The American Academy of Arts and Sciences released “United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities,” a research paper highly critical of the Vision for Space Exploration. In the paper, former Director of NASA’s JSC George W. S. Abbey and former White House science advisor Neal F. Lane stated that the Vision for Space Exploration does not address major obstacles to the United States’ progress in space exploration and science. Those problems include predicted shortfalls in the U.S. engineering and science workforce and declining international cooperation on existing and planned space missions. Abbey and Lane also stated that the United States would be unlikely to realize the Vision’s objectives because of the diminishing U.S. commitment to the country’s commercial space industry and the declining role of basic science in the U.S. space program and in the national economy. NASA officials did not comment on the paper, stating that they had not yet seen it.(John Schwartz, “Report Says Space Program Is Lacking Money and Focus,” New York Times, 23 June 2005; George W. S. Abbey and Neal F. Lane, “United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities” (Occasional Paper, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA, 2005), 1–2.)
Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company announced the formation of a joint venture called United Launch Alliance, combining the production, engineering, testing, and launch operations associated with U.S. government launches of Boeing Delta and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. The merger ended a two-year legal battle between the two largest government contractors, in which Lockheed Martin had accused Boeing of cheating to win rocket-launch work. The venture eliminated market competition for launching weather satellites for NOAA, scientific satellites for NASA, spy satellites for the National Security Agency, and communications satellites for the U.S. Air Force. According to the agreement, the joint venture would produce both Boeing’s Delta and Lockheed’s Atlas rockets, consolidating production at Boeing’s Decatur, Alabama, facility. Lockheed’s Denver, Colorado, office would serve as headquarters, housing the engineering and administrative functions. Lockheed Martin’s Vice President of Financial Strategies Jeffrey D. MacLauchlan remarked that the preservation of the two separate rocket families was the crux of the venture’s appeal to the federal government.(Lockheed Martin, “Boeing, Lockheed Martin To Form Launch Services Joint Venture,” news release, 2 May 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/BoeingLockheedMartin FormLaunchServi.html (accessed 17 September 2009); Renae Merle, “Boeing, Lockheed Join Rocket Division,” Washington Post, 3 May 2005.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
Aera Corporation, which had competed as American Astronautics in the X Prize private spaceflight competition, signed a five-year launch support agreement with the U.S. Air Force, securing access to Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. Although Aera had yet to launch a single test vehicle, the company planned to launch paying customers by the end of 2006. Aera’s President and Chief Operating Officer Lewis Reynolds explained that the company had used computer-based modeling for most of its testing and had done very little testing of actual physical components for the spacecraft. The company intended to apply for a FAA launch license within 30 days and to secure a manufacturing facility for its seven-seat spaceship, the Altairis, by the end of April.(Alan Boyle, “Dark Horse Makes Bold Claims in Space Race,” MSNBC.com, 8 March 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7121988// (accessed 2 September 2009).)
The Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at California’s Edwards Air Force Base at 5:11 a.m. (PDT). The mission―officially designated STS-114―was NASA’s first Shuttle mission since the February 2003 loss of Columbia. The Shuttle’s successful reentry was particularly important, because the Columbia accident had occurred during the reentry phase of its mission. The mission’s primary objectives were to test and evaluate new safety procedures for Shuttle missions and to continue construction and maintenance of the ISS. Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson had performed some of the ISS and Shuttle maintenance tasks during three spacewalks on 30 July, 1 August, and 3 August. The total duration of STS-114 was 13 days, 21 hours, and 32 minutes.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114.” 257)
An international group of astronomers led by Debra A. Fischer of San Francisco State University announced that they had discovered the largest solid core yet found in an exoplanet. The planet, called HD 149026b, has a solid core that is approximately 70 times larger than Earth’s mass. The discovery was the first observational evidence of the core accretion theory of planetary formation, which posits that planets begin as small rock-ice cores and acquire additional mass through gravitational attraction of gas and other matter. The competing gravitational instability theory holds that planetary formation occurs after the rapid gravitational collapse of large gas clouds. Fischer and the other astronomers reported that they had determined that the mechanism of gravitational instability was unlikely to have produced the large, rocky core of HD 149026b.
NASA announced the establishment of the Exploration Systems Advisory Committee (ESAC), composed of leading experts from government, academia, and industry. NASA named Lester L. Lyles, a former commander of the U.S. Air Force Materiel Command to chair ESAC. Lyles had extensive experience managing large, high-technology organizations involving aeronautical and astronautical research, development, acquisition, and logistics. The committee would provide advice and recommendations to NASA’s Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems, including input regarding plans, policies, programs, and other matters pertinent to the directorate’s responsibilities.
NASA officially refuted news reports that had circulated on 16 February claiming that NASA scientists affiliated with ARC had found strong evidence that life might exist on Mars. According to the news reports, during a private meeting in Washington, DC, two astrobiologists from Ames had told a group of space officials that they had found strong evidence, in the form of methane signatures, that life currently exists on Mars, hidden in caves and sustained by pockets of water. NASA stated that it did not have any observational data from any current Mars missions to support the claim. NASA further stated that the work the scientists had conducted did not directly support any conclusion regarding the existence of life on Mars but, rather, that the scientists’ research could help formulate a strategy for searching for such life. The scientists had not submitted any research papers asserting the existence of Martian life to any scientific journal.(NASA, “NASA Statement on False Claim of Evidence of Life on Mars,” news release 05-052, 18 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05052_mars_claim.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Bloomberg News, “NASA Says Claims of Evidence of Current Life on Mars Are False,” 19 February 2005; Brian Berger, “Exclusive: NASA Researchers Claim Evidence of Present Life on Mars,” Space.com, 16 February 2005, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/mars_life_050216.html (accessed 28 August 2009).)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns,” news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, “NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
NASA launched a new environmental satellite for NOAA, aboard a Boeing Delta 2 7320-10 expendable launch vehicle, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The NOAA-18 (N), the fourth in the series of five Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellites (POES) carrying improved imaging and sounding capabilities, would improve weather forecasting and monitor environmental events globally, collecting data about Earth’s surface and atmosphere. The craft also carried instruments used in COSPAS-SARSAT, the international Search-and-Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking System (COSPAS is the Russian acronym for “Cosmicheskaya Sistema Poiska Avariynyh Sudo,” which means “Space System for the Search of Vessels in Distress”). Established in 1982, COSPAS-SARSAT had saved 5,000 lives in the United States and 18,000 worldwide.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619; NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Environmental Satellite,” news release 05- 129, 20 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05129_ NOAA_)
NASA announced the establishment of the DART Mishap Investigation Board to determine why the DART spacecraft had failed to complete its mission on 15 April. Initially, NASA had believed that DART had come within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the target satellite before low fuel readings prompted it to abort its mission. However, NASA spokesperson Kimberly D. Newton later explained that new data had indicated that DART had bumped the satellite, boosting its orbit by as much as 5.75 miles (9.3 kilometers). However, DART had abandoned its target approximately halfway through its 24-hour mission. The Board consisted of seven voting members from NASA’s MSFC, NASA’s GSFC and ARC; the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; and the U.S. Air Force Space Command. NASA assigned eight federal employees to serve as advisors to the Board―six from MSFC, and one each from NASA’s JSC and NASA Headquarters. NASA selected Scott D. Croomes of MSFC to chair the Board and Kerry L. Remp of GRC to serve ex officio, to assure that board activity conformed to NASA’s procedural requirements.(NASA, “NASA Announces Dart Mishap Investigation Board Members,” news release 05-105, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05105_DART_mishap_board.html (accessed 29 June 2009); NASA Engineering and Safety Center, NESC Review of Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) Mission Mishap Investigation Review Board (MIB) (NESC Request No. 05-020-E, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, December 2006), http://klabs.org/richcontent/Reports/Failure_Reports/dart/ 167813main_rp-06-119_05-020-e_dart_report_final_dec_27.pdf (accessed 18 November 2009); Chris Kridler, “Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
