Associate Administrator for NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missions—STS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASA’s efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitz’s resignation, praising the former astronaut’s tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASA’s decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttle’s reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, “Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA,” news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, “Scott J. ‘Doc’ Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former),” http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family,” Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
NASA issued a statement in support of astronaut Daniel M. Tani and his family. Tani, stationed at the ISS, had lost his mother on 19 December when she died in an automobile accident. NASA spokesperson Eileen M. Hawley remarked that NASA believed this was the first time an American astronaut had lost a family member while on a mission in space. The statement indicated that NASA intended to provide Tani and his family with any assistance they needed. Hawley explained that NASA did not have a prescribed policy for emergencies such as this and would respond according to Tani’s wishes.(NASA, “NASA Statement on the Death of Astronaut Dan Tani’s Mother,” news release 07-282, 20 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07282_Mike_Coays_Statement.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Mark Carreau and Carol Christian, “Space Station Astronaut’s Mom Dies in Car Wreck,” Houston Chronicle, 20 December 2007.)
The U.S. Missile Defense Agency successfully launched a Minotaur-1 rocket from the Mid- Atlantic Regional Spaceport launchpad on Wallops Island, Virginia, at 2:47 a.m. (EST). The rocket carried the Near Field Infrared Experiment (NFIRE), which was part of a study to improve the interception of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and to assess the viability of a laser communication system for missile-defense applications. During the mission, an infrared tracking sensor on board NFIRE would collect exhaust-plume data from two disarmed Minutemen ICBMs, which the agency would launch later in 2007 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch of Minotaur 1 was the second launch from the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport. Operated by a consortium including Old Dominion University and the states of Maryland and Virginia, the spaceport was one of six federally licensed spaceports in the United States.(Stephen Furness, “Wallops Spaceport’s 2:47 a.m. Launch a Success,” Chincoteague Beacon (VA), 24 April 2007; Jon W. Glass, “Rocket Launched Successfully from Eastern Shore Spaceport,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 25 April 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Q—all CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)—were technology demonstrators, including two—CalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)—that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSat—CAPE 1—with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate and the American Helicopter Society (AHS) selected Eric Greenwood II—a graduate student at the University of Maryland, who was studying aerospace engineering with a specialty in rotorcraft acoustics—as the first winner of the
NASA announced an agreement with the U.S. Air Force to support abort-flight-test requirements for the Orion Project. Under a contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chandler, Arizona, the U.S. Air Force Space Development and Test Wing at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, had scheduled flight tests of abort-test boosters. The purpose of the tests, which would begin in 2009 at White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) in New Mexico and would last through 2011, was to support certification of the Orion CEV’s launch-abort system. The system included a small escape rocket designed to ensure the safety of the crew in the event of a launch-vehicle malfunction while on the launchpad or during ascent to orbit. Of the six tests planned, two would simulate a situation involving an abort from the launchpad and would require no booster; the remainder would use abort-test boosters to simulate aborts at three stressing conditions along the Ares launch-vehicle trajectory.(NASA, “NASA Buys Abort Test Boosters for Orion Flight Tests,” news release 07-86, 16 April 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07086_Orion_ATB_purchase.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASA’s JPL announced that, after entering the Victoria Crater on 13 September, Opportunity had reached its first destination inside the crater, driving 7.45 meters (24 feet) on 18 September and 2.47 meters (8 feet) further on 22 September. On 25 September, the rover had descended 2.25 meters (7.38 feet) down the inner slope of the 800-meter-wide (2,625-foot-wide) crater to a band of relatively bright bedrock, positioning itself to examine a selected slab of rock composed of three distinct layers. After the science team had conducted safety checks, Opportunity would examine the rock, using the tools at the end of its robotic arm. Safety checks were necessary because Opportunity was sitting on the slope at a 25° tilt. Victoria was the largest crater that Opportunity had visited during its nearly four Earth years of Mars exploration. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, the Rover Science Principal Investigator, explained that, through the several planned stops along the band of rock, scientists hoped to 141 figure out the processes that had led to Victoria’s formation and to its distinctive appearance.
NASA celebrated the 80 anniversary of Charles A. Lindbergh’s solo transatlantic flight with Lindbergh’s grandson Erik Lindbergh, himself an aviator, who had recreated his grandfather’s historic flight in 2002. Erik Lindbergh joined NASA in its rededication of a unique astronomy craft, a 747 airliner, which Pan American Airways had christened “Clipper Lindbergh” in 1977. NASA had modified the aircraft, enabling it to carry a 45,000-pound (22.5-ton or 20.4 tonnes) infrared telescope system. Designed to fly at more than 40,000 feet (12,192 meters), the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) would operate at an altitude above nearly 99 percent of Earth’s atmospheric water vapor, greatly enhancing the observatory’s ability to study the cosmos. The German Aerospace Center had provided the telescope, and NASA had modified the craft.(NASA, “NASA’s SOFIA To Be Rededicated on Historic Lindbergh Anniversary,” media advisory M07-52, 11 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_M07052_SOFIA_event.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Aero-News Network, “Erik Lindbergh Dedicates NASA’s Sofia in Honor of Grandfather,” 22 May 2007. 71 NASA, “Mars Rover Spirit Unearths Surprise Evidence of Wetter Past,” news release 07-118, 21 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07118_Spirit_discovers_wet_Mars.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Space.com, “NASA Rover Finds Surprising Evidence for Mars’ Watery Past,” 21 May 2007, http://www. space.com/scienceastronomy/070521_rover_wetterpast.html (accessed 6 April 2010).)
NASA launched its Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) mission from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 6:01 p.m. (EST), marking the first time NASA had launched a five-satellite constellation aboard a single rocket. NASA had designed the mission to uncover the catalyst of geomagnetic substorms, the atmospheric events visible in the Northern Hemisphere as a sudden brightening of the aurora borealis. Scientists hoped that the mission’s findings would help protect humans and commercial satellites in space from the effects of particle radiation. NASA had planned the mission to last two years, during which time the five identical satellites would collect data, attempting to achieve what no previous single-satellite mission had been able to do—to pinpoint when and where substorms begin.(NASA, “NASA’s THEMIS Mission Launches To Study Geomagnetic Substorms,” news release 07-47, 17 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0747_THEMIS_Postlaunch.html (accessed 14 October 2007).)
IBM announced that NASA had selected, for its James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), IBM’s Rational Rose Real-time software, which used unified modeling language (UML). The choice marked a change in NASA’s strategy for software development and management of its space- based telescopes. Because a number of organizations had used proprietary software to build components and instruments for the HST, the software had lacked a UML, preventing the software codes of the various programs from relating to one another. Furthermore, the contractors who had built the scientific instruments had not maintained them after the launch of the craft. Instead, NASA staff had assumed that responsibility. Glenn Cammarata, leader of NASA’s Integrated Science Instrument Module (ISIM) flight-software development team at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), explained that the management of telescopes with instruments containing incompatible software was a nightmare. Resolving problems in the HST software had often required NASA to locate the person who wrote the code in the original software, whereas IBM’s UML would allow any programmer to examine JWST software and to understand its system architecture. Additionally, the UML would allow close collaboration among the various developers working on individual components of the JWST.(IBM, “NASA Eyes Open Standard Software for Next-Generation James Webb Space Telescope,” press release, 19 January 2007, http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/20901.wss (accessed 30 October 2009); Jon Brodkin, “The Software Plan for NASA’s New Space Telescope,” Infoworld, 23 January 2007.)
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronauts—a Russian, an American, and a Malaysian—to the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysia’s first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, “Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station,” 11 October 2007.)
The U.S. Air Force granted SpaceX a five-year license to launch satellites from Space Launch Complex 40 (SLC 40) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Commander of the U.S. Air Force Space Command Kevin P. Chilton remarked that such agreements encourage entrepreneurial space achievement, which could benefit DOD and the commercial space industry. Under the agreement, SpaceX would pay for all improvements, construction, and maintenance related to operations at the site. Before receiving the license, SpaceX had operated from a launch complex on Omelek Island, in the Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. Elon Musk of SpaceX highlighted the importance of access to the Cape Canaveral launch complex, stating that SLC 40 was the only launchpad capable of supporting activities involving SpaceX’s Falcon 9 Heavy. The license allowed the government to retain the right to let other competitors share use of the launch site.(Associated Press, “Air Force OKs License for SpaceX,” 27 April 2007; Brian Berger, “U.S. Air Force Licenses SpaceX To Launch from Cape Canaveral,” Space.com, 26 April 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070426_spacex_ capecanaveral.html (accessed 9 June 2010).)
NASA successfully launched its Dawn spacecraft aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 7:34 a.m. (EDT). Mission Controllers at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, received telemetry data on schedule at 9:44 a.m. (EDT). The data indicated that Dawn had achieved proper orientation in space and that its solar array had succeeded in generating power from the Sun. Dawn’s mission was to travel 1.7 billion miles (2.7 billion kilometers) to explore two asteroids located in orbit between Mars and Jupiter—Vesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015. The International Astronomical Union had reclassified Ceres as a dwarf planet in 2006. In their search for new information about the collection of rocky materials remaining from the formation of the planets, NASA scientists hoped that the US$474 million mission would provide insight into how size, water, and gravity had influenced the development of Earth and its planetary neighbors. NASA scientists intended to use Dawn’s instrument suite to measure the asteroids’ elemental and mineral composition, shape, surface topography, and tectonic history, as well as to search for water-bearing minerals. While studying how Dawn orbits the asteroids, scientists also planned to measure the masses and gravity fields of Vesta and Ceres. Engineers had designed Dawn to use ion propulsion, a unique hyperefficient system using solar power to ionize xenon, generating thrust. Although this method provided less power than conventional engines, ion propulsion could maintain thrust for months at a time.(NASA, “NASA’s Dawn Spacecraft Enroute To Shed Light on Asteroid Belt,” news release 07-213, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07213_Dawn_Final_Release.html (accessed 4 August 2010); NASA, “Dawn Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release 07-212, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07212_Dawn_launched.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Mark K. Matthews, “NASA’s Dawn To Cast Light on Asteroids ‘Frozen in Time’,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 September 2007; Mark Carreau, “NASA’s Launch Starts 3-Billion-Mile Trip to Asteroids,” Houston Chronicle, 28 September 2007.)
NASA submitted to the U.S. Congress a report that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005 (Pub. L. No. 109-155) had mandated, “NASA Report to Congress Regarding a Plan for the International Space Station National Laboratory.” The Act required NASA to designate the U.S. portion of the ISS as a “national laboratory” and to make it available to public and private entities for basic and applied research not applicable to NASA’s mission. In the report, NASA affirmed its support of the concept and summarized steps taken during 2006 to make the ISS national laboratory a reality. NASA reported that a number of organizations had expressed interest in using the ISS for research in the fields of education, human health, and defense sciences. The report highlighted the project’s scheduled milestones, identified its constraints, explained NASA’s strategy and tactical initiatives for achieving the goal, and offered NASA’s preliminary findings on the project’s feasibility. After outlining progress to date, NASA described the preliminary operations plan. According to this plan, NASA would first address workforce needs and the requisite ground-based assets and management structures. NASA’s report concluded that, based on the demonstrated interest of parties outside of NASA, the odds of successfully realizing the goal set forth by Congress appeared promising. However, the report also noted that, because of the challenge of completing the ISS by 2010 and the need to demonstrate the capabilities of next-generation, commercial space-transportation services by the end of 2010, the financial risk to non-NASA entities remained high.(NASA, “NASA Report to Congress Regarding a Plan for the International Space Station National Laboratory” (NASA technical report no. PB2008-1005533, Washington, DC, May 2007), http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/ casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20090010198_2008045339.pdf (accessed 24 May 2010); Jeff M. Bingham, “The Significance of NASA’s ISS National Laboratory Report,” NASASpaceflight.com, 4 June 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/ 2007/06/the-significance-of-nasas-iss-national-laboratory-report/ (accessed 20 June 2010).)
Europe’s Ariane-5ECA rocket launched a two-satellite payload, weighing 9.4 tonnes (10.4 tons), from Europe’s launch center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:29 (GMT), setting a new benchmark for a commercial launch. The heavy-lift rocket carried Galaxy 17, an American geostationary communications satellite, and Astra 1L, a European geostationary communications satellite. Galaxy 1 would provide telephone and television services for South America, North America, and Europe; Astra 1L would provide direct-to-home video and voice links throughout Europe. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin attended the launch to observe the Ariane- 5ECA rocket, which would begin launching payloads to the ISS later in 2007.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643, 1 June 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx643.html (accessed 26 March 2010); BBC News, “European Rocket Powers To Record,” 4 May 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/ 6621297.stm (accessed 10 June 2010).)
Scientists from MIT and researchers from the U.S. Air Force published a paper in the journal Science explaining their development of oil-repellant materials with aerospace applications. The scientists had used fibers from polymers, combined with a special class of molecules called fluoroPOSS, to create oil-repellant, or superoleophobic, surfaces. The scientists explained that engineers would be able to use the fluoroPOSS-polymer blend to protect parts of airplanes and rockets, such as rubber gaskets and O-rings, which are vulnerable to damage resulting from saturation in fuel.
The Boeing Company announced that, on 20 July, the X-48B flight-test vehicle, a Blended Wing Body (BWB) experimental aircraft, had made its first test flight. Boeing Phantom Works had developed the BWB in cooperation with NASA and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory. The remotely controlled X-48B had taken off from NASA’s Edwards Air Force Base in California, climbing to an altitude of 7,500 feet (2,286 meters) and landing 31 minutes after takeoff. Boeing had developed two X-48B research vehicles to gather detailed information about the stability and flight-control characteristics of the BWB design, particularly during takeoff and landing. Previously, Boeing had used Ship 2, the test-flight vehicle, for ground and taxi testing. Ship 1, which had completed extensive testing in 2006 at the Old Dominion University’s NASA Langley Full-Scale Wind Tunnel in Virginia, was the backup vehicle for the flight-test program. The BWB design resembled a flying wing, but the wing blended smoothly into a wide, flat, tailless fuselage, helping the craft gain additional lift with less drag than a circular fuselage. NASA’s DFRC had provided engineering and technical support for the BWB, based on its years of operating cutting-edge, remotely controlled aircraft. NASA had focused on developing fundamental flight dynamics and structural concepts for the BWB, as well as helping to validate and verify its hardware and software and to integrate and test the aircraft’s systems and the pilot’s ground-control station. NASA’s range group had provided critical command and control communications and telemetry during the test flight.
NASA announced the names of the committee members tasked with conducting a comprehensive review of the health care systems and medical policies that NASA provided for the benefit of astronauts, as well as the standards and certification NASA required of astronauts. The review included an examination of behavioral health care services available to astronauts. To chair the group of external experts, NASA named Richard E. Bachmann Jr. of the U.S. Air Force, an expert in aerospace medicine with experience providing medical support to people conducting operations in extreme environments. NASA appointed James M. Duncan, NASA Chief of Space Medicine, and Wayne R. Frazier, an executive from the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, to serve on the committee in an ex officio capacity. The arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February had prompted the review.(NASA, “NASA Announces Medical Review Team Members,” news release 07-75, 26 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07075_Medical_Review_Members.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Jeanna Bryner, “NASA Sets Team To Review Astronaut Mental Healthcare,” Space.com, 26 March 2007, http://www.space. com/news/070326_nasa_healthcare.html (accessed 27 January 2010).)
Over the course of 10 hours, NASA’s Mission Control remotely unfurled the S3/S4 solar arrays located on the new truss segment. Tip to tip the solar arrays spanned a distance of 240 feet (73 meters). With the solar arrays added to the left and right sides of the new power module, the ISS achieved an unprecedented symmetry in its appearance. In the midst of the solar-array- deployment operation, a fire alarm sounded in the Russian sector of the ISS, but crew and mission managers quickly determined that a computer malfunction was the cause. Russian computers, working in conjunction with American computers, had failed, and attempts to reboot the Russian computers had triggered the false fire alarm. However, because of the computer failure, the small maneuvering jets on Atlantis had assumed control of the ISS’s attitude, placing the station’s solar panels in a poor position for gathering sunlight and causing power levels to drop. Mission Control ordered the crew to turn off some nonessential equipment until the ISS regained attitude control. Thereafter, engineers successfully reestablished gyroscope control, and the left-side array began tracking the Sun properly.(Houston Chronicle, “New Solar Array,” 13 June 2007; John Schwartz, “Glitch Blamed for Fire Alarm on Orbiter,” New York Times, 13 June 2007; William Harwood, “Computer Glitches Impact Station Attitude Control,” Spaceflight Now, 12 June 2007.)
for a new module scheduled to arrive later in the year. ISS Expedition 15 Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineers Oleg V. Kotov and Clayton C. Anderson worked from inside the space station to move the Pressurized Mating Adapter-3 (PMA-3) from its port-side perch on NASA’s Unity module to a berth facing Earth. The crew had delayed the relocation process by approximately 1 hour, because three of the sixteen bolts securing the PMA had returned intermittent fault messages. However, Mission Control determined that the error messages would not affect the relocation or the installation of the Harmony node later in the year. Kotov assisted Anderson in operating the ISS’s robotic arm, while Yurchkhin oversaw the bolt-latching systems, alternately freeing and securing the module during its relocation. PMA-3 detached from Unity at 8:23 a.m. (EDT) and, at 9:07 a.m. (EDT), the crew successfully reattached the port to its new berth. NASA’s lead Expedition 15 Flight Director Robert C. Dempsey acknowledged the cooperation between the Russian and American crew members. Dempsey remarked that Expedition 15’s crew was one of the first truly integrated crews that he had seen, noting that the mission marked the first time that Russian cosmonauts had operated NASA-controlled components, such as the Canadian-built robotic arm.(Tariq Malik, “Space Station Crew Clears Port for New Module,” Space.com, 30 August 2007, http://www.space. com/missionlaunches/070830_exp15_pma3move.html (accessed 30 June 2010).)
NASA announced that one of its STEREO satellites had recorded images of an April 2007 collision between a comet and a solar hurricane, marking the first time that scientists had observed such an event. Encke’s comet, traveling in the orbit of Mercury, had encountered a CME. NASA had designed STEREO to observe this type of solar event. As the CME swept by, the comet’s tail had brightened and then had disconnected, as the front of the ejection carried it away. Scientists had known that a comet’s plasma tail could disconnect from the comet, but the conditions necessary for this to occur had remained a mystery. Preliminary analysis of the images, which NASA researchers had combined into a movie, indicated that a phenomenon called magnetic reconnection had caused the tail to detach. In a magnetic reconnection event, the magnetic fields in a CME crunch together the oppositely directed magnetic fields around a comet, causing the comet fields to link together suddenly. This sudden reconnection releases a burst of energy that detaches the comet’s tail. Angelos Vourlidas of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, was lead author of an article about the event, published in the 10 October 2007 issue of Astrophysical Journal Letters. Remarking on the researchers’ sense of awe when they viewed the images, Vourlidas described their surprise at seeing the disconnection of the tail, calling the event “the icing on the cake.”(NASA, “NASA Satellite Sees Solar Hurricane Detach Comet Tail,” news release 07-214, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07214_Comet_Collision.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Andrea Thompson, “Solar Storm Rips Tail Off Comet,” Space.com, 1 October 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/071001_hurr_comet.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
An Atlas-5 rocket launched six satellites from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Two of the satellites were part of the Orbital Express Experiment and four would measure the chemical makeup of the atmosphere and the signal turbulence of satellites. The primary goal of Orbital Express, a joint effort of NASA, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), was to develop a system allowing spacecraft to “act independently and smarter.” Fred G. Kennedy of the U.S. Air Force, DARPA Program Manager for Orbital Express, explained that the Orbital Express mission’s goal was to enable satellites autonomously to refuel, repair, and upgrade—a feat that would “radically change satellite design.” In April 2005, NASA had launched two satellites that were supposed to rendezvous autonomously, but a collision of the two craft during the docking attempt had destroyed them. Because the satellites were preprogrammed, ground controllers had been unable to transmit commands to the satellites’ computers. To avoid such an event in the future, DARPA had designed the Orbital Express satellites to accept guidance from ground controllers.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641, 1 April 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx641.html (accessed 25 January 2010); Todd Halvorson, “Atlas 5 Launches Satellites,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2007; Shelby G. Spires, “2 Satellites To Test Auto Docking Technology,” Huntsville Times (AL), 9 March 2007.)
NASA released images of the Sun, captured by the X-ray Telescope aboard the international spacecraft Hinode, formerly known as Solar B. The images showed that the Sun’s magnetic field “is much more turbulent and dynamic than previously known.” Richard R. Fisher of the Heliophysics Division of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate remarked that, for the first time, scientists could detect tiny granules of hot gas rising and falling in the Sun’s magnetized atmosphere. Alan M. Title of Lockheed Martin, also a professor of physics at Stanford University, added that Hinode images revealed irrefutable evidence of the presence of turbulence-driven processes that bring magnetic fields to the Sun’s surface, resulting in an extremely dynamic gaseous envelope around the Sun. A collaborative mission, led by JAXA and including ESA and Britain’s Particle Physics Astronomy Research Council, Hinode had launched on 23 September 2006. Hinode carried three primary instruments—the Solar Optical Telescope, the X-ray Telescope, and the Extreme Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrometer—to study the Sun’s magnetic field and how its explosive energy propagates through the various layers of the solar atmosphere.(NASA, “International Spacecraft Reveals Detailed Processes on the Sun,” news release 07-72, 21 March 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07072_Hinode_Images_of_Sun.html (accessed 14 October 2009);)
“Alvin” Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffe’s backup during NASA’s teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavour’s payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavour’s 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavour’s time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavour’s heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, “STS-118: Endeavour,” NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, “Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter,” NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, “Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off,” New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
Engineers successfully tested the main parachute for NASA’s Constellation Program rockets during a drop test at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Ground, validating the results of a test conducted in September. NASA had designed the parachute system to allow recovery and reuse of Ares-1 and Ares-5 first-stage boosters. A U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 16,500 feet (5,029 meters) dropped the main parachute, which measured 150 feet (46 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms). NASA had outfitted the main parachute with a 42,000-pound (19,051-kilogram) weight that simulated the load of the rocket’s first stage. The parachute and all supporting hardware functioned properly and landed safely 3 minutes after the drop.(NASA, “NASA Conducts Second Test of Main Parachute for Ares Rockets,” news release 07-254, 15 November 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/nov/HQ_07254_Ares_Yuma_Parachute_ Test.html (accessed 20 October 2010).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California after weather concerns prevented the crew from landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. Sunita L. Williams returned home with the STS-117 crew, having surpassed Shannon W. Lucid’s 1996 record of 188 days and 4 hours. Williams had set a new 195-day record for the longest spaceflight by a woman. U.S. astronaut Clayton C. Anderson remained at the ISS, scheduled to return home aboard Discovery in October. The STS-117 mission had successfully increased the power capability of the ISS, preparing the station for the future delivery of European and Japanese laboratories. Although Atlantis had sustained some damage soon after launch on 8 June, several inspections in orbit had revealed no critical damage, and Mission Control had declared the Shuttle’s thermal protection system safe for reentry on flight day 13. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to last 11 days, but had added extra days to allow time in case of the necessity of repairs to the thermal protection system. Olivas had stapled a thermal blanket back into place during the unscheduled fourth spacewalk on 17 June.(NASA, “Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-142, 22 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07142_Atlantis_landing.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Lands in California,” 25 June 2007.)
Florida police released on bail Lisa M. Nowak, a NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy captain. The police had arrested Nowak the day before, after she threatened Colleen M. Shipman, a captain in the U.S. Air Force. Nowak had perceived Shipman as a romantic rival. NASA placed Nowak on 30-day leave and removed her from her mission duties. Nowak had flown her only mission as a crew member on STS-121 in July 2006, aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. NASA spokesperson Nicole Cloutier-Lemasters explained that, according to its past policy, NASA had screened crew members assigned to the ISS, before, during, and after missions, but had not screened Shuttle crews flying for two-week stints. Although Cloutier-Lemasters said that NASA did not plan to conduct an investigation of Nowak, NASA’s Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that NASA had begun a review of its screening policy. NASA hoped to determine whether it had overlooked indications for concern in Nowak’s case. Dale explained that NASA intended the review process to reveal whether or not astronauts were receiving adequate psychological and medical care and attention.(Mike Schneider and Erin McClam, “Astronaut Charged with Attempted Murder,” Associated Press, 7 February 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronaut’s Arrest Spurs Review of NASA Testing,” New York Times, 8 February 2007.)
NASA launched its Aeronomy of Ice in Mesosphere (AIM) satellite aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket dropped from a Stargazer-L-1011 aircraft. The Stargazer launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 21:26 (UT). NASA had designed AIM to study noctilucent clouds (NLCs) in the polar mesosphere. Observers can only see NLCs at night. Shortly before the mission, these clouds had appeared more often and had grown brighter. Observers had first seen NLCs in the 1880s, soon after the massive volcanic eruption on the Indonesian island of Krakatoa. Space- based satellites had periodically observed the clouds since the 1980s. AIM was the first spacecraft devoted to the study of NLCs. Scientists hoped to answer basic questions about why the clouds form and whether human-caused global warming was responsible for the recent changes. AIM carried three instruments: the Solar Occultation for Ice Experiment (SOFIE) would remotely sense the gases that condense to NLCs; the Cosmic Dust Experiment (CDE) would serve as an in situ sampler of the cosmic dust over the NLCs; and the Cloud Imaging and Particle Size (CIPS) experiment, a panoramic ultraviolet (UV) imager of the NLCs operating in the 265-nanometer-wavelength band, would provide the morphology of the clouds in both hemispheres.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642; NASA, “NASA’s AIM Mission Soars to the Edge of Space,” news release 07-92, 25 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07092_AIM_launch.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Associated Press, “NASA Launches Satellite To Study Clouds,” 26 April 2007.)
NASA announced the official appointment of William W. Parsons Jr. as Director of NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Parsons became KSC’s ninth director, succeeding James W. Kennedy, who was retiring from NASA. Parsons had served as KSC’s Deputy Director since February 2006. After the Columbia tragedy in 2003, Parsons had led NASA’s Return to Flight effort as Space Shuttle Program Manager at KSC and had contributed to the success of STS-114 in 2005. Parsons had also served as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi and as Deputy Director of NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin remarked that Parson’s experience as a program manager and center director, in addition to his knowledge of NASA’s human spaceflight community, made him the “right person to take Kennedy Space Center through the end of the Shuttle era and into the era of lunar exploration.”(NASA, “Parsons Assumes Role as NASA’s Kennedy Space Center Director,” news release 07-01, 4 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_0701_Parsons_KSC.html#at (accessed 14 October 2009); Aero- News Network, “Upgraded: Parsons Tapped as Kennedy Space Center Director,” 8 January 2007.)
NASA released the findings of two reviews examining the medical and behavioral health assessment of astronauts. Following the arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February 2007, NASA had requested that an independent external committee conduct a comprehensive review of the health services available to astronauts. Commander of the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine Richard E. Bachmann Jr. had chaired the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee, composed of representatives from eight federal agencies. The Review Committee suggested that NASA examine the structure of the Astronaut Office. In addition, the
NASA announced that it had signed a MOU with the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), entering into an agreement that would enable American scientists to access the ISS to pursue research about human health and disease. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and NIH Director Elias A. Zerhouni stated that the partnership could pave the way for research advances in cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, osteoporosis, and other medical conditions. The MOU marked the first time that NASA had formed a partnership with another agency to use the U.S. segment of the ISS as a national laboratory.(NASA, “NASA and NIH Partner for Health Research in Space,” news release 07-190, 12 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07190_NASA_NIH_MOU.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Michelle Mittelstadt, “NIH, NASA Finish Deal for Research Lab in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 13 September 2007. 135 X Prize Foundation, “Google Sponsors Lunar X Prize To Create a Space Race for a New Generation,” news release, 13 September 2007, http://www.googlelunarxprize.org/lunar/press-release/google-sponsors-lunar-x-prize- to-create-a-space-race-for-a-new-generation (accessed 9 August 2010); John Schwartz, “$25 Million in Prizes Is Offered for Trip to Moon,” New York Times, 14 September 2007.)
