NASA announced that a team of NASA and university scientists had achieved the first definitive detection of methane in the Martian atmosphere, confirming that Mars is either biologically or geologically active. Using NASA’s Infrared Telescope Facility and the W. M. Keck telescope at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the team had detected three spectral features called absorption lines—a definitive signature of methane. Michael J. Mumma of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, lead author of an article in Science Express, explained that the Martian atmosphere quickly destroys methane in a number of ways. According to Mumma, the discovery of substantial plumes of methane in the northern hemisphere of Mars in 2003 indicated that an ongoing process was releasing the gas. The plumes had dispersed, covering the entire planet, and had dissipated within three years. Mumma explained further that the research team did not have enough information to determine whether a biological process, a geological process, or a combination of the two was producing the methane.(NASA, “Discovery of Methane Reveals Mars Is Not a Dead Planet,” news release 09-006, 15 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-006_Mars_Methane.html (accessed 14 January 2011); Dan Vergano, “Methane Plumes Spotted on Mars May Be a Sign of Life,” USA Today, 16 January 2009.)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with American Tank and Vessel of Mobile, Alabama, for the installation of a test-cell diffuser and associated systems in the A-3 test stand at NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. NASA planned to test the J-2X engine for its Constellation Program at the A-3 test stand. Construction had begun in 2007, and NASA had scheduled the first test to take place in 2012. The contract with American Tank and Vessel had a maximum value of US$45 million.(NASA, “NASA Awards Construction Contract for Rocket Engine Testing,” news release C09-006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-006_SSC_A-3_Test_Stand.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
The U.S. Department of Transportation’s Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced the finalization of amended certification standards requiring makers of transport category aircraft to have automatically activating icing-protection systems or to provide a method of alerting pilots to turn on the aircraft’s icing-protection system. FAA Administrator J. Randolph “Randy” Babbitt explained that the new rule added another level of safety to prevent the occurrence of a situation in which the pilots of an airplane were unaware of ice accumulation on the craft or did not think ice accumulation on the aircraft was significant enough to warrant activation of ice- protection equipment. The fatal crash of an American Eagle ATR 72 near Roselawn, Indiana, in 1994, had initiated a decade of research by the FAA, NASA, and other entities, leading to the new rule. Ice build-up on the American Eagle’s wings had caused the crash.(U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, “FAA Mandates Timely Activation of Ice Protection Systems for New Designs,” FAA news release, 3 August 2009, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 10679 (accessed 12 September 2011); John Croft, “FAA Toughens Icing Protection Standards,” Air Transport Intelligence, 4 August 2009.)
NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 9:09 a.m. (EST). Approximately 52 minutes into the flight, the rocket placed the 1,485-pound (673-kilogram) WISE craft into polar orbit 326 miles (525 kilometers) above Earth. From that point, the craft would carry out its mission to map all objects in the sky in infrared light—near-Earth asteroids, stars, planet-forming discs, and distant galaxies. Approximately 3 minutes after separating from the rocket, WISE reoriented itself toward the Sun, enabling it to use its solar panels to generate its own power. Approximately 17 minutes later, valves opened on the craft’s cryostat, a chamber of super-cold hydrogen ice designed to maintain WISE at colder temperatures than the objects the craft would observe. WISE’s primary mission would expire once the frozen hydrogen was depleted, approximately 10 months after launch. Scientists expected the resulting WISE atlas to contain hundreds of millions of objects, which would provide astronomers and space mission designers with a long-lasting infrared roadmap.(NASA, “NASA’s WISE Eye on the Universe Begins All-Sky Survey Mission,” news release 09-286, 14 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09-286_WISE_launch.html (accessed 16 December 2011); John Johnson Jr., “NASA Launches New Mapping Spacecraft,” Los Angeles Times, 15 December 2009.)
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino, a mechanical and robotics engineer on this third spacewalk, and Michael T. Good, a former U.S. Air Force test pilot on his first space mission, undertook the second of five planned spacewalks to repair the HST. The spacewalk agenda consisted of the most important task of the 11-day mission—to replace the gyroscopes that kept the telescope pointed in the correct direction—and to replace three batteries. Working from inside the telescope, Good and Massimino had difficulty installing the second set of new gyroscopes and resorted to using a spare that did not initially fit either. The extra work extended the spacewalk to 8 hours—1.5 hours longer than scheduled—making it the tenth longest spacewalk on record.(Dennis Overbye, “Astronauts Work on Replacing Hubble’s Gyroscopes,” New York Times, 16 May 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of Colorado-based United Launch Alliance to launch two payloads for NASA’s SMD and two for NASA’s Space Operations Mission Directorate, under a NASA Launch Services contract. The US$600 million award stipulated that the four payloads— the Radiation Belt Storm Probes (RBSP) mission, the Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) mission, and the Tracking and Data Relay Satellites K and L (TDRS-K and TDRS-L) missions— would launch aboard Atlas-V expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) from Launch Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA planned to launch the RBSP mission in 2011, as part of its Living with a Star Program. The RBSP mission would use two nearly identical spacecraft, which would study Earth’s radiation belts for two years, helping scientists understand how the Sun’s changing energy flow affects the radiation belts. Planned for 2014, the MMS mission, part of the SMD Heliophysics Division Solar Terrestrial Probes Program, would launch four identical satellites together in a stacked formation. Traveling around Earth in an elliptical orbit, the MMS mission satellites would study the fundamental plasma-physics processes of magnetic reconnection that occur when energy emanating from the Sun’s solar wind interacts with Earth’s magnetic field. NASA planned to launch TDRS-K and TDRS-L in 2012 and 2013, to replenish the NASA communications relay network that provides voice, data, video, and telemetry links between the ground and spacecraft below geosynchronous orbit. The ISS and NASA’s HST use the NASA communications relay network.(NASA, “NASA Awards Launch Services Contract for Four Missions,” news release C09-011, 16 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_C09-011_Launch_Services.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, “NASA Contracts Science Missions on ULA’s Atlas V Rockets,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 March 2009. 40 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 665; Peter B. De Selding, “Russian Rocket Lofts ESA Gravity Mapping Satellite,” Spacenews.com, 17 March 2009, http://www.spacenews.com/civil/russian-rocket-lofts-esa-gravity-mapping.html (accessed 10 May 2011).)
NASA’s Kepler astronomy probe, named for Johannes Kepler, who had published the laws of planetary motion in 1609, successfully launched into space from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, aboard a United Launch Alliance Delta 2, at 10:49 p.m. (EST). Kepler’s mission was to identify the first Earth-size planets orbiting stars at distances that would permit water to pool on the planet’s surface. Scientists had designed the craft to search for brightness variations in more than 100,000 stars in the Cygnus-Lyra region. Astronomers study brightness variations because, when a planet passes in front of a star, the star’s light appears to dim, enabling them to determine the diameter of the transiting object. The Kepler mission would use a photometer to monitor the same star field over approximately three-and-a-half years, allowing multiple observations of transits of exoplanets in orbits of as long as one year. Ideally, the Kepler probe would observe an object at least three times to confirm the measurement of its orbital period. Mission scientists placed the 1,052-kilogram (2,319-pound) craft in a 372.5-day solar orbit to help the probe maintain a stable pointing attitude.(NASA, “NASA’s Kepler Mission Rockets to Space in Search of Other Earths,” news release 09-052, 7 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-052_Kepler_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 665, 1 April 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx665.html (accessed 10 May 2011); Joel Achenbach, “Kepler Lifts Off, on Age-Old Quest: Space Telescope Seeks To Find Other Earths on 31⁄2- Year Mission,” Washington Post, 9 March 2009.)
NASA announced a partnership with the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory to develop a “technology roadmap” study for the commercial reusable launch vehicle (RLV) industry. Led by NASA’s Innovative Partnerships Program, the study would identify technologies and assess their potential use, in an effort to accelerate the development of commercial RLVs. The study would also recommend to the U.S. government technology tasks and milestones for various vehicle categories. NASA had defined the categories as 1) reusable, suborbital vehicles; 2) expendable and partially reusable, orbital vehicles; 3) reusable, two-stage orbital vehicles; and 4) advanced vehicle concepts, such as single-stage-to-orbit, air-breathing systems, in-flight refueling, and tethered upper-stage vehicles. NASA and the U.S. Air Force planned to evaluate all types of flight systems—from space entry, descent, and recovery systems, to avionics, communications, and flight control. The study would commence in 2009, at the Commercial and Government Responsive Access to Space Technology Exchange in Dayton, Ohio (26−29 October 2009). Representatives from NASA, the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory, and the FAA’s Office of Commercial Space Transportation would meet with representatives from the commercial RLV industry, soliciting feedback about long-range growth plans and the necessary technology to implement those plans successfully.(NASA, “NASA Announces Commercial RLV Technology Roadmap Project,” news release 09-238, 13 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-238_RLV_Study.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Michael Cooney, “NASA Partners with US Air Force To Develop Commercial Space Roadmap,” Network World, 14 October 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that NASA had continued to experience cost overruns and delays in implementing large-scale projects or those budgeted at US$250 million or more. GAO had audited 18 NASA projects, with a combined life-cycle cost of more than US$50 billion. Of those 18 projects, 13 had entered the implementation phase. Ten of the 13 had experienced significant cost growth or schedule growth or both. Development costs had increased by an average of 13 percent from baseline cost estimates, and projects had an average launch delay of 11 months. GAO reported that many projects had faced challenges in developing new technologies or retrofitting older technologies, as well as difficulty managing contractors. However, GAO found that, despite these problems, NASA had improved its ability to manage and to estimate the cost of major projects. Nevertheless, GAO suggested that NASA needed to make additional improvements. The report noted that, although NASA’s budget represented less than 2 percent of the federal government’s discretionary budget, NASA was increasingly receiving requests to expand its portfolio to support important scientific missions, such as the study of climate change. GAO found that, to meet these increased demands, NASA would need to work even harder to manage its resources as effectively and efficiently as possible.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA: Assessments of Selected Large-Scale Projects” (report no. GAO-09-306SP, Washington, DC, 2 March 2009), http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-306SP (accessed 11 May 2011); Mark Matthews, “GAO: NASA’s Big Projects Take Too Long, Cost Too Much,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 March 2009.)
Russia’s Soyuz TMA-17 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:52 p.m. (CST), carrying NASA astronaut Timothy J. Creamer, Russian cosmonaut Oleg V. Kotov, and JAXA astronaut Soichi Noguchi to the ISS. The three crew members, scheduled to remain at the ISS until May 2010, would join Expedition 22 crew members American Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian Maxim V. Suraev aboard the space station, bringing the station crew total to five. The mission was Creamer’s first. The launch marked the first time a Soyuz craft had launched at night in winter.(NASA, “Crew Lifts Off From Kazakhstan To Begin Science and Construction Work Aboard the International Space Station,” news release 09-295, 20 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09- 295_Soyuz_launch_ex22.html (accessed 16 December 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Astronauts Blast Off for Christmas Space Mission,” 21 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Launches Toward International Space Station,” Space.com, 21 December 2009, http://www.space.com/7693-crew-launches- international-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA successfully launched its Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) aboard an Atlas-V rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 5:32 p.m. (EDT). Also on board, with a companion mission, was LRO, which safely separated from LCROSS 45 minutes after launch. The mission planned for the 1,290-pound (585-kilogram) LCROSS and the 5,216-pound (2,366-kilogram) Centaur upper stage was to perform approximately three long, looping polar orbits around the Earth and the Moon, before colliding separately with the Moon on 9 October 2009. NASA had tentatively targeted an impact site at the Moon’s south pole near the Cabeus region, but refused to identify the exact target until 30 days before impact, when its scientists would have had time to study the information collected by LRO, other spacecraft orbiting the Moon, and observatories on Earth.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Lunar Impactor,” news release 09-143, 18 June 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-143_LCROSS_Launch_Success.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
Richard E. Halpern, a senior NASA official who had served as Science Manager on Spacelab, the ISS, and other human spaceflight and robotic NASA projects, died of heart ailments at the age of 78. Halpern had served in the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s and had held a fellowship at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University in 1968 and 1969. Before joining NASA in 1963, he had worked at the Naval Ordnance Laboratory. After joining NASA, Halpern had become Director of its High Energy Astrophysics Program during the early planning stages for the ISS. In the late 1970s, he had served as Program Manager for three launches of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory. He had served as Director of the ISS utilities and operations division from 1986 until his retirement in 1989. NASA had awarded Halpern its Exceptional Service Medal in 1978 and its highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, in 1980.(Matt Schudel, “Obituaries: Richard E. Halpern NASA Official,” Washington Post, 7 December 2009.)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting, members of NASA’s MESSENGER mission team and cartographic experts from the U.S. Geological Survey released the first global map of Mercury. The team had built the map from 917 images that NASA’s MESSENGER spacecraft had collected as recently as 29 September 2009 and from earlier images that Mariner 10 had captured in the 1970s. Scientists planned to use the map as a critical tool to help identify Mercury’s craters, faults, and other features. MESSENGER would use this information in its observations, when the craft entered Mercury’s orbit in 2011. MESSENGER Principal Investigator Sean C. Solomon remarked that, beyond its use as a planning tool, the global map signified that MESSENGER was no longer a flyby mission. Instead, MESSENGER would soon become an in-depth, nonstop global observatory of the solar system’s innermost planet.(Alexis Madrigal, “First Global Map of Mercury,” Wired, 16 December 2009; Nancy Atkinson, “MESSENGER Team Releases First Global Map of Mercury,” Universe Today, 16 December 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that the development schedules of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital Sciences Corporation had recently fallen behind, despite steady progress. SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation, NASA’s commercial partners, were working on transportation technologies for space cargo, according to Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) agreements. Both companies had experienced schedule slips that would delay demonstration launches scheduled for 2010 and 2011. Having successfully completed its initial 14 developmental milestones on time, SpaceX was in the process of testing, fabricating, and assembling key components. However, a schedule slip in the development of its launch vehicle had contributed to anticipated delays of two to four months in most of SpaceX’s remaining milestones, including demonstration missions. Orbital had successfully completed seven of 19 developmental milestones but had experienced delays in the development of its launch vehicle. The delays were partly because NASA and Orbital had amended their agreement, which now required Orbital to demonstrate a different cargo-transport capability than originally planned. This change had delayed the demonstration mission date from December 2010 to March 2011. GAO pointed out that the delays would cause NASA to experience a cargo-resupply shortfall for the ISS, once the SSP had concluded in 2010. NASA estimates showed that NASA would need to have 82.7 tonnes (91 tons) of dry cargo delivered to the ISS between 2010 and 2015. To deliver approximately half the total amount of dry cargo, NASA planned to use ISS partners’ vehicles—three Russian Progress vehicles in 2010 and 2011, six Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2015, and four European Automated Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2013. Based on these projections, GAO concluded that NASA would face a cargo-resupply shortfall of approximately 40 tonnes (44 tons) between 2010 and 2015. If commercial partners were to experience further delays or to become unable to provide cargo- resupply services when anticipated, NASA would be unable to make as full a use of the ISS as it had intended.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Commercial Partners Are Making Progress, But Face Aggressive Schedules To Demonstrate Critical Space Station Cargo Transport Capabilities” (report no. GAO-09-618, Washington, DC, June 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09618.pdf (accessed 5 August 2011); Network World Fusion, “Can Commercial Space Technology Get Off the Ground? NASA’s Commercial Space Technology Is Seemingly at a Crossroads,” 17 June 2009; Mark Matthews, “GAO Gives COTS Companies a Passing Grade,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 June 2009.)
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASA’s MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttle’s main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicle’s Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSC’s propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFC’s Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, “Lightfoot Named Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA conducted its first test flight of the 327-foot-tall (99.67-meter-tall) Ares I-X rocket, which would launch the Shuttle’s successor craft. The Shuttle’s successor would carry humans to the ISS, the Moon, and beyond. NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate in Washington, DC, and the Constellation Program’s Ares I-X mission management office at NASA’s JSC in Houston led the Ares I-X efforts. The prototype launched at 11:30 a.m. (EDT) from the newly modified Launch Complex 39B, a former Shuttle launchpad. The first launch of a new type of rocket from NASA’s KSC since 1981, the launch occurred 48 years and 1 day after the inaugural launch of the Saturn rocket. The test vehicle produced 2.6 million pounds (1.18 million kilograms) of thrust, accelerating the rocket to nearly 3 Gs (G-forces) and Mach 4.76, just under hypersonic speed. The test flight lasted 2 minutes, the time needed for the first-stage solid-fuel booster to burn out and separate from the mock upper stage at a suborbital altitude of 150,000 feet (45,720 meters). Parachutes deployed, and recovery ships collected the booster from the Atlantic Ocean. The rocket carried more than 700 sensors designed to collect data in several areas, including assembly and launch operations, separation of the vehicle’s first and second stages, controllability and aerodynamics, the reentry and recovery of the first stage, and new techniques of vehicle design. Engineers would analyze the data to validate computer models used to design rockets and to test the safety of steering a tall rocket with a single solid-rocket motor. The mission lasted 6 minutes, from launch to splash down of the rocket’s booster stage, nearly 150 miles (241.4 kilometers) down range.(NASA, “NASA’s Ares I-X Rocket Completes Successful Flight Test,” news release 09-252, 28 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-252_Ares_I-X_Success.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA’s New Moon Rocket Makes First Test Flight,” 29 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Rocket Takes Off as Clouds Break,” New York Times, 29 October 2009; Robert Block, “Ares I-X Flies—But Will Program: Ares I-X Lifts Off from Kennedy Space Center on Short Test Flight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 October 2009.)
NASA announced the successful completion of the second drop test of a drogue parachute for the Ares-I rocket. The drop test had taken place on 28 February 2009 at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The test was the seventh in a series of flight tests supporting the development of the Ares-I parachute-recovery system, which comprised a pilot chute, drogue, and three main parachutes. To test the 68-foot-diameter (20.7-meter-diameter) drogue parachute, researchers had dropped the parachute from a U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 25,000 feet (7.62 kilometers). The drogue had carried a 50,000-pound (22,680-kilogram, or 22.68-tonne) load, to simulate the rocket’s spent first-stage motor. The parachute and the test hardware had functioned as planned, landing the load safely. NASA engineers had designed the drogue to permit recovery of the rocket’s reusable first-stage motor. They planned to use the design in future Ares-I flights, including launches associated with NASA’s Constellation Program.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Tests Parachute for Ares Rocket,” news release 09-045, 2 March 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-045_Ares_Drogue_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced the designation of three university and industry partners to serve as national hypersonic science centers. The centers’ task would be to promote research in air-breathing propulsion, materials and structures, and boundary-layer control for aircraft able to travel at Mach 5. NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission in Washington, DC, and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory’s Office of Scientific Research in Arlington, Virginia, had selected the partners from more than 60 contenders. The University of Virginia in Charlottesville would host the National Center for Hypersonic Combined Cycle Propulsion and would lead a team specializing in air-breathing propulsion research; Texas A&M University in College Station would be the National Center for Hypersonic Laminar-Turbulent Transition and would specialize in boundary layer−control research; and Teledyne Scientific and Imaging LLC in Thousand Oaks, California, would host the National Hypersonic Science Center for Hypersonic Materials and Structures. James L. Pittman, Principal Investigator for the Hypersonics Project of NASA’s Fundamental Aeronautics Program at NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, remarked that NASA’s joint investment with the Air Force of US$30 million over five years would “support basic science and applied research that improves our understanding of hypersonic flight.” Pittman stated that the establishment of the centers signaled a major commitment to advancing foundational hypersonic research and to training the next generation of hypersonic researchers.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Designate National Hypersonic Science Centers,” news release 09-050, 5 March 2009.)
NASA announced that, together with industry engineers, it had successfully tested the three main parachutes of the Ares-I rocket, which NASA was designing to serve as the booster rocket for the Orion CEV. Engineers had designed the parachutes as the primary element of the rocket’s deceleration system, which included a pilot parachute and a drogue parachute. The main parachutes would deploy in a cluster, open simultaneously, and provide the necessary drag to slow the descent of the solid-rocket first-stage motor to a soft landing in the ocean, allowing their recovery for use on future flights. NASA’s MSFC engineers had conducted the first cluster test at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The flight test was the eighth in an ongoing series supporting the development of the Ares-I recovery system. The research team had dropped the 41,500-pound (18,824-kilogram, or 18.8-tonne) load from a U.S. Air Force C- 17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,058-meters). All parachutes and test hardware had functioned properly and landed safely. The parachutes measured 150 feet (45.72 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonnes), making them the largest rocket parachutes manufactured to date.(NASA, “NASA Tests Largest Rocket Parachutes Ever for Ares I,” news release 09-113, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-113_AresI_Parachutes_Test.html (accessed 20 June 2011);)
NASA announced the selection of the members of the mishap board tasked with investigating the unsuccessful launch of the OCO, which had failed to reach orbit after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on 24 February 2009. NASA charged the board to identify the causes and contributing factors of the launch failure and to recommend measures that NASA should take to prevent a similar incident in future missions. NASA had named Arthur F. “Rick” Obenschain, Deputy Director at NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the investigation, and now named four other voting members: Jose A. Caraballo, Safety Manager at NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia; Patricia M. Jones, Acting Chief of the Human Systems Integration Division in the Exploration Technology Directorate at NASA’s ARC in Moffett Field, California; Richard J. Lynch of Aerospace Systems Engineering at NASA’s GSFC; and David R. Sollberger, Deputy Chief Engineer of the NASA Launch Services Program at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. NASA named Ruth D. Jones, the Safety and Mission Assurance Manager at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), as the board’s ex officio member, charged with assuring that board activity conformed to NASA procedural requirements.
Pursuant to a 2008 congressional mandate, NASA was required to provide a research management plan for the ISS National Laboratory. The GAO report, “International Space Station: Significant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research,” evaluated how NASA was currently using the ISS for research and how NASA expected to use the ISS once it was completed. The report also identified challenges to maximizing ISS research, as well as examining common management practices at other national laboratories and large science programs, practices that could apply to the management of the ISS.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “International Space Station: Significant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research” (report no. GAO-10-9, Washington, DC, November 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d109.pdf (accessed 21 December 2011).)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), an independent group of experts that had evaluated NASA’s safety performance since 1968, released its 2008 annual report. ASAP agreed that continuing to operate the Shuttle fleet would minimize the gap between Shuttle retirement and the first Orion flights, but the panel did not favor that approach because of NASA’s diminished Shuttle manufacturing and support capabilities. NASA had been closing out contracts with Shuttle component manufacturers and supporting vendors since 2004. According to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), operating the fleet beyond 2010 would require NASA to recertify the entire Shuttle system and to draw funds from the Constellation Program, thereby impeding its effort to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. ASAP saw little likelihood that NASA could field Ares-I rockets and Orion spacecraft before March 2015, even if Congress provided additional funding. ASAP had concluded that no evidence indicated that the commercial sector could develop cargo and crew transport services in time, or that commercial spacecraft were appropriate to transport NASA personnel, or that commercial spacecraft could safely dock with the ISS. In addition to ASAP’s annual report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) had released a report analyzing budget scenarios for fulfilling President George W. Bush’s 2004 space exploration plan. Each scenario predicted schedule slips requiring additional congressional funding. The CBO had found that, at current funding levels, NASA must delay development of Ares I’s and Orion’s initial operating capabilities until late 2016, delay the return of humans to the Moon for three years, and delay 15 out of 79 science missions beyond 2025.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel Releases Annual Report,” media advisory M09-061, 16 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_M09-061_ASAP_Annual_Report.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Todd Halvorson, “Independent Safety Experts Call for Shuttle Shutdown,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009; Eun Kyung Kim, “Report: NASA Needs Extra Billons To Maintain Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009. See also U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, “The Budgetary Implications of NASA’s Current Plans for Space Exploration” (report, Washington, DC, April 2009), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/ doc10051/04 -15-NASA.pdf.)
NASA announced that X-Prize Foundation and NASA would host the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander X-Prize Challenge (NGLLXPC) awards at a ceremony in Washington, DC. Masten Space Systems, led by David Masten, had won a first prize of US$1 million for its Xoie rocket prototype, which had competed in the Level-1 contest. Masten Space Systems had also won a second place award of US$150,000 in the Level-2 contest for its Xombie rocket. Texas-based Armadillo Aerospace’s Scorpius rocket had qualified for the Level-1 prize in September but had lost to Xoie in its flight on 30 October in the accuracy category, receiving US $500,000 for second place. Modeled after the US$10 million Ansari X-Prize competition for private-sector spaceflight, NGLLXPC was one of NASA’s Centennial Challenges, intended to encourage the development of new rocket technologies for use in future spacecraft. NASA required contestants to build and fly a rocket-powered vehicle simulating the flight of a vehicle to the Moon. The lander had to take off vertically, travel horizontally, and fly a mission profile designed to demonstrate both power and control, before landing accurately at another spot. Then the craft must take off again, travel horizontally back to its original launch point, and land successfully. The lander must complete the entire exercise within 2 hours and 15 minutes. NASA provided the prize money for the Level-1 and Level-2 contests, and the X-Prize Foundation managed the competition, with commercial sponsorship from Northrop Grumman.
NASA launched its Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) aboard a four-stage Taurus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 1:55 am (PST). However, approximately 3 minutes later—7 seconds after the ignition of the third stage, the payload fairing—the nose cone protecting the satellite as it rises through the atmosphere—failed to separate, dooming the craft. The satellite fell back to Earth, landing in the ocean near Antarctica. Had the launch succeeded, the Observatory would have joined Japan’s GoSat, in precisely measuring carbon-dioxide levels in the air. GoSat had reached orbit on 23 January. (NASA, “NASA’s Launch of Carbon-Seeking Satellite Is Unsuccessful,” news release 09-039, 24 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-039_OCO_failure.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Kenneth Chang, “NASA Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit,” New York Times, 25 February 2009.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed retired U.S. Marine Corps general and former astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. as NASA’s twelfth Administrator, marking the first appointment of an African American as NASA’s Administrator. During his 34-year career with the Marine Corps, Bolden had spent 14 years as a member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, which he had joined in 1980. As an astronaut, he had traveled to orbit four times aboard the Space Shuttle, between 1986 and 1994. On two of those trips he had served as Commander of the Shuttle. His missions had included the deployment of the HST and the first joint U.S.-Russian Shuttle mission. While he was an astronaut, Bolden had fulfilled many technical assignments, serving as Astronaut Office Safety Officer; Technical Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations; Special Assistant to the Director of JSC; Lead Astronaut for vehicle test and checkout at KSC; Chief of the Safety Division at JSC, where he oversaw safety efforts for the return to flight after the 1986 Challenger accident; and Assistant Deputy Administrator at NASA Headquarters. In May 2006, NASA had inducted Bolden into the Astronaut Hall of Fame. The Senate also confirmed Lori B. Garver as NASA’s new Deputy Administrator. Like Bolden, Garver was returning to NASA for a second period of service. Between 1996 and 2001, she had served as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and Senior Policy Analyst for the Office of Policy and Plans, before becoming Associate Administrator of that office.(NASA, “Bolden and Garver Confirmed by U.S. Senate,” news release 09-165, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-165_Bolden_and_Garver.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Bolden Confirmed as NASA Administrator,” 16 July 2009.)
NASA launched the latest Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) weather satellite, GOES O, from Space Launch Complex 37 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, at 6:51 p.m. (EDT), aboard a Delta-4 rocket. The craft’s schedule would place GOES O in its final orbit on 7 July 2009, at which time NASA would rename it GOES 14. Twenty-four hours after launch, Boeing Space and Intelligence Systems would hand engineering control over to NASA; five months later, NASA would transfer operational control of GOES 14 to NOAA. NOAA would perform check-out operations of the craft, store it in orbit, and make it available for activation when one of two operational GOES satellites degraded or exhausted its fuel. GOES O was the second of three of the newest generation of GOES satellites launched. In addition to providing continuous weather monitoring for 60 percent of the planet, these GOES satellites monitored solar flares and tracked climate change.(NASA, “NASA and NOAA’s GOES-O Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release 09-148, 27 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09148_GOES_O_Launch.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Marcia Dunn, “Sophisticated Weather Satellite Rockets into Orbit,” Associated Press, 29 June 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Rocket Launches Weather Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 June 2009.)
At NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the field of space transportation. The agreement would allow the two space agencies to exchange technical information and personnel, providing NASA with assistance in several key areas. These key areas included composite material technology, development of payload shrouds, and management of propellants in spacecraft propulsion systems used for transit to and from lunar orbit. Bolden reflected on NASA’s long history of participating with ESA in human spaceflight activities, remarking that the agreement underscored NASA’s intention to continue building that relationship. Dordain added that the exchange of technical information enabled under the terms of the agreement would benefit both agencies, facilitating work toward future launch systems, human spaceflight, and exploration missions.(NASA, “U.S. and Europe Agree on Civil Space Transportation Cooperation,” news release 09-208, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-208_NASA_ESA_MOU.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA successfully launched its PharmaSat nanosatellite at 7:55 p.m. (EDT) from its Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) aboard a four-stage U.S. Air Force Minotaur-1 rocket. The rocket also carried the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory’s TacSat-3 satellite, which was the primary payload, and other NASA CubeSat Technology Demonstration experiments—Aerocube 3, CP 6, and Hawksat 1—three 4-inch, cubed satellites developed by universities and industry to measure electron collection, radiation testing, and guidance and control systems. PharmaSat’s mission was to investigate the effects of antifungal agents on the growth of yeast in microgravity, to help scientists better understand how microbes might become resistant to drugs used to treat sick astronauts on long-duration flights. PharmaSat separated from the rocket approximately 20 minutes after launch and entered low Earth orbit at an altitude of 285 miles (458.7 kilometers). Following the checkout period, ground controllers planned to command PharmaSat to initiate its biological experiment, scheduled to last 96 hours. The satellite would transmit radio signals to Ground Control stations at two California locations and would send mission data to the NASA Mission Management Team at ARC. The satellite could continue to transmit this data for as long as six months.(NASA, “NASA Flight Facility Successfully Launches Nanosatellite,” news release 09-114, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-114_PharmaSat_Launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667; Matthew Jones, “Rocket May Launch a Promising Future for Wallops Island,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 20 May 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of four proposals to study the risks of space radiation for humans living in space. NASA selected the proposals of New York University School of Medicine, the University of Texas Medical Branch in Houston, Loma Linda University in California, and Georgetown University in Washington, DC. The four institutions would become NASA Specialized Centers of Research. With the establishment of this program, NASA would invest US$28.4 million in the four institutions over a five-year period. At the centers, researchers would study carcinogenesis and the risks of spaceflight to the central nervous system, helping them to begin to develop effective radiation countermeasures for space travelers.(NASA, “NASA Selects Four Proposals To Study Space Radiation Risks,” news release 09-126, 2 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-126_Radiation_Risk_Proposals.html (accessed 22 July 2011). 82 Associated Press, “Delayed Spacewalk Ends Successfully,” 8 June 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Spacewalkers Prime Space Station for New Docking Port,” Space.com, 5 June 2009, http://www.space.com/6799-spacewalkers-prime- space-station-docking-port.html (accessed 3 August 2011).)
NASA and Microsoft Corporation announced plans to make planetary images and data available to the public via the Internet under a Space Act Agreement. The project required NASA and Microsoft jointly to develop the technology and infrastructure necessary to enable the public to explore NASA content using the WorldWide Telescope, Microsoft’s online virtual telescope for exploring the universe. Online since 2008, WorldWide Telescope combined images from ground- and space-based telescopes to simulate the experience of peering into the cosmos. The agreement directed NASA’s ARC in Moffett Field, California, to process and host more than 100 terabytes of data, which WorldWide Telescope would incorporate later in 2009. The data would feature imagery from NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which NASA had launched in 2005 to examine Mars using several instruments, including a high-resolution camera. Since 2006, MRO had returned more data than all other Mars missions combined. NASA planned to launch its Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) in May 2009. After LRO images became publicly available later in 2009, NASA intended to include those images in the WorldWide Telescope project. The agreement built on a prior collaboration with Microsoft, in which NASA had developed three-dimensional, interactive Microsoft Photosynth collections of the Space Shuttle launchpad and other KSC facilities.(NASA, “NASA and Microsoft To Make Universe of Data Available to the Public,” news release 09-067, 24 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-067_Microsoft_WorldWide_ Telescope.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Microsoft’s WorldWide Telescope To Focus on Mars,” 25 March 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 5:53 p.m. (PDT), ending a successful 14-day mission to the ISS. Weather prevented the crew from landing at KSC in Florida. STS-128 had delivered to the ISS NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had begun a three-month mission as a resident, replacing Timothy L. Kopra. Kopra had returned home with Discovery’s crew. Discovery had also delivered to the ISS 9 tons (8.16 tonnes, or 8,165 kilograms) of supplies, to sustain the six-person crew and to equip the station for more science experiments. The delivery had included two refrigerator-sized science racks for the station—one for conducting experiments on materials such as metals, glass, and ceramics, and the other for studying how fluids react in microgravity. In addition, Discovery had delivered a freezer for samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air-purification system, and a treadmill named for the comedian Stephen Colbert. The crew had undertaken three spacewalks, to replace experiments outside ESA’s Columbus laboratory and to empty an ammonia-storage tank.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery Returns to Earth After Successful Mission,” news release 09-212, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-212_Discovery_Lands.html (accessed 15 September 2011); James Dean, “Storms Prevent KSC Landing, Divert Discovery to California,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 September 2009; William Harwood, “Shuttle Glides to a California Landing,” New York Times, 12 September 2009.)
NASA launched its National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellite, NOAA 19, or NOAA-N Prime, aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 2:22 a.m. (PST). The successful launch occurred following two scrubs resulting from technical problems. The Lockheed Martin−built NOAA-N Prime was the latest and final spacecraft in the Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) satellite series. Lockheed Martin had been designing and building for NASA and NOAA since the first Television and Infrared Observational Satellite (TIROS) weather satellite, which had launched in April 1960. Replacing NOAA 18, NOAA-N Prime would become the primary “afternoon” spacecraft, a designation based upon the time a spacecraft’s orbit crosses the equator. NOAA-N Prime was carrying the same primary instruments that NOAA 18 had on board, with the addition of an Advanced Data Collection System (ADCS) and an improved Search and Rescue Processor. France’s national space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales (CNES) had provided the ADCS, a system designed to measure environmental factors such as atmospheric temperature and pressure, as well as the velocity and direction of ocean and wind currents. CNES had also provided the Search and Rescue Processor, designed to detect distress calls from emergency beacons on board aircraft and boats, as well as to locate people carrying devices in remote areas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664; NASA Spaceflight, “ULA Delta II Launches on Third Attempt with NASA’s NOAA- N Prime,” 6 February 2009.)
Astronomer Arthur D. Code died in Madison, Wisconsin, at the age of 85. A designer of space observatories, Code had worked with a team of scientists from NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory in 1968, to send into orbit a bat-shaped satellite—the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO 2). Although the original OAO craft had failed in its 1966 mission, OAO 2 had succeeded, yielding information about the composition of stars, comets, and galactic gases. Intended to last a year, the OAO-2 mission had remained operational until 1973. OAO 2 had sent back data indicating that young stars in the constellations Scorpius and Orion are far hotter than previously thought and, therefore, are likely aging more quickly than astronomers had previously believed. OAO-2 successor craft included OAO 3 and NASA’s HST. Following the OAO-2 mission, Code had taught at the University of Wisconsin, where he had refined his designs and had analyzed data retrieved from subsequent satellites. In 1990 he and a team of students had sent an ultraviolet-detecting telescope to orbit aboard Space Shuttle Columbia; the team had used the device to study polarized ultraviolet light. Code had served as president of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and had been a member of the NAS. NASA had awarded him its Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.(Jeremy Pearce, “Arthur Code, Astronomer and Professor, Dies at 85,” New York Times, 23 March 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn embarked on the fourth of the five spacewalks scheduled for STS-127. During the spacewalk, they finished replacing batteries, a task that they had begun during the 22 July spacewalk but had been unable to complete. Mission Control had terminated the 22 July spacewalk early because of rising levels of carbon dioxide in Cassidy’s spacesuit. During today’s spacewalk, which lasted 7 hours and 30 minutes, Cassidy and Marshburn successfully replaced the last four of the six batteries storing power generated by the ISS’s oldest set of solar arrays. These batteries provided power to the American laboratory Destiny when the station was orbiting in darkness.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Install Fresh Batteries on Spacewalk,” 24 July 2009; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Duo Keep Station Going and Going,” 25 July 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at 8:39 a.m. (PDT) at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending a successful 13-day mission to HST. Weather conditions had prevented Atlantis from landing at KSC. Astronauts had performed five spacewalks to repair, replace, and upgrade the instruments and computers on HST. These repairs and upgrades had not only restored the telescope, but had also expanded its capabilities. NASA considered the unprecedented mission historic, because of the complexity of the repairs and because the mission had been the last time human beings would go to space to repair an orbiting scientific instrument. NASA had placed HST in low Earth orbit at 600 kilometers (373 miles) to facilitate repair missions, but the location was suboptimal for space telescopes. NASA had planned to place HST’s successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) away from Earth, at L2, and, therefore, had designed JWST to function without repairs or upgrades. In addition to making HST repairs, astronauts had performed a commercial drug experiment aimed at finding a vaccine against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and other microbes.(NASA, “NASA’s Space Shuttle Returns to Earth After Hubble Mission,” news release 09-120, 24 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-120_STS-125_Landing_Edwards.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Houston Chronicle, “This Is Why We Fly: Hubble Repair Mission Showcases the Value of the Manned Space Program,” 26 May 2009; Daniel Holz, “The Last Fix,” Discover Magazine, 26 May 2009, http://blogs. discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2009/05/25/the-last-fix/ (accessed 21 July 2011); Frank Morring Jr., “Drug Experiment Performed on Atlantis,” Aviation Week, 20 May 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of STS-127 at the ISS, focusing on odd jobs and unfinished tasks, which they completed in 4 hours and 54 minutes. The duo rewired power cables for the ISS’s American- built attitude-control system; secured loose insulation on a Canadian-built maintenance robot; and added to JEF a pair of television cameras, which would provide good views of Japan’s new unpiloted cargo ship, the H-2 Transfer Vehicle, scheduled to make its maiden flight in September 2009. The only task that the astronauts left unfinished was the installation of a cargo attachment system, a task that Mission Control had decided would require too much time. Instead, Mission Control instructed Cassidy and Marshburn to tend to some “get-ahead” tasks—attaching wire ties to external cables and installing new handrails and work-site attachments on the Kibo laboratory. The five spacewalks tied the record for the most EVAs (extravehicular activities) performed on the ISS while a Space Shuttle was docked at the station.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Wrap Up Space Station Service Call,” Space.com, 27 July 2009, http://www.space. com/7059-spacewalkers-wrap-space-station-service-call.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
NASA announced that the MIB led by Arthur F. “Rick” Obenschain had completed its report about the cause of the unsuccessful 24 February 2009 launch of the OCO and released a summary of its findings and recommendations. The MIB did not make the complete text of the official report public because it contained information protected by U.S. International Traffic in Arms Regulations and company-sensitive proprietary information. The board’s report verified that the Taurus launch vehicle’s fairing—a clamshell structure that encapsulated the satellite as it traveled through the atmosphere—had failed to separate upon command, preventing the craft from reaching its planned orbit. The craft had crashed into the ocean near Antarctica minutes after launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The board had identified four possible causes of the fairing failure—a failure of the frangible-joint subsystem, a failure in the electrical subsystem, a failure in the pneumatic system, or a cord caught on a frangible-joint side- rail nut plate. The board had made recommendations to prevent future problems associated with those four hardware components.(NASA, “NASA Releases Orbiting Carbon Observatory Accident Summary,” news release 09-163, 17 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-163_OCO.html (accessed 10 August 2011); NASA, “Overview of the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) Mishap Investigation Results for Public Release,” http://www.nasa.gov/ pdf/369037main_OCOexecutivesummary_71609.pdf (accessed 16 August 2011); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, “Hardware Problem Blamed on NASA Satellite Crash,” 17 July 2009.)
