China signed a contract with Teresat, Inc. of New York to launch its first satellite for an American firm. The contract called for a Teresat WestarVIS satellite to be launched into orbit aboard a Chinesemade rocket in the first half of 1988. (LA Times, Jan 29/87). During January: The American journal Aviation Week & Space Technology reported two serious Soviet setbacks in space that were not acknowledged by Soviet authorities. The magazine claimed that on January 29 the Soviets deliberately destroyed a Cosmos 1,813 military reconnaissance satellite they had launched on January 15, 1987. When the satellite malfunctioned upon reentry, its selfdestruction system was activated to prevent it from striking a populated area or from falling into western hands. Also according to this source, a Soviet SL12 Proton booster rocket failed during launching on January 30, 1987. Its fourth and uppermost stage failed to ignite and the debris from the rocket and communications satellite it carried fell out of orbit a day later. C Trib, Feb 7/87; NY Times, Feb 7/87)
The world's two largest wind tunnels became fully operational at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The two tunnels, the upgraded 40by80 foot wind tunnel and the new, open circuit, 80by120 foot wind tunnel, are housed in the National FullScale Aerodynamics Complex. Both tunnels are used for fullscale and largescale testing of advanced aircraft. They offer new capability for testing of rotorcraft and vertical and shorttakeoff and landing aircraft (V/STOL). (NASA Release 87180; P Inq, Dec 12/87)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force signed a pricing agreement, establishing reimbursement policies for Department of Defense (DoD) flights on the Space Shuttle and NASA flights on DoDprocured expendable launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87147)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
James Elliott, a spokesman for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that a NASA rocket exploded about 20 seconds after launch from Poker Flats, Alaska. The small rocket, carrying an upperatmosphere plasma experiment, detonated when its second stage malfunctioned. (W Post, Mar 8/87)
Astronaut John A. McBride was named acting Assistant Administrator for Congressional Relations, effective September 1, 1987. He would replace John F. Murphy, who was appointed Chief of the Office of External Affairs at NASA's Ames Research Center, in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 87116)
The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful than the American Space Shuttle. According to the Soviet Tass News Agency, the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central Asia, fired correctly but a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a "twostage multipurpose launch vehicle" capable of putting into orbit more than 100 tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could carry. (LA Times, May 17/87; C Trib, May 18/87; W Times, May 18/87)
A military satellite was lifted into orbit by a Titan 34D, the Nation's largest untended booster rocket. The launch from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base was the first successful launch of a Titan 34D rocket since February 1985. C Trib, Oct 28/87; LA Times, Oct 27/87; W Times, Oct 28/87)
Pioneer 12, which had been orbiting the planet Venus, was directed, by controllers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to begin tracking the newly discovered Comet Wilson. This would be the fourth time that Pioneer 2, orbiting Venus since 1986, interrupted observations of the planet H&to study a comet passing Venus on its way to the Sun. (LA Times, Mar 15/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain and strengthen the existing Space Shuttle processing arrangement at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, with Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida. The decision was recommended by a senior review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. The group was chaired by Roy S. Estess, Deputy Director, National Space Technology Laboratories, Mississippi, and included representatives from NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 8726)
An international panel of scientists selected three experiments submitted by NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission to be launched in early 1990's. The cometary ice and dust experiment (CIDEX) was designed to capture and analyze dust, ices, and gasses evolved from the comet as the coma and tail develop during its pass around the sun. The thermal infrared radiometer experiment (TIREX) would measure the thermal emission and the scattering of solar radiation from the comet. The third experiment would consist of an interdisciplinary scientist for exobiology, the study of chemical processes and physical events leading to emergence of life in the universe. The CIDEX mission was managed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. (NASA Release 8763)
NASA officials, who met in Moscow with their Soviet counterparts December 713 to discuss cooperation in space, said the Soviet Union planned to launch a spacecraft to Mars in 1992. In addition, the Soviets asked the United States to modify an American spacecraft to help relay data from another Soviet mission to Mars set for launching in 1994. (CSM, Dec 21/87; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 19/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
NASA announced that White Sands Space Harbor, New Mexico, was designated an alternate endofmission landing site for Space Shuttle missions STS26 through STS28. The new site was to be used for a Shuttle landing when conditions at Edwards Air Force Base in California precluded landing. (NASA Release 87 189)
Five NASA and U.S. Air Force pilots completed the first phase of research flying of the Advanced Fighter Technology Integration F111 aircraft at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. During the first phase of research flying, the aircraft's wing was modified so that it could fly with optimum wing curvature at subsonic, transonic, and supersonic speeds. The MAW system was operated only manually, and the pilot selected the aircraft's wing curvature. The aircraft, with its distinct Mission Adaptive Wing (MAW), entered the second phase of research flying where the computers were modified so the wing curvature could adjust automatically. (NASA Release 87118; Def News, Aug 24/87)
NASA selected Lockheed Engineering and Management Services Company to negotiate an engineering support contract for Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The contract would consolidate work currently performed by Lockheed, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and Northrop Services, Inc. (NASA Release 8742; WSJ, Mar 27/87; H Chron, Mar 27/87)
American and Soviet scientists agreed to joint effort in a wide range of space research. Their first joint project called for a launch of a Soviet "space zoo" satellite containing monkeys, rats, fish, and other living organisms. The 14day flight of this satellite was to provide Soviet and American scientists an opportunity to study the impact of weightlessness on the vital functions of animals. Some 26 other experiments were approved by working groups from the United States and the Soviet Union meeting for a weeklong scientific conference in Moscow. The joint project was the first to be conducted under the terms of a fiveyear space cooperation agreement signed on April 15, 1987, by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and U.S. Secretary of State George P. Shultz. (C Trib, Aug 11/87; LA Times, Aug 11/87; P Inq, Aug
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that its Denverbased Space Systems group was one of the companies awardedh) 0*0*0*two NASA contracts to study and design spacecraft for a mission to Mars. A contract to study the techniques of robotic rover to traverse Martian surface was awarded by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA awarded a similar contract to the FMC Corporation of Santa Clara, California. The second contract was awarded by NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. It called on Martin Marietta to study braking methods that would allow a spacecraft to orbit Mars, enter its atmosphere, and descend to the surface of the planet. The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company of Sunnyvale, California, was the other company awarded this study contract by the JSC. Martin Marietta was the company that designed, built, and tested the twin Viking spacecraft that landed on the surface of Mars in 1976 and 1977. (AVWK, Oct 26/87; B Sun, Oct 1/87, Rocky Mountain News, Oct 1/87)
According to a news release from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, NASA would manage a major international experiment on the use of satellites to study our environment. The experiment, part of the International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project, would employ over 100 scientists from more than 25 institutions to study the interaction between the land system and climate system. Over 25 ground measurement stations would be set up on the Konza Prairie in Kansas for the experiment. Six research planes and five Earthorbiting satellites would also be used. (NASA Release 8795)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, in Columbia, Maryland, for negotiations on a contract for continuation of maintenance and operations of the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN). The DSN provides tracking and data acquisition for planetary spaceflight missions and for NASA's crewtended and untended space programs. The fiveyear contract, with an option for an additional five years, was expected to begin April 2, 1987. (NASA Release 879)h)0*0*0*February 5: Jesse W. Moore resigned from NASA, effective February 8, 1987. Moore joined NASA in 1966. Among the varied positions he held included Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science (19781979); Director of Space Flight Division (19791981); Director of the Earth and Planetary Exploration Division (19811983); Acting Associate Administrator of Space Flight (April 1984August 1984); and Associate Administrator of Space Flight (August 1984January 1986). He was named Director of the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston, Texas, in January 1986, and in October 1986 he moved to Headquarters as a Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Policy and Planning. (NASA Release 8710; NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87)
NASA announced that its scientists had joined with scientists from the Brazilian Institute for Space Research and from U.S. and Brazilian universities and institutes to conduct a 45day study of tropospheric (part of the atmosphere closest to Earth) chemistry in the atmosphere over the Amazon River Basin tropical rain forest during the wet season. NASA's program of global tropospheric experiments to study the chemistry of Earth's atmosphere and its interaction with land and oceans began in the 1980's. NASA used the Space Shuttle in 1981 and 1984 to measure tropospheric carbon monoxide with a gas filter radiometer. In July and August 1985, NASA's Amazon boundary layer experiment (ABLE) documented the importance of biosphereatmosphere interactions in determining chemical processes in the troposphere over undisturbed rain forests. The second ABLE experiment, begun in midApril 1987, was to study how tropical forests affect the gas exchange, chemistry, and budgets of several key gases in the troposphere. A NASA Electra aircraft, stationed in Manasus, Brazil, in the center of the Amazon River Basin, was expected to measure atmospheric trace gasses and aerosols during a series of flights. The results from the experiments aboard the Electra aircraft and from several investigations carried out at ground sites would be evaluated by the team of scientists late in 1987. NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications in Washington, D.C., was responsible for the tropospheric chemistry program. Langley's Atmospheric Sciences Division, with logistical support from the Bionetics Corporation in Hampton, Virginia, managed the ABLE project. (Nasa Release 8766)
NASA announced that Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, were studying concepts for designing and building a robot space vehicle for Mars exploration and samplereturn mission. If approved, the robotic space vehicle mission would be launched in 1998 and return with martian samples in 2001. The mission would precede human exploration of Mars. (NASA Release 8744)
NASA announced that it would launch a seventh Department of Defense Fleet Satellite Communications spacecraft from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida, no earlier than March 26, 1987. (NASA Release 8740)
NASA issued a request for proposal to U.S. industry for a program support contractor to assist the NASA Space Station Program Office, in Washington, D.C., with development of the Space Station. (NASA Release 878)
NASA announced reopening, after major modifications, the wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Constructed in 1944, the 40by80foot wind tunnel was used for fullscale testing of civilian and military aircraft. Modifications to the tunnel included increasing power from six 6,000horsepower electric motors generating airspeeds of up to 230 mph to six 22,500horsepower motors generating top airspeeds of 345 The modified 40by80foot wind tunnel represented the first phase of the creation of the National FullScale Aerodynamics Complex, which included the Outdoor Aerodynamics Research Facility, at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The second phase, including the new "straight through" leg with its 80by120foot test section, was expected to be completed in late 1987. (NASA Release 8798)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced that the next Space Shuttle orbiter would be assembled in Palmdale, California. He gave costs and schedule factors as the reasons why this site was chosen over Califonia's Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 87100; H Chron, June 18/87)
NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, at Headquarters in Washington, D.C., selected 29 life sciences investigators for space flight study. According to Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, Director of NASA's Life Sciences Division, the first phase of the study, the definition phase, which is expected to begin in the early fall of 1987 and last less than a year, would be followed by selection of investigators for actual flights aboard the Space Shuttle. Chosen investigators could participate in future Space Shuttle missions anytime between 1991 and 1994, or even later. (NASA Release 8754)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel Hinners would replace Dr. Frank McDonald as Chief Scientist, effective August 24, 1987. At the same time, Dr. Hinners would retain his position as NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator(Institutions). NASA also announced Dr. Frank McDonald would return to the Goddard Space Flight Center as Associate Director/Chief Scientist. (NASA Release 87121)
NASA announced that its Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) supercomputer system, the world's most advanced, had become fully operational. The NAS system will make possible a wide range of aerospace vehicle technologies and capabilities and will ensure the Nation's preeminence in aeronautical research. By the end of 1987, the operational system was expected to be capable of a billion calculations per second, and within a decade its capability should reach 10 billion calculations per second. The 90,000squarefoot NAS building, located at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and containing a 15,000squarefoot central computer room was equipped with an array of systems for the optimal functioning of the computers. (NASA Release 8721; NY Times, Mar 10/87; CSM, Mar 10/87; SF Chron, Mar 10/87)
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Lew Allen announced that Richard P. Laeser had been appointed to manage JPL's new support office in Washington, D.C., for NASA's Space Station Program. Laesar, who until his new appointment had been the manager of the Voyager mission to outer planets, would also serve as Director of the Office of Requisitions and Assessments for the Space Station. Norman R. Haynes was appointed the new manager of the Voyager mission. He formerly was manager of JPL's Systems Division. StarNews, Jan 5/87)
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)
NASA announced that beginning March 14, 1987, the Pioneer 12 spacecraft, orbiting Planet Venus, would study the newly discovered Comet Wilson. The Comet was to be tracked by controllers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, from March 1421,h)0*0*0*and again from March 31 to April 30. (NASA Release 8725)
The Air Force announced that it would purchase 20 rockets from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for launching navigational satellites. Modeled on the existing rockets used by NASA, the Delta 2 medium rocket boosters would also be used commercially for launching communications satellites. (UPI, Jan 21/87; USA Today, Jan 22/87; NY Times, Jan 22/87; W Post, 22/87)
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the promotion of Dr. John M. Klineberg, Deputy Director of Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, since July 1979, to Director of the Center, effective immediately. Dr. Klineberg went to Lewis from NASA Headquarters, where he had served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. An internationally recognized expert in the field of transonic flow, he first joined NASA in 1970 at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 8786)
Officials at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, reported that NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory would leave on October 31, 1987, for New Zealand on a monthlong mission to study the supernova SN1987a. Scientists aboard the Kuiper would make eight research flights to study the supernova, located 170,000 light years away. Supernova SN1987a is the closest supernova to Earth since the invention of a telescope some 400 years ago. (NASA Release 87162; AvWk, Nov. 9/87)h)#0*0*0*November 3: NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs James T. Rose announced new program initiatives to encourage and expand commercial space activity. Rose told some 270 executives from across the country, meeting for a threeday workshop in Nashville, Tennessee, that the new programs will build on earlier NASA commercial development policies. According to Rose, the agency already had awarded $50,000 grants to 206 small businesses for feasibility studies in this area. One of the program initiatives announced by Rose called for 28 percent space allocation for commercial secondary payloads aboard the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 87/165; NY Times, Nov 5/87; Tennessean, Nov 4/87; W Times, Nov 5/87)
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
NASA announced that its fiscal year 1988 budget request did not include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 million for the launching of the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. The Agency said it planned to launch the spacecraft in 1992 from the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8732; LA Times, Mar 14/87; NY Times, Mar 15/87)
NASA selected five American principal investigators and five Italian scientists for a joint U.S.Italian Tethered Satellite System (TSS1) project. The TSS1, a deplorable subsatellite to be 'tethered' to the Space Shuttle via a retractable cable, was expected to lift aboard Columbia in the fall of 1990. (NASA Release
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
The panel, headed by retired Air Force General Alton D. Slay, praised NASA's toptobottom review of hundreds of items and procedures that could cause another disaster. It added, however, that several analyses of possible equipment failure and of items considered critical to safety would not be completed until the summer of 1987. The panel recommended that NASA rank the most critical safety items, based on the likelihood of their failure, and that it closely link the engineering changes and the hazard analyses. (NY Times, Jan 15/87; W Post, Jan 16/87; UPI, Jan 16/87)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced the composition of the Atlas Centaur 67 Investigation Board. The Board, chaired by Jon R. Busse, Director, Office of Flight Assurance, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would investigate the loss of the Atlas Centaur 67 mission on March 26, 1987 and recommend corrective action. The mission vehicle was destroyed 51 seconds after an apparently normal liftoff. (NASA Release 8745)
NASA selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Silver Spring, Maryland, to negotiate a contract for systems, engineering, and support services. The services provided by the contract would be in support of the Mission Operations and Data Systems Directorate, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8739)
Pilots from NASA, the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Navy, and the Grumman Aerospace Corporation completed the first phase of experimental flying of the forwardsweptwing X29 aircraft. During the tests, the X29, with its threesurface pitch control system, reached an altitude of 50,200 feet and speeds of about 1.5 times the speed of sound. After a total of 104 flights, the pilots began the second phase of the flight research program at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. During this phase, further flights would test the forward swept wing structure divergence tendencies and the overall aerodynamic performance of the wings and canards. Researchers would also investigate the aircraft's control system and handling qualities, as well as maneuvering characteristics applicable to military use. (NASA Release 87113)
NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs Isaac T. Gillam named 28 teams that have submitted proposals to establish Centers for the Commercial Development of Space. The objective of the Centers would be to stimulate research in the microgravity environment of space. This research was expected to lead the development of new products that have commercial value. The proposed research fields include space power, space propulsion, remote sensing, communication technology, and bioscience. The overwhelming majority of the proposals came from American universities. (NASA Release 8769)
NASA announced that the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite would be launched on a Delta expendable launch vehicle in early 1989 rather than on the Space Shuttle in July 1988, as originally planned. The change in schedule was caused by the backlog of science payloads awaiting launch on the Space Shuttle as a result of the Challenger accident. Designed to study the "Big Bang," COBE would be launched into a 560statutemile, sunsynchronous orbit from Vandenburg Air Force Base in California. Because of the switch from the Shuttle to Delta, COBE would be reduced in weight from 10,500 pounds to 5,000 pounds and in size from 15 feet to 8 feet in diameter. Scaling down the spacecraft would also require that COBE be redesigned. (NASA Release 871)
NASA launched a PalapaB2P, an Indonesian communications satellite, on a Delta 182 from Launch Complex 17B, Eastern Space and Missile Center, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida. The satellite, intended to serve Indonesia's 13,677 islands, was placed into an elliptical orbit ranging from about 115 miles to 23,000 miles above the Earth. The PalapaB2P satellite, built by Hughes Aircraft Company, was to be used as a backup for a failing relay station already in orbit. (NY Times, Mar 21/87; B Sun, Mar 21/87; P Inq, Mar 21/87; NY Times, Mar 22/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and General Kabbaj, the Inspector of the Royal Moroccan Air Force, signed an agreement permitting the United States the use of Morocco's Ben Guerir Air Force Base for emergency landing of the Space Shuttle. The facility would be ready for such an emergency in February 1988. (NASA Release 876)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
NASA announced an international joint effort to investigate ozone depletion over the Antarctic. NASA was to be joined in this effort by other Federal science agencies; the Chemical Manufacturers Association; scientists from Harvard University, the University of Denver, and the University of Washington; and the governments of Argentina, Chile, France, Great Britain, and New Zealand. A specially equipped ER2 plane and a modified DC8 airliner were to make a number of flights through the ozone hole between August 17 and September 29, 1987, to see whether manmade chemicals, nature, or both are destroying the ozone. The findings will be examined by an international panel of policy makers meeting in Montreal, Canada, in September 1987. (NY Times, July 30/87; W Post, July 29/87; W Times, July 29/87)
NASA awarded a contract to the Computer Sciences Corporation, El Segundo, California, for operations support to the Mission Support Directorate of Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. Under the contract, Computer Sciences Corporation would provide maintenance, operations, and sustaining engineering of institutional ADP facilities, networks and work stations, and user support. About 30 percent of the work would be performed by two Computer Sciences Corporation subcontractors, International Business Machines Corporation and Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation, a unit of Ford Motor Company. (NASA Release 87148; WSJ, Oct 7/87)
NASA announced that it, together with the Universities Space Research Association, in Columbia, Maryland, and the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, would establish a Center for Excellence in Space Data and Information Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, beginning October 1, 1987. The new research facility would serve as the nerve center for a network of researchers from leading universities and from industry computer science departments. The emphasis would be on research in areas of potential longterm application to NASA programs in the Space Station era. (NASA Release 8770)
NASA announced that astronaut Dr. Sally K. Ride would leave the agency in Fall 1987. Dr. Ride, the first American woman to fly in space, would assume the position of Science Fellow at the Stanford University Center for International Security and Arms Control in Palo Alto, California. (NASA Release 8784; B Sun, May 27/87; NY Times, May 27/87; W Post, May 27/87; W Times, May 27/87)
NASA announced that an international team of researchers, coordinated by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, was using satellites to study how the Earth's tectonic plates move in the Caribbean Sea and Central and South America. The experiment, spanning several years, would allow researchers to chart the motions of dozens of land sites in 16 countries using signals from orbiting navigation satellites. Research teams carreied electronic receivers designed to pick up signals from seven NAVSTAR satellites operated by the U.S. Department of Defense, as part of the Global Positioning System (GPS) program. By locating receiver equipment at established survey markers in South America and the Caribbean, and collecting GPS data from up to four GPS satellites passing overhead, researchers calculated the location of receiving sites on the ground and are planned to compare measurements over time to determine tectonic displacement. The plates studied included the Caribbean plate, in portions of the southern Caribbean Sea; the Cocos plate, in the Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Central America; the Nazca plate, off the west coast of South America; and the South American plate, upon which lies most of the South American continent. The research was funded by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Earth Science and Applications Division. (NASA Release 8830)
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
NASA announced the selection of General Electric, AstroSpace Division, Princeton, New Jersey, for negotiations leading to the award of a costplusawardfee contract for design, fabrication, instrument integration, and launch operation support of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) Wind and Polar missions. The two GGS laboratories, with their complement of scientific instruments, were to examine the flow of energy from the Sun through the Earth's geospace environment. This project was to be part of the overall scientific investigations within the International SolarTerrestrial Physics Program. The contract would provide for delivery of the Wind laboratory to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for launch readiness on December 30, 1992, and delivery of the Polar laboratory to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for launch readiness on June 30, 1993. Each laboratory would be launched on a government`"furnished expendable launch vehicle. (NASA News, Nov 23/88)
NASA announced that a scientist at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a new, ground breaking computational model that could accurately simulate the complex, fluctuating air flow within aircraft engine turbines and compressors. The new computational model, developed by NASA scientist, Man Rohan Rai, was expected to generate significant savings for the aircraft engine industry once it became ready for commercial applications. The model performed one of the most complex computer simulations ever undertaken and provided the most accurate calculation to date of air flow within turbines. Engine concepts and designs had been tested primarily by experimental methods, most often by building prototype engines and subjecting them to a battery of tests. Advanced computer techniques were far less expensive and much faster. Current computational work was performed on a Cray2 supercomputer at the new Ames Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility. (NASA Release 8894; ARC Release 8850; SF Chron, Jul 13/88; Bus Week, Jul 25/88)
In an interview with the Washington Post, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev announced he would ask President Ronald Reagan to approve a joint SovietU.S. untended flight to Mars during the upcoming summit meeting in Moscow. A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman said Gorbachev's proposal for a Mars mission was recommended by Roald Z. Sagdeev, a Soviet space expert, as a symbol of superpower cooperation and a fruitful scientific and technological undertaking. "This is a field for cooperation that would be worthy of the Soviet and American people," Gorbachev said. "And I will make that proposal to President Reagan." (W Post, May 22/88; UPI, May 22/88; LA Times, May 22/88; B Sun, May 23; C Trib, May 23/88)
A DMSP F9 meteorological observation satellite was successfully launched at 9:53 p.m. aboard an AtlasE rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base Space Launch Complex3 in California. The 1,650pound Department of Defense (DoD) satellite was placed in a nearpolar orbit. (W Times, Feb 4/88; Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988, 171)
Morton Thiokol, Inc. was fined by Utah state officials for six safety violations in connection with a December 29, 1987, fire that killed five workers and destroyed a missile casting building at Thiokol's Wasatch facility near Salt Lake City. The Utah Occupational and Safety Health Division sought fines of $31,700 against Thiokol, citing violations of safety rules related to protection of workers, deviations from approved procedures, and failure to take precautions against static electricity buildup in a rocketcasting facility. An Air Force investigation into the immediate cause of the fire, which occurred during the casting of solid rocket propellant into the metal casing of an MX missile segment, was pending. (UPI, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 17/88; NY Times, Mar 17/88; WSJ, Mar 17/88; W Times, Mar 17/88)
NASA announced that it had negotiated a contract with Rockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division to consolidate Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida launch site. Under the contract, Rockwell's orbiter logistics operations in Downey, California, would be transferred to existing Launch Support Operations activity at KSC. During this same period, Rockwell's component overhaul and repair activities would move from its network of original Shuttle equipment manufacturers to the Rockwell Service Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. The move would complete a consolidation begun in 1985. (NASA Release 88156)
An engineer who, only hours before the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch the spacecraft in cold weather was named a winner of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award. Roger M. Boisjoly, a former engineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.the manufacturer of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor blamed for the Challenger accident that0*killed seven crew memberswas honored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for attempting to halt the launch and for his attempts to have the flawed rocket redesigned. The AAAS, in an announcement, cited Boisjoly "for his exemplary and repeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as an engineer by alerting others to life threatening design problems on the Challenger Space Shuttle and for steadfastly recommending against the tragic launch." Boisjoly was to receive the AAAS award during February 14 ceremonies in Boston. (LA Star News, Jan 27/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
outward at 868 miles per second. Previous Kuiper observations of the expanding ejected cloud had greatly contributed to understanding how the explosion proceeds. KAO Supernova 1987a research was being conducted by the Astrophysics Branch, Space Science Division, Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 88168; ARC Release 8889)
Two U.S. Navy navigation satellites were launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a 600mile circular polar orbit aboard a NASA Scout rocket. The two Oscar satellites were part of the U.S. Navy's longestablished, continuous allweather global navigation system. Made available to nonNavy users in 1967, the spacecraft had since been adapted for diverse civilian uses such as commercial shipping, charting of offshore oil and mineral deposits, and land survey projects. The system provided position information within onetenth of a nautical mile anywhere in the world. This marked Scout's 100th flight and followed closely on the heels of the Scout San Marco D/L launch, which took place on
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the Moon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./U.S.S.R. humanassisted missions. "Going to the Moon together would give the two leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for further cooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission to Mars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crewtended mission. Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year0*in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted the notion that American space leadership was lost. Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budget request for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr 14/88; NASA Release 8852)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the new Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, effective immediately. Abbey had been Special Assistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November 1987. He began his NASA career in 1967 as Technical Assistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program. He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Director of Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight Crew Operations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and service awards. (NASA Release 8836)
The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle was rolled out of the Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) to Launch Pad 39B in preparation for mission STS26, scheduled for late September. (UPI, Jul 4/88; NY Times, Jul 5/88; W Post, Jul 5/88; WSJ, Jul 5/88; W Times, Jul 5/88; P Inq, Jul
A NASA Delta 181 launch vehicle carrying a major Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) experimental payload was launched at 5:07 pm EST from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The 6,000 pound payload, the heaviest ever carried by a Delta rocket, consisted of a main orbiting sensor platform and fifteen subsatellites released from the main spacecraft during the first 4 hours of the 12hour experiment. The goal of the $250 million exercise was to test the ability of an orbiting sensor platform to detect and track the various components of Soviet Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) in flight. Four of the subsatellites were small solidfuel rockets whose exhaust plumes simulated the exhaust from the upper stages of Soviet ICBMs, whereas other test objects simulated real and "dummy" Soviet warhead reentry vehicles. During the mission, the main satellite and subsatellites were monitored by over 100 radar tracking stations, which simulated the groundbased component of an antimissile defense system. In addition, the exercise also included0*the detection, by sensors on the satellite, of a 40foot sounding rocket launched from Kauai, Hawaii. The experiment was declared a success despite the failure of an infrared sensor. The Delta launch, originally scheduled for February 4, was delayed five days because of an apparent valve malfunction on the Delta. Data gathered by the satellite during the 12hour exercise would be transmitted to Earth over a 10day period. (SSR 1988 008AD; UPI, Feb 9/88; NY Times, Feb 9/88; W Post, Feb 9/88; W Times, Feb 9/88; USA Today, Feb 9/88;
NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreement providing for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. The umbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access to NASAmanaged launch support facilities when conducting commercial launches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASA Release 88124)
Using NASA's new supercomputer at the Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility, Dr. Kozo Fujii, a research fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, developed a computer model that simulates the airflow field physics associated with vortex breakdown and provides new insights into its causes. Vortex breakdown is a complex phenomenon that can cause loss of lift and control for highperformance aircraft. Understanding and' 0*eventually controlling vortex breakdown would improve maneuverability and safety for highperformance aircraft. (NASA Release 8813)
NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747100 jetliner to serve as a second Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) for the space transportation system. A letter contract was signed with Boeing Military Airplane Company, a division of the Boeing Company, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for NASA use. The additional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability and eliminate a potential singlepoint failure in the space transportation system. The 231foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttle orbiter vehicles from landing sites to orbiter processing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The 747100, which is nearly identical to the original SCA, was selected to minimize costs associated with modifications and operation. (NASA Release 8828; JSC Release 88005) During February:
A classified Department of Defense payload was launched aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle from launch complex 40 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Sources quoted by the Associated Press said the rocket failed to carry its payload into the correct orbit. The payload was widely believed to be a Vortex reconnaissance satellite. (SSR 1988 077AC; UPI, Sep 2/88; Reuter, Sep 2/88)
NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
NASA officially transferred custody of Launch Complex 17 and East Coast Delta launch operations to the U.S. Air Force. Since 1960, NASA had conducted 143 Delta launches from the twopad Complex, located at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Under Air Force stewardship, Complex 17 would continue to be used to launch Delta medium class vehicles. The Air Force had procured 20 new Delta IIs for Department of Defense payloads. The first launch was scheduled for later in 1988. In addition, at least eight commercial Delta IIs would be launched by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington, Beach, California, from Complex 17 between 1989 and 1992. (NASA Release 8899)
A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched aboard a Titan 2 launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Civilian experts said they believed the rocket was carrying a cluster of Navy recon naissance satellites known as "White Cloud." The Titan 2 launch followed an apparent failure of a Titan 34D rocket to launch a military reconnaissance satellite into proper orbit. (SSR 1988 078AB; NY Times, Sep 6/88; W Times, Sep 6/88; CSM, Sep 6/88)
Astronomers at NASA's Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, and the University of California at Berkeley uncovered the most distant galaxy yet seen. Called 4C41.17, the newly discovered galaxy is located at an estimated distance of 15 billion light yearsmore than 90 percent of the distance to the visible limits of the universe. The discovery was made by a team of American and European astronomers, using the Very Large Array (VLA) Radio Telescope Facility near Socorro, New Mexico, and was confirmed a galaxy using the 2.1 meter optical telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory. Studying remote galaxies like 4C41.17 was expected to help forge a better understanding of how galaxies have evolved since the time of the Big Bang. This research was supported by NASA, the European Space Agency, the National Science Foundation, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope project, and the Space Telescope Science Institute. (NASA Release 88111; P Inq, Aug 9/88; B Sun, Aug 9/88; )
President Ronald Reagan signed a report to Congress creating a joint Department of Defense (DoD) and NASA program for the development of the Advanced Launch System (ALS). The ALS was intended to provide a launch system that would meet longterm national launch needs; would be flexible, robust, reliable, and responsive; and would drastically cut costs in all elements of the space launch system. The management plan created a joint program office headed by an Air Force program manager and a NASA deputy program manager. DoD would manage the systems engineering and integration, vehicle, logistics, and payload module. NASA would manage liquid engine systems and focused technology efforts. DoD would accept full funding responsibility for the program, with any unique civil requirements not addressed by the ALS baseline being funded by NASA. (NASA Release 885)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASA general counsel. Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel since October 27, 1985. He began his career at NASA in September 1982, as Chief Counsel of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8898)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinners had been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of Space Science. From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment as Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88138)
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
Defense Shuttle mission to an expendable launch vehicle. (Payload Flight AssignmentsNASA Mixed Fleet, Aug 1988; NASA Release 88120) During August: A Cray YMP, the fastest supercomputer in the world, arrived at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and underwent acceptance tests in the Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) Facility. The NAS was established as a national facility available to leading U.S. research institutions through a national network. It had longterm support from Congress to use the fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress in U.S. aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics, and chemistry. Supercomputer systems were complementing and extending aerospace research being done in wind tunnels and highvelocity (4,000 to 15,000 mph) shock tunnels. The new YMP central processor would not only solve old problems four times as fast as existing systems, but also would be used to investigate flow phenomena that could not be investigated currently by wind tunnels or computers. Another important application of the NAS supercomputer system would be the modeling of air flows for hypersonic vehicles such as the National AeroSpace Plane and the Space Shuttle. '!0*Ames was the first customer to take delivery of this new supercomputer, expected to be fully operational by January 1989. (ARC Release 8880)
The first direct observation of an atmosphere on Pluto was made by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) astronomers flying aboard NASA ARC's Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO). A team of astronomers from MIT, including Edward Dunham, James Elliot, Amanda Bosh, Steve Slivan, and Leslie Young, made the observation during a temporary occultation of a star behind Pluto. The observations were made at 41,000 feet (12,300 meters) altitude, approximately 500 miles south of Pago Pago, American Samoa, over the Southern Pacific Ocean. Information about the temperature, pressure, and extent of the atmosphere would be derived from the occultation data, obtained using a solid state video camera attached to KAO's 36 inch (92 cm) telescope. The airborne observations lasted about 1.5 minutes, occurring shortly after midnight. (ARC Release 8840)
This date marked the tenth anniversary of the launch of0*NASA's Seasat Satellite, which ushered in a new era in space research focusing on unsolved questions of the world's oceans and weather. Launched on June 26, 1978, on an AtlasAgena rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, Seasat carried a payload of five scientific instruments unlike any package carried on previous remotesensing satellites. Among the experimental instruments Seasat pioneered were a synthetic aperture radar, which provided highly detailed images of ocean and land surfaces; a radar scatterometer to measure nearsurface wind speed and direction; a radar altimeter to measure the height of the ocean surface and waves; and a scanning multichannel microwave radiometer to measure surface temperature, wind speeds, and sea ice cover. The satellite also carried a passive visual and infrared radiometer to provide supporting data for the other four Seasat demonstrated how space sensors could be used in oceanography, serving as a protoype for a generation of international missions that could provide answers to some of the world's most baffling and threatening weather phenomena. (NASA Release 8884)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
NASA commemorated the second anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. At the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, workers preparing to resume Shuttle flights paused to pay silent tribute to the Challenger crew by halting all activity at 11:38 a.m., the time of the Challenger lift off from launch Pad 39B on January 28, 1986. Flags around KSC and at NASA Centers throughout the country were lowered to half staff while workers stood silent for 73 seconds, the length of the fatal Challenger flight. Just before the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S. McCartney spoke to workers over a television circuit and loudspeakers saying: "As we make preparations to return the Space Shuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to remember the men and women of the Challenger crew." (UPI, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 29/88; C Trib, Jan 29/88;
NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) departed NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for Guam to study the Sun's atmosphere during the total solar eclipse of March 1718. A team of seven scientists aboard KAO was to make a flight through the shadow of the Moon as it moves across the Pacific Ocean. The scientists were interested in the few seconds at the beginning and end of the solar eclipse when the Sun would be almost completely covered by the Moon and when the edge of' 0*the solar disk would begin to reappear from behind the Moon. The Kuiper would intercept the path of the eclipse about 600 miles northwest of Guam. The Kuiper, a modified Lockheed C141 jet transport aircraft, is fitted with a 36inch diameter telescope and flies at 41,000 to 45,000 feet. Measurements of the solar atmosphere would be made at the farinfrared wavelengths of 30, 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 micrometers, representing the first attempt to record simultaneously these wavelengths from the Sun on such a narrowly defined spatial scale. (NASA Release 8837; ARC Release
NASA began flight tests of a new design of lownoise, energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unducted propellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternative to highercost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version of the old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 8840)0** The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for the Martian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moon and its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobos mission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Soviet spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both would approach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 8841)
The Pioneer Venus orbiter spacecraft marked 10 years of orbital observations of the clouddraped planet. Ceremonies were held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to celebrate Pioneer's accomplishments. December 9 would also mark 10 years since a companion spacecraft, Pioneer Venus 2, had entered the atmosphere of Venus along with 4 hardimpact probes it had released. Observations by Pioneer revealed a great deal about the atmospheric content of Venus, plate tectonics, volcanic activity, and the magnetic field. Pioneer had also observed five comets, including Halley. Pioneer, whose orbit was deteriorating, was scheduled to cease operating in August 1992 and be destroyed upon entering the lower atmosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 88165)
NASA set a target launch date of September 29 for STS26, the next Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of the launch date followed an updated assessment of the projected impact of Hurricane Gilbert on mission control and training facilities at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. In connection with the announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said, "NASA's decision to set this launch date is based on over two years of persistence and dedication by NASA and contractor personnel, culminating in the STS26 flight readiness review held at the Kennedy Space Center on
After 23 years in solar orbit, Pioneer 6, the oldest operating spacecraft, returned to the vicinity of its launch. The craft passed within 1.16 million miles of the Earth, roughly five times the distance between the Earth and its Moon. This distance was the closest Pioneer 6 had ever approached Earth since launch from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida in 1965. With only five lunar distances separating them, Earth's gravitational pull was strong enough to haul the craft toward its own orbit, thereby increasing time in orbit for Pioneer 6 by six days (from 311 to 317 days) and 6 million miles. The spacecraft was designed to study the Sun's atmosphere, the heliosphere. After 23 years, two of Pioneer 6's original instruments were still transmitting information on the turbulence of the solar wind to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Three sister probes followed Pioneer 6 into solar orbit. During the period from 1966 to 1970, Pioneers 7, 8, and 9 were launched into coordinated orbits. With Pioneer 6, this spacecraft team formed a network of solar weather stations monitoring the heliosphere, triangulating information back to Earth from the far side of the Sun, and increasing understanding of solar effects on Earth's magnetic field. (SSR 1965 105A; ARC Release 8881)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
Dr. C. Howard Robins, Jr. was named NASA Associate Administrator for Management, effective January 9. His primary responsibility was to help strengthen NASA's core organizational and infrastructural capabilities. Robins, a 30year NASA veteran, would replace Manuel Peralta, who left NASA to become president of the American National Standards Institute. (NASA Release 891, Jan 5/89; W Times, Jan 11/89)
A NASA AtlasCentaur vehicle carrying a Navy communications satellite was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. This was the last orbital launch of a launch vehicle by NASA, since responsibility for all future orbital launches was transferred to the private sector and the branches of the Defense Department. Since inception in 1958, NASA had launched over 400 untended orbital rockets. The AtlasCentaur carried a Navy Fleet Satellite Communications F8 (FLTSATCOM F8) relay station into a preliminary orbit on its way toward geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 89145, Sep 18/89; NASA Release, Sep 25/89; NASA: Atlas/Centaur68 FLTSATCOM F8 Launch Press Kit, Sep/89; AP, Sep 25/89; UPI, Sep 25/89; USA Today, Sep 25/89; NY Times, Sep 26/89; WSJ, Sep 26/89; LA Times, Sep 26/89; P Inq, Sep 26/89; B Sun, Sep 26/89; W Times, Sep 26/89)
The first attempt to launch a fully private funded rocket ended in failure when the 58foottall "Koopman Express" sounding rocket caught fire while still on the launch pad. The rocket was to have flown on a 15minute suborbital flight from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, during which it would have released a cloud of inert gas to test sensors on a military Delta Star satellite. The rocket was also scheduled to deploy an engineering model of a Parashield during reentry into the atmosphere. (NY Times, Oct 6/89; W Post, Oct 6/89; USA Today, Oct 6/89; W Times, Oct 6/89; B Sun, Oct 6/89)
A coalition of three antinuclear groups filed suit in the Washington, D.C. Federal District Court to stop the launch of the nuclearpowered Galileo space probe aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis. The three groups contended that NASA and the Department of Energy had illegally delayed release of health and safety risk assessments of a potential accident involving Galileo's plutoniumfueled radioisotope thermal generators. The groups filing suit were the Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, the Christic Institute, and the Foundation on Economic Trends. NASA and the Energy Department denied the charges, and the space agency continued to carry on with preparations for the planned launch of0*AtlantisGalileo on October 12. The suit was subsequently dismissed by the court during its preliminary hearing. (LA Times, Sep 28/89; NY Times, Sep 29/89; W Post, Sep 29/89; W Times, Sep 29/89; B Sun, Sep 29/89;UPI, Sep 29/89)
A team of astronomers reported that they had discovered evidence of "brown dwarfs," large celestial objects that are intermediate in size between planets and stars. The findings,' 0*presented at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, showed evidence of at least nine brown dwarfs orbiting stars in the constellation Taurus. The observed objects were believed to be from 5 to 20 times the size of Jupiter. Evidence of brown dwarfs was expected to help account for some of the "missing" dark matter believed to exist in the universe. (W Post, Jun 15/89; P Inq, Jun
Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin Jr., and Michael Collins participated in the first of several planned ceremonies at NASA facilities commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted lunar landing on July 20, 1969. Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins gathered at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, with a crowd of 6,000 NASA employees and their families to commemorate the launching of their Saturn V rocket from KSC on July 16, 1969. The ceremony included a playback of the final three minutes of the Apollo 11 countdown and statements by the former astronauts. Following the ceremony, the astronauts rode in a 20mile motorcade to Cocoa Beach, where they `"attended a luncheon in their honor. (UPI, Jul 16/89; USA Today, Jul (#17/89; B Sun, Jul 17/89)
NASA announced it had awarded Ford Aerospace a $500 million contract to modernize its Mission Control Center at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, and build a new control center for future Space Station operations. (NASA Release, Sep 7/89; Reuters, Sep 7/89; NY Times, Sep 7/89; W Post, Sep 7/89)
An unarmed Air Force Midgetman missile went off course and was destroyed shortly after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The missile began to tumble 70 seconds into the flight during its second stage burn, causing the range safety officer to transmit a selfdestruct command. The Midgetman, which was undergoing its first flight test, had been programmed to deliver a dummy warhead 4,600 miles over the Pacific Ocean to the Kwajalen Atoll test range. Despite the failure, the test was declared a partial success by the Air Force. (NY Times, May 12/89; WSJ, May 12/89; USA Today, May 12/89; W Times, May 12/89)
The Space Shuttle Discovery was successfully launched at night from Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on mission STS33. Discovery carried a classified Department of Defense payload believed to be a $300 million surveillance satellite. The satellite was deployed from the Shuttle's cargo bay on November 23, and was scheduled to boost itself into a geostationary orbit. Several experiments of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) technology were also expected to be performed. Crew members for STS33 were Air Force Colonel Frederick Gregory (Commander), Air Force Colonel John Blaha (Pilot), and Mission Specialists Navy Captain Manley L. Carter Jr., F. Story Musgrave, and Kathryn C. Thornton. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on November 27. (NASA Release 8975, Nov 15/89; SSR 1989 090 A; AP, Nov 23/89; UPI, Nov 23/89; NY Times, Nov 23/89; W Post, Nov 23/89; WSJ, Nov 23/89; W Times, Nov 23/89; P Inq, Nov 23/89)
In civil proceedings against Rockwell International Corporation in a Los Angeles Federal court, prosecutors recommended that a $5 million fine be levied against the company, after pleading guilty to overbilling the Government on a satellite navigation contract. Rockwell had entered a conditional guilty plea for overbilling the Air Force by nearly $450,000 on contracts for the $1.2 billion NAVSTAR satellite system. (UPI, Feb 21/89; LA Times, Feb 22/89)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was successfully launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS34 to0*deploy the $1.4 billion Galileo Jupiter space probe. The Atlantis launch had been delayed by a week because of problems with a computer, a main engine master control device, and, finally, rain. Shortly after reaching orbit, Atlantis released the Galileo probe and the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) from the cargo bay. The IUS subsequently fired Galileo on a trajectory toward Venus, in preparation for a gravity assist maneuver that would swing the spacecraft back toward Earth twice and onward to Jupiter. Galileo was scheduled to reach Jupiter in December 1995, whereupon it would begin orbiting the planet for 22 months of observations of the Jovian system. Approximately five months before reaching Jupiter, Galileo would release a 34inch unpowered descent module that would enter the Jovian upper atmosphere and descend several hundred miles before being destroyed by extreme atmospheric pressure. The AtlantisGalileo mission had sparked protests and a law suit by antinuclear groups concerned over the danger of possible radioactive contamination from the probe's radioisotope thermal generators in the event of a catastrophic accident. In anticipation of possible efforts to disrupt the launch, NASA increased security measures at KSC. In addition to launching Galileo, the STS34 crew would conduct observations of the Earth's ozone layer and perform several onboard medical, biological, and materials processing experiments. The crew included Navy Captain Donald E. Williams (Commander), Navy Commander Michael J. McCulley (Pilot), and Mission Specialists Shannon Lucid, Franklin Changaz, and Ellen S. Baker. The mission ended successfully on October 23 with Atlantis landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA MOR 829348901; NASA PFOR M9898934; NASA STS34 Press Kit, Oct/89; NASA Facts: STS34; Galileo/KSC Release 7989, Sep/89; SSR 1989 084 AD; UPI, Oct 19/89; AP, Oct 19/89; NY Times, Oct 19/89; W Post, Oct 19/89; USA Today, Oct 19/89; WSJ, Oct 19/89; P Inq, Oct 19/89; W Times, Oct 19/89; B Sun, Oct 19/89)
A team of astronomers from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) and Princeton University announced the discovery of the oldest and most distant object yet observed in the universe. The object was reported to be a quasar at a distance of 10 to 15 billion lightyears from Earth, which may have formed when the universe was only about a billion years old. The discovery challenged conventional theories on the timetable for the formation of galaxies and galacticsized bodies in the early universe. Previous observations had placed the age of most quasars at about 3 billion years after the Big Bang. The new observations were expected to produce major revisions in theories of how matter coalesced during the early universe. (NY Times, Nov 20/89; W Post, Nov 20/89; W Times, Nov 20/89; P Inq, Nov 20/89; B Sun, Nov 20/89)
NASA named 18 astronauts to fly on future Space Shuttle missions, including the first AfricanAmerican woman and the first member of the Coast Guard to fly aboard the Shuttle. Dr. Mae Jemison, a physician, would become the first African American woman to fly in space. She was scheduled for the June 17, 1991, Spacelab mission aboard Discovery. (AP, Sep 9/89; UPI, Sep 29/89; USA Today, Oct 4/89; W Times, Oct 2/89) During September: The Soviet news magazine Izvestia published an article confirming that the Soviet Union had established a secret program in the 1960s to beat the United States in landing astronauts on the Moon. The Izvestia article claimed that the Soviet Union had secretly conducted a crewassisted lunar landing program from 1961 to 1969 comparable to the Apollo program and had developed a boosterknown as the N1comparable to the United States Saturn V. The Soviet lunar program was eventually abandoned after three attempts to launch the N1 failed; the United States successfully landed astronauts on the Moon in 1969. (FBISSov89210, Nov 1/89; H Chron, Sep 17/89)
Astronomers at Cornell University announced the discovery of an apparent galaxy in the making, challenging conventional theory that galaxies formed only during the early history of the universe. The galaxy observed by Cornell astronomer Martha Haynes and Ricardo Giovanelli appeared to contain no fully developed stars and to consist of only protostellar material, mainly hydrogen. The observed galaxy, named UGC7394, was 65 million light years distant. (UPI, Aug 29/89; WSJ, Aug 29/89; W H&Times, Aug 29/89; B Sun, Aug 29/89; C Trib, Aug 29/89)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, on mission STS30, whose main objective was to deploy the $550 million Magellan Venus radar mapper. Magellan, the first United States interplanetary mission to' 0*be launched in 11 years, was deployed from the cargo bay of Atlantis 6 hours after launch and was subsequently propelled toward the Sun and Venus by a solid fuel inertial upper stage (IUS). Following the IUS firing, ground controllers confirmed that the spacecraft was operating normally and was on a proper course toward Venus. Upon arriving at Venus in August 1990, the 7,700pound Magellan would enter Venusian orbit for several months of extensive radar mapping of the planet's cloud shrouded surface. Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on May 8. (NASA MOR, C6008930, E1998930; NASA PFOR, M9898930; SSR 1989 033AB; UPI, May 5/89; NY Times, May 5/89;W Post, May 5/89; WSJ, May 5/89; P Inq, May 5/89; B Sun, May 5/89; W Times, May 5/89; USA Today, May
After five cancelled launch attempts, an Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR navigation satellite. The NAVSTAR was the second of a planned network of satellites known as the Global Positioning System, which would allow military units to determine their position anywhere on Earth within 50 feet. (SSR 1989 043D, 044A; W Times, Jun 12/89)
An Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, carrying0*the fourth NAVSTAR navigation satellite. The NAVSTAR would become part of an eventual 21satellite Global Positioning System (GPS) navigation network. (SSR 1989 085 AC; NY Times, Oct 22/89; W Times, Oct 23/89)
The Space Shuttle Discovery was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on mission STS29, the main objective to deploy the final Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS4). Discovery carried a crew of five on a 5day mission. Six hours into the mission, the 2.5 ton $100 million TDRS4 was successfully deployed into low Earth orbit where it subsequently boosted itself into a 22,300 mile geosynchronous orbit. Discovery also carried biological experiments that to conduct studies of the embryonic development of chickens and bone healing in rats in a microgravity environment. The STS28 crew would also photograph and film environmentally damaged areas throughout the world for later scientific analysis. Discovery's launch had been delayed a month because of cracks found in the main engine turbopumps. Replacement occurred on the launch pad. During the mission, a hydrogen tank supplying the Shuttle's fuel cells was temporarily shut down because of erratic pressure readings. The problem, which caused a temporary electricity shortage aboard the Shuttle, was resolved the following day, allowing Discovery to stay in orbit for five days as planned. Discovery successfully landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on March 19. (NASA MOR/Flight Operation Report, M9898829; SSR 1989 021A; AP, Mar 1319/89; UPI, Mar 1319/89; NY Times, Mar 1420/89; WSJ, Mar 1420/89; W Post, Mar 1420/89; W Times, Mar 1420/89; USA Today, Mar 1420/89; P Inq, Mar 1420/89; B Sun, Mar 1420/89)
An Air Force Titan 4 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, carrying a classified military satellite. This was the first launch of the Titan 4, a new generation of heavy lift launch vehicles dedicated mainly to Department of Defense missions. The $220 million Titan 4 was believed to be carrying a $180 million advanced early (#warning satellite. (SSR 1989 046AE; NY Times, Jun 15/89; WSJ, Jun 15/89; W Post, Jun 15/89; USA Today, Jun 15/89; C Trib, Jun 15/89; LA Times, Jun 15/89; W Times, Jun 15/89)
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
A group of U.S. and Canadian astronomers announced that they had discovered evidence of vigorous activity in a whitedwarf star previously thought to be a stellar "corpse." This new and unexpected behavior may offer astronomers new insight into how stars are born, evolve, and ultimately die. The whitedwarf star, catalogued as 0950+139, lies at the center of the faint nebula called EGB6 and is located about 1500 light years from Earth in the direction of the constellation Leo. The findings were presented at the 173rd meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Boston, Massachusetts. (NASA Release 893, Jan 11/89)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and the Ambassador of Japan to the United States H.E. Nobuo Matsunaga signed a Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the government of Japan on cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the Space Station Freedom. The agreement was signed at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. Under the agreement, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM) to the Freedom program. The JEM, to be permanently attached to the Space Station base, would consist of a pressurized laboratory module, at least two experiment0*logistics modules, and an exposed facility. (NASA Release 8932, Mar 14/89)
An Air Force Titan 34D launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, carrying a secret military payload into orbit. The 16story, $65 million Titan was believed to be carrying a pair of Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS) satellites. (SSR 1989 035AC; W Times, May 11/89; C Trib, May 11/89; B Sun, May 11/89; P Inq, May 11/89)
The Space Shuttle Columbia was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on mission STS28 to deploy a classified Department of Defense payload. This was the first launch of the Columbia orbiter in the three and a half years since the explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger. Various media sources reported that Columbia had deployed an advanced military reconnaissance satellite and performed tests of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) hardware. Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on Sunday, August 13. (SSR 1989 061A; NASA PFOR, 9898928; NASA MOR, E1998928; UPI, Aug 8/89; AP, Aug 8/89; NY Times, Aug 9/89; W Post, Aug 9/89; W Times, Aug 9/89; USA Today, Aug 9/89; LA Times, Aug 9/89; C Trib, Aug 9/89; P Inq, Aug 9/89; B Sun, Aug 9/89)
The Air Force successfully launched the first of its new Delta 2 launch vehicles, carrying a $65 million NAVSTAR satellite into a preliminary elliptical orbit. The NAVSTAR, the first operational satellite of the Global Positioning System (GPS), subsequently boosted itself into an 11,000 mile circular orbit. The 21satellite GPS network was expected to provide very precise positioning data for U.S. and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) troops and vehicles throughout the world. The satellites would also broadcast precise positioning data to civilian users. (SSR 1989 013A; UPI, Feb 14/89; W Post, Feb 15/89; NY Times, Feb 15/89; LA Times, Feb 15/89; W Times, Feb 15/89; USA Today, Feb 15/89; P Inq, Feb 15/89; W Times, Feb 17/89)
The Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia was accidentally sprayed with water when an automatic sprinkler system went off unexpectedly inside the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) Orbiter Processing Facility No. 2. KSC engineers examined the orbiter for damage and planned an investigation of the incident. (UPI, Sep 24/89; W Times, Sep 25/89; USA Today, Sep 25/89)
A NASA Delta launch vehicle was successfully launched on this date from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, carrying the $160 million Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite into a 570mile polar orbit. Three instruments aboard COBE would record the background radiation left over from the "Big Bang" in unprecedented detail, allowing refinement of theories on the formation of galaxies and galactic clusters in the early universe. The Delta was the last launch vehicle in NASA's inventory. Hereafter all future NASA untended launches would occur on commercial or military boosters. (NASA Release N8974; NASA Cosmic0*Background Explorer (COBE) Press Kit/Release 89172; SSR 1989 AD; AP, Nov 18/89; UPI, Nov 18/89; LA Times, Nov 18/89; P Inq, Nov 19/89; C Trib, Nov 19/89; CSM, Nov 20/89)
An Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR navigation satellite. The NAVSTAR would be the fifth in an eventual network of 21 military and commercial satellites that would comprise the Global Positioning System. (SSR 1989 097 AC; AP, Dec 11/89; NY Times, Dec 12/89; USA Today, Dec 12/89; W Times, Dec 12/89; C Trib, Dec 12/89)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that a NASA T38 jet trainer aircraft being flown by a Space Shuttle astronaut had experienced a near collision with a Pan American World Airways widebody jet about 30 miles West of Washington, DC. The pilots of the Airbus A310 jetliner reported the two planes had come within 500 feet of each other while on perpendicular flight paths. The T38 was flown by Navy Captain David M. Walker, Commander of the recently completed Space Shuttle mission STS28. The near collision occurred when Walker's aircraft strayed below its assigned flight elevation. (AP, May 17/89; UPI, May 17/89; NY Times, May 17/89; W Post, May 17/89; B Sun, May 17/89)
In a major test of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a Delta Star SDI test satellite was successfully launched aboard a Delta launch vehicle at 4:51 p.m. from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The threeton satellite would be used to test remote sensing equipment used to detect rocket launches and laser beam emissions from Earth in conditions that would simulate the initial stages of a nuclear conflict. The threeton satellite carried a laser radar, seven video imaging cameras, and an infrared imager. The Delta Star was expected to carry out tests throughout the next six to nine months. (SSR 1989 026A; NY Times Mar 25/89; W `"Post, Mar 25/89; C Trib, Mar 25/89)
The last Titan 34D launch vehicle in the Air Force's inventory was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force station in Florida, carrying a classified Department of Defense payload. This was the final launch of the Titan 3 series launch vehicles, which were being replaced by the more powerful Titan 4. (SSR 1989 069 AD; UPI, Sep 4/89; NY Times, Sep 5/89; W Post, Sep 5/89; USA Today, Sep 5/89; C Trib, Sep 5/89; LA Times, Sep 5/89; W Times, Sep 5/89)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Dale L. Compton to be Director of the NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, effective December 20. Compton, who succeeded William F. Ballhaus, had been Acting Director since Ballhaus resigned on July 15. (NASA Release 89182, Dec 11/89)
This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the first hypersonic flight of the X15 experimental rocket plane. North American Aviation pilot A. Scott Crossfield was at the controls for the first flight. The X15 research aircraft flew a total of 199 flights in what is widely regarded as one of the most successful aeronautical research programs ever conducted. (NASA Release 8982, May 30/89)
An Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle carrying a NAVSTAR satellite was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The 126foot Delta 2 placed the NAVSTAR navigation satellite in a preliminary orbit, from where it would boost itself into a 12,000mile circular orbit. The NAVSTAR was the third of an eventual network of 21 satellites that would comprise the Global Positioning System, a highly accurate navigation system for military and commercial users. (SSR 1989 064AC; AP, Aug 18/89; `"UPI, Aug 18/89; W Post, Aug 19/89; LA Times, Aug 19/89; W Times, Aug 21/89)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, selected Stanford Telecom for negotiations leading to a fiveyear, $30 million contract to provide systems engineering support for the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite and the Advanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin Marietta Corporation received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Force for modifications to space launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release C90aa)
For the first time, Soviet defense committee lawmakers visited the Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASA prepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classified satellite launch that, said sources, was to take reconnaissance photographs and intercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12day visit reflected a new openness in the Soviet Union, and the committee chairman, referring to the mission said, "We have no special secrets...I think you are wasting your money." (W Post, Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90)
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, issued a call for proposals for design of a Satellite Servicer System flight demonstrator to show the ability to maintain satellites in polar and high inclination orbits. The onorbit flight demonstration would exercise rendezvous and docking, as well as orbital replacement unit exchange and fluid transfer. (NASA Release 9012)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
The Office of Technology Assessment warned that Space debris could make space activity too risky in 20 to 30 years if the most traveled orbits continue to be littered. With the average collision velocity in low Earth orbit 6.2 miles per second, an object having 1/35th the weight of an aspirin tablet has the impact of a .30caliber bullet, they said. The Air Force tracks such debris to advise NASA before Shuttle missions, but no course change has ever been deemed necessary. (W Post, Oct 12/90; C Trib, Oct 14/90)
Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS35) was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro1 for a 10day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one xray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that would supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. The project originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, but subsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro1 crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The Xray telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro1 mission did not achieve all of its objectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lint in the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forced to aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135 of the slated 250 targets were observed. (NY Times, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90; W post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)
landing postponed for a day because of fog. The flight set a precedent both because of duration, 11 days, and because the aircraft was the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, a result of the captured cargo. The mission was without incident, save for a few minor problems involving a leaky dehumidifier, a smoke detector0*that went off unexplainably, a malfunction in one of the three Inertial Measurement Units (critical for reentry, but the Shuttle can land with only one functioning unit), and a small engine used by the automatic pilot for maintaining flight path that fired for no reason. The retrieved satellite remained in the Shuttle cargo bay and was scheduled to be flown to Kennedy Space Center in Florida atop a modified NASA jumbo jet later in the week. During reentry, two NASA experiments measured the aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics of the orbiter. One of the experiments, a Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing experiment, involved an infrared camera used to collect imagery from the left wing, an area that reached 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, a higher than usual temperature, on the STS28 flight. The second experiment involved the Shuttle Entry Air Data System, housed in Columbia's nose cap to gather "air data" to determine the orbiter's aerodynamic flight characteristics.(NY Times, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90; W Post, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90;C Trib, Jan 13/90;CSM, Jan 16/90; NASA Release 908)
Telescopes for NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft were delivered to the Goddard Space Flight Center for integration into a payload module scheduled for launch in August0*1991. The science payload was designed, built, and tested at the University of California, Berkeley, to focus on the study of an unexplored portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called the extreme ultraviolet, between the Xray and ultraviolet wavelengths. (NASA Release 9034)
Physicians at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, announced in November that they had instituted a new treatment, promethazine, for space motion sickness. Since NASA's return to flight in September 1988, the medication had helped decrease the malady. (NASA Release 90155)
Three SR71 Blackbird aircraft, reconnaissance planes being retired by the Air Force, were Scheduled to arrive in February at Edwards Air Force Base in California, for "flyable storage." NASA hoped to use the highspeed aircraft, capable of Mach 3 at 80,000 feet, for tests relating to the Space Plane later in the year. Daily News, Jan 30/90; NASA Release 9024)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS38, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite, probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would be assigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagon planned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the future. The satellite was deployed the following day. Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a continuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the 7mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the 3mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had not been used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixth time the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since the Challenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (NY Times, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; W Post, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA
The Air Force and NASA entered their final stage of a $250 million, tenyear experiment for the X29 program, scheduled to be completed in March 1991. The test plane was designed to be 30 percent unstable and was dependent upon a sophisticated flight control system to produce and maintain stability. Glenn Spacht of Grumman Corporation, developer of the X29 and producer of the F14, said, "When applied to the F14, the plane will get better handling qualities, survivability, maneuverability, and antispin characteristics....The F14 can certainly reap the benefits of the X29." (Def News, Jun 25/90)
Rockwell Space Operations was selected by NASA for a $814 million, 10year station operation support contract. The contract would provide support for mission, flight crew, and facility operations for the Space Station and other flight programs at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Mar 7/90)
NASA scientists reported to the American Astronomical Society preliminary information obtained from the Cosmic Background Explorer spacecraft, launched on November 18, 1989, aboard a Delta rocket. The data gleaned by the Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer, the Differential Microwave Radiometer, and the Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment0*supported the Big Bang theory, but at the same time minimized the belief that other releases of energy had subsequently occurred. Scientists reported that instruments aboard the craft performed with unprecedented precision. This precision was predicted to increase over the spacecraft's estimated two more years of data gathering. (NASA Release 905; P Inq, Jan 15/90)
The Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, awarded Rockwell International Corporation a fiveyear extension on the contract for systems integration. The $1.36 billion contract extensions were for flight and ground systems engineering maintenance and safety analysis, including configuration of the hardware required for each orbiter flight and Shuttle mission support from countdown to landing. (NASA Release C90A; C90B; WSJ, Jan 12/90)
The Air Force decided in September to convert the Space Launch Complex6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California for Space Shuttle liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets. The launch pad had been idle since the Challenger accident in 1986. (NY Times, Sep 30/90) Oct 1: The High Resolution Imager, an instrument for the study of cosmic Xrays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched last June, sent back its first light pictures to a ground station near Munich. The cooperative program between the United States, West Germany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited several international scientists. The pictures sent back represented a neutron star 3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova that occurred in this galaxy 320 years ago and 10,000 light years away, and a cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2156. (NASA Release 90133)
The projected cost for NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS) had soared from an estimated $12 billion to $30 billion dollars, Administration sources announced. It was the largest and most expensive project yet undertaken by NASA. President George Bush had asked the National Academy of Sciences to review the matter and recommend cost reductions. Lauded by environmental scientists and termed by former astronaut Sally Ride as a "mission to planet Earth," the plan called for putting platforms, launched by Titan 4 rockets from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, into polar orbit. Each platform would carry 10 sophisticated scientific instruments that could send 10 trillion bytes of data daily. The first EOS platform, said NASA, would not be in orbit until 1998. (LA Times, Jan 26/90)
NASA announced the selection of 84 proposals for Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Aiming to stimulate technological innovation from small business, the contracts were allowed to reach $500,000 over a twoyear period. (NASA Release 90152) '%0*November 27: The sixmember Hubble Optical Systems Board of Investigation, formed by NASA and headed by Dr. Lew Allen of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena, California, released its final report, cumulating a 5month study. The report stated that both NASA and the PerkinElmer Corporation, then known as Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, were responsible for the flawed mirror that prevented the Hubble Space Telescope from distinguishing very faint objects. Lower management at the Corporation discounted any information that conflicted with certified procedures for testing the mirror with newly designed equipment. Upper management at PerkinElmer and at NASA, the report went on, were left unaware of potential problems the mirror might have had in 1981. Dr. Allen and Leonard Fisk, NASA's Chief Scientist, agreed that NASA management operated under different procedures then and would have caught the problem in 1990. (NY Times, Nov 28/90; W Post, Nov 28/90) During November: NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundation held their first "Technology 2000" conference in Washington, D.C., to encourage marketing of space technology. Among the innovations showcased were an implant device for releasing insulin in programmed doses; a light sensing instrument called the "Video Harp"; a system to allow the hearing impaired to locate loud noises such as sirens; a digital audio signal processing system for fuller, more realistic sound called the "Convolvotron"; the model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System; and the Intelligent Physics Tutor with stepbystep instructions to a student. Hightech gear only a few years away, said USA Today, included a spaceage washer and dryer, refrigerator, and gloves. USA Today, Nov 29/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS41, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida after a 5month dry spell; the fleet was grounded during much of this period because of hydrogen'!0*leaks. Ulysses, the craft's 814pound nuclear powered payload, was released later that afternoon, and a threestage solidfuel rocket began the craft on its long trip to Jupiter. Ulysses was to sling shot Jupiter in order to achieve polar orbit about 120 million miles from the Sun in May 1994. In order to escape an Earth orbit, the $750 million joint mission between NASA and the European Space Agency reached 34,130 mph, the greatest velocity yet required by an interplanetary probe for the task. The scientific mission also included a controlled fire to see how flames behave in weightlessness and release of the craft's 50foot robotic arm, which had a special material attached to estimate effects of deterioration on the Intelsat satellite, launched earlier this year into a low and useless orbit. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 10, ending a fourday, practically flawless mission. (W Post, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90; NY Times, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Ross as Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. John W. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held several managerial positions in the private sector. Lawerence Ross, who joined NASA in 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as Deputy Director of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has been given several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970. After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near San Francisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director of LeRc. Townsend began government service in 1947 and held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 9049; 9050; 9051; 9055)
NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 9077) 0*June 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principal means of reaching space. This was the second successful launch of the rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (W Post, Jun 9/90; NY Times, Jun 9/90)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, Exploration and Technology, announced an organizational change at the AmesDryden Flight Research Center, Mountain View, California, designed to reinforce and strengthen national flight research capabilities at the AmesDryden Flight Research Facility (DFRF), Edwards, California. Kenneth J. Szalai was chosen as the Ames Deputy Director, effective December 3, 1990. He was, however, located at Dryden and directed research and operations. Szalai previously served as Chief of the Research Engineering Division at Dryden. (NASA Release 90149)
The Air Force launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, which successfully carried a NAVSTAR satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was the eighth in a planned series of 21 that promised to give military units their locations to within 50 feet. (W Post, Aug 3/90)
A Delta 2 rocket carried a $654 million navigation satellite, NAVSTAR, into orbit from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. This was the eighth launch of the Air Force's Delta 2 rocket, designed for heavier payloads than the original Delta. It was number 7 of a planned 21 satellite constellations that were to help ground units, ships, and aircraft locate their precise positions. (UPI, Mar 26/90)
A joint NASA/U.S. Geological Survey team of American scientists planned to work with a Soviet Science team to study volcanoes along Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula, part of the Pacific's "Ring of Fire." The study would mark the first time Western scientists had been allowed in the region. (NASA Release
NASA announced the selection of Margaret G. Finarelli as Acting Associate Administrator for External Relations, and the names of microgravity mission payload specialist candidates. Finarelli, who had been Deputy Associate Administrator since December 1988, would temporarily replace Kenneth S. Pedersen, who had taken a oneyear teaching assignment with Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. Candidates for payload specialists for the March 1992 STS53 Space Shuttle mission were Lawrence J. DeLucas, Joseph Prahl, Albert Sacco, and Eugene H. Trinh. (NASA Release 90107; 90108)
NASA tested two of its experimental aircraft at the AmesDryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. One of the aircraft, an F16XL, used an experimental wing surface for improving airflow at supersonic speeds. The second aircraft, an X29, demonstrated an increase for highangleofattack, the angle of an aircraft relative to its actual flight path. (NASA Release 9052; 9059)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, awarded Jackson and Tull of Washington, D.C. a $19 million contract to support the Applied Engineering Division in automation and robotics and thermal and data systems. The firm was selected under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act; the potential for the contract over a fiveyear period was $63 million. (NASA Release C90q)
Jerry Grey, Director of Science and Technology Policy for the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, recommended that weapons designed for the Strategic Defense Initiative be developed to locate and destroy any asteroids that threaten Earth, views endorsed by Vice President Dan Quayle. Grey noted that 1,500 asteroids cross the Earth's orbit every year, that the location of only 100 of them is known, and that the impact of even a relatively small asteroid could have a devastating effect. (P Inq, May 15/90; C Trib, May 17/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $65 million NAVSTAR Global Positioning System satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was 10th in a series of 21 that the United States hoped to have `"in orbit by 1992. (W Post, Nov 27/90; USA Today, Nov 27/90)
NASA successfully tested its selfrepairing flight control system on an F15 aircraft at AmesDryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The system detected damaged flight control components, such as ailerons, rudders, and elevators, and adjusted undamaged flight surfaces to compensate so the pilot could maintain good aircraft response. (NASA Release 9043)
After five delays because of the Shuttle Commander's' 0*head cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather, Atlantis (STS36) lifted off under dark skies from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to deliver a 37,300pound classified military satellite into orbit. The postponements tacked on an additional $2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Truly reiterated NASA's policy that meeting launch schedules was secondary to safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its $500 million military payload the following day at an orbit inclined 62 degrees north of the equator, allowing it to fly over every major populated and industrialized center in the Soviet Union. An even higher inclination orbit would have been preferred. A polar orbit was considered ideal for a recon naissance satellite, but the Shuttle base at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, from where such an orbit could have been safely achieved, was not operational; the weight of the larger satellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle. Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California on March 4. No problems were reported during the brief 41/2 day mission, the Space Shuttle's 34th mission and the 6th mission dedicated solely to the military.W Post, Mar 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 5/90; Feb 28/90; NY Times, March 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; P Inq, Mar 5/90))
A Titan 4 rocket booster exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California during tests, killing one worker and injuring nine others. The Air Force was further developing the rocket, which experts called problem plagued, hoping to replace the Space Shuttle for launching of heavy payloads. (C Trib, Sep 8/90; LA Times, Sep 9/90)
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)
NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta II rocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craft was to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth's night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release
The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board of Investigation created by NASA met for the first time in Washington, D.C., to hear presentations from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, makers of the precision mirrors for the telescope. Members of the Board included Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and Gary Tesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion of the meeting, Dr. Allen said, "The board now has a good base of information from which to0*proceed with its investigation." (NASA Anno)
In a flight test that concluded in August, NASA, the Air Force, and Boeing Commercial Airline Group announced betterthanexpected findings taken from the results of modifying a 22foot section of a Boeing 757 wing. The design reduced drag in what could equate to 10 percent if the entire span of both wings had been modified. A 1percent reduction would have amounted to a $100 million annual savings in fuel costs for the U.S. airline industry. (NASA Release 90115)
NASA reported on the completed computerized medical reference system, a project engendered by computer and medical experts at the University of Florida and the Kennedy Space Center in Florida in 1979 and known as the Clinical Practice Library of Medicine (CPLM). The system contains nearly all of the text and graphics of seven commonly used medical reference books that are considered essential for practicing medicine. Being lightweight as well as offering high speed access to references, the CPLM has great potential for both space travel and Earth uses alike. (NASA Release: 9030a)
The Defense Department lifted military secrecy from Shuttle missions, not because of decreased Soviet threat or the nature of the payload but because of the cost of security. The move was expected to save the government $80 million. Security would be applied more selectively because the Soviet Union and the American public were considered to be familiar with the nature of most space flights to date. Discovery would carry a payload known as Cirris, for Cryogenic Infrared Radiation Instrumentation for Shuttle, designed to determine the feasibility of the space-based detection of enemy aircraft and missiles. (NY Times, Apr 22/91; P Inq, Apr 23/91)
UPI reported that ground had been broken for the $70 million Space Center Houston being built just outside Johnson Space Center. The center is to be an "experience center" providing visitors with a sense of daily Space Station life. (UPI, May 28/91)
The Baltimore Sun quoted Anne Thompson, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center with reference to the interconnectedness of the atmosphere's mounting problems: global warming, ozone depletion, and smog. As examples she pointed out that some hydroxyl-enhancing gases contributed to acid rain; others contributed to the greenhouse effect, while at the same time, hydroxyl played a vital role in stemming depletion of the Earth's ozone layer. (B Sun, Nov 9/91)
According to Florida Today, the Atlantis astronauts were scheduled to arrive at Kennedy Space Center in a few days, to begin preparations and a practice countdown for the Space Shuttle flight. (Fla Today, Oct 28/91; UPI, Oct 31/91)
Forrest McCartney, director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, said NASA might have to close one of its two Shuttle launch pads to save money. (P Inq, Oct 22/91)
An article in Florida Today referred to former NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's proposal that some 100 top Shuttle program managers around the country be moved to Kennedy Space Center under a consolidation plan NASA was considering. The recommendations were to be discussed at a December 9-10 meeting with NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (Fla Today, Nov 15/91)
A proposal that $211 million be spent on the chance that gravity waves could be exploited to fathom black holes and other cosmic enigmas divided scientists and faced Congress with a quandary. Involved was possible Federal funding of two proposed gravity wave observatories, a joint project of the California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. American supporters of the project, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), admitted there was no guarantee of success but believed its scientific potential was gigantic if it succeeded. (NY Times, Apr 30/91)
Final approval was given for the construction of a new visitors' center at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The Manned Space Flight Education Foundation helped raise funds for the $60 million structure. (AP, Apr 12/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the six moons of Neptune discovered by Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989 were given names by the International Astronomical Union's Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams. In addition, Saturn's newest moon, Pan, was discovered by Mark Showalter, a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (P Inq, Sep 28/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
NASA announced the selection of PacificCorp Capital, Inc., Reston, Virginia, for a contract for Institutional Automatic Data Processing (IADP). IADP was to support the Johnson Space Center, Houston, and the White Sands Test Facility, New Mexico. (NASA Release C91-p)
Cort Durocher, executive director of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Washington and a former combat pilot and space engineer, wrote in the Houston Chronicle that while working to minimize risks, space exploration involves occasional failures and possible loss of life. (H Chron, Mar 25/91)
The media reported the Air Force announcement that the second attempted launch of an Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments was postponed for at least one month because of a technical problem. (AP, Sep 2/91; NY Times, Sep 3/91; W Post, Sep 3/91; W Times, Sep 3/91; P Inq, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 3/91; C Trin, Sep 3/91; LA Times, Sep 3/91)
Florida Today described the opening on September 3 at the Kennedy Space Center of a third garage for NASA's four-Orbiter Space Shuttle fleet. The hangar was outfitted with equipment intended for the Air Force's mothballed Shuttle launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, saving NASA about $40 million. (Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
The media reported that the Air Force had launched an unmanned Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral July 3. The rocket contained a $65 million satellite that joined 10 advanced Global Positioning System spacecraft already circling the globe in order to assist military forces on the ground, at sea, and in the air to determine their location. (UPI, Jul 4/91; W Times, Jul 5/91)
An article citing Technology Review, referred to the system developed by NASA's Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resources Information Services to fight fires by enabling firefighters to "see" through the fire. (San Francisco Examiner, Aug 14/91)
NASA announced its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would participate in two experiments to study the July 11 solar eclipse from the ground and from space. A new cryogenic instrument attached to NASA' Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was to test a theory about the sun's atomic processes in its infrared regions. Also, an x-ray telescope in a sounding rocket, to be launched from White Sands, New Mexico, was to study the solar corona. (NASA Release 91-108)
The Antelope Valley Daily News reported that NASA might be flying one of the Advanced Tactical Fighters, namely the F-23 prototype, about which it was negotiating with Northrop Corporation. The aircraft would be used for aeronautics research at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Jul 7/91)
Per Gloersen, a senior scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was quoted by the media as reporting in the British publication Nature findings concerning the shrinking of the polar ice cover. Global warming might be the cause, but Gloersen said 30 years of records would be needed for a definite conclusion. (UPI, Jul 3/91; B Sun, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; W Post, Jul 8/91)
A $40 million communications satellite was launched by a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The satellite was owned by GTE Spacenet Corporation of McLean, Virginia. The satellite was scheduled to take over the work of the present Westar spacecraft in June and increase GTE's transponder capacity for relaying information. (AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; CSM, Apr 15/91)
Stormy weather prevented Space Shuttle Atlantis from landing at Kennedy Space Center so it landed instead at MacDill Air Force Base; the flight would resume when the weather cleared. (AP, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had made a supplemental agreement to the contract with McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California. The modification included the changes made in Space Station Freedom Program review activities. (NASA Release 91-124)
Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported to the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia that the High Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced instrument on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made the best spectrograms ever obtained of Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to 100 times larger than the sun, is a massive star in a galaxy 170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is evolving toward a supernova state in the next few million years, is shedding its hot gases at a great rate in a "stellar wind" that strips the star of an amount of gas equal in mass to the sun every 100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed that the activity of pulsars inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was preventing the collapse of matter into a black hole and in some cases creating "born-again" pulsars in binary pairs form. (NASA Release 91-8; NY Times, Jan 17/91; B Sun, Jan 17/91; USA Today, Jan 17/91; P Inq, Jan 17/91; W Post, Jan 17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA Times, Jan 17/91; W Times, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the ceremony that would take place on April 25 on the occasion of the rolling out of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour. The ceremony was scheduled for Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, where the orbiter was assembled by Rockwell International Corporation's Space System Division. Truly praised the efforts of all those in NASA and industry who had cooperated on the program. Part of the ceremony would involve the presentation to NASA by Robert Duce, Dean of the University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography, of Endeavour's first "payload," a sternpost remnant recovered from the orbiter's namesake, the first ship commanded by British explorer Captain James Cook in 1768-71. During the ceremony Truly announced the creation of the NASA Endeavour Teacher Fellowship Program  with the gifts donated to NASA by the public for the replacement orbiter. The program would award scholarships to American undergraduates studying to be teachers. (NASA Release 91-62; UPI, Apr 24/91; NASA Release 91-64)
NASA announced its award of a $191 million, five-year contract to Krug Life Sciences, Houston, for medical operations and research support services. The work, covering the period March 1, 1991 through February 29, 1996, was to be done at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-f)
An editorial raised the fairness issue with regard to NASA's anchor tenancy contracts to help the commercial space business. To date Spacehab, American Mobile Satellite Corporation, and Orbital Sciences Corporation have such contracts. The editorial advocated that other agencies, such as the Department of Justice in the case of mobile services and environmental and ocean agencies in the case of fish research, should reimburse NASA for these costs. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
A number of NASA scientists participated in the International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids held in San Juan Capistrano, California, and jointly sponsored by NASA and The Planetary Society. At congressional request, a NASA committee headed by David Morrison, space science chief at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, was to recommend how to improve the search for asteroids. Another committee was to advise how best to divert threatening asteroids. At the end of the conference July 3, a statement advocated construction of several sophisticated new telescopes to find all significant asteroids and learn if any were on a collision course with Earth. (AP, Jul 1/91; AP, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; P Inq, Jul 6/91; Oakland Tribune, Jul 8/91)
NASA announced that David Reasoner, Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would chair the May 28 meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. At the session, results of the CRRES artificial Earth auroras experiment would be discussed. (NASA Release 91-77)
NASA officials announced that its X-29 experimental aircraft flew five times on January 25, setting a new record for daily flights from the Ames-Dryden test center. The second of two X-29s built by NASA, it was conducting high angle of attack test studies and military utility in a joint project with the Air Force. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 14/91)
Stanley G. Rosen, retired director of long-range planning for the US Air Force Space Division in El Segundo, California, and vice president for public policy of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said the Persian Gulf War demonstrated the need for radar satellites. Such satellites could penetrate clouds and battlefield smoke as well as monitoring all troop movements and could possibly detect Scud missile launchers. (LA Times, Feb 18/91)
According to Aviation Week and Space Technology, quoting the Earth Observing System (EOS) Engineering Review Panel, NASA's plans for EOS satellites A and B "should be completely reconfigured." The panel also stated that the EOS Data and Information System was incorrectly configured and lacked central control of data archiving and distribution. NASA released the report on September 23. The same issue of the magazine reported that NASA was discussing with Martin Marietta reintroducing the Titan 3 booster to launch the EOS spacecraft into polar orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, in the late 1990s. (AvWk, Sep 16/91; NASA Editor's Note N91-64)
Robert C. Cowen, a science writer for the Christian Science Monitor, wrote of a recent article in the journal Science by Compton J. Tucker and Wilbur W. Newcomb of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Technical University in Lubbock. They used American polar-orbiting weather satellites to show the shifting sands of the Sahara Desert. (B Sun, Aug 30/91)
Lewis Schiff, program coordinator for NASA's High Alpha Technology Program, a cooperative research program at NASA's Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers, announced that tests were underway on an F/A-18 fighter aircraft in the world's largest wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California. (NASA Release 91-92; LA Times, Jun 24/91)
The media discussed the forthcoming launch of Atlantis and the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) it will set in orbit. Gamma rays have the highest of all forms of radiation and are born deep inside atomic nuclei. GRO was to canvass the entire sky over a two-year period, scanning the whole sky during the first year and concentrating on the most intriguing objects the second year. GRO was to be controlled by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists from Germany's Max Planck Institute, which supplied GRO's imaging telescope, were to assist. GRO's Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer Experiment was to be the main instrument for examining the material enveloping supernovas to look for gamma rays. University of Washington astronomer George Lake believed GRO would find in the dark matter, strange particles called "wimps" (weakly interacting massive particles) in a Milky Way object called Geminga. The Soviet spacecraft Granat, carrying a French gamma-ray detector, found an object that accretes surrounding matter, generating antimatter that in turn creates gamma rays. (P Inq, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; UPI, Apr 1/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; UPI, Apr 2/91; CSM, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; USA Today, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; AP, Apr 3/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; P Inq, Apr 5/91)
Florida Today reported that Forrest McCartney, who had headed Kennedy Space Center since 1986 would be retiring in about a year. Subsequently, the media reported that McCartney had been asked to step aside early by top NASA managers. (Fla Today, Oct 23/91; UPI, Oct 25/91; AP, Oct 26/91; W Times, Oct 27/91; O Sen Star, Oct 30/91)
NASA announced that the German Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) began a new phase of operation on February 8. It started pointed observations of x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high energy phenomena. The US ROSAT Science Data Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, will process and distribute ROSAT pointed data and provide facilities for the scientific analysis of the data. Britain is also cooperating in this venture, which involved the original ROSAT launching from Cape Canaveral, Florida on June 1, 1990 on a Delta expendable launch vehicle. (NASA Release 91-23)
The oldest B-52 bomber, which serves as a test-bed aircraft for the NASA Ames-Dryden facility at Edwards Air Force Base, and was built in 1952, may be facing retirement. Difficulties in obtaining spare parts were a major consideration according to Jack Levine, director of NASA's Flight Projects Division. NASA would like to substitute a newer B-52, such as the G model delivered in the early 1960s, for which spare parts are readily available. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 24/91)
Eugene Kranz, Director of the Mission Operations Directorate (MOD) at Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the establishment of a Space Station Mission Operation Project Office within MOD. The new office, headed by Charles R. Lewis, was to have responsibility for the development and implementation of Space Station Freedom flight operations. (NASA Release 91-35)
NASA stated that Endeavour would not be convoyed through Lancaster as previous Shuttles were, but instead would fly via a 747 jet to Houston's Johnson Space Center. There a dedication ceremony would be held before Endeavour was flown to Florida to prepare for its mission. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 28/91)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Robert L. Crippen as the new Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, effective January 1, 1992. Crippen is to replace Forrest S. McCartney. (NASA Release 91-180; AP, Oct 31/91; UPI, Oct 31/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91)
NASA announced that based on satellite observations of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, researchers from NASA and Geo Eco Arc Research in La Canada, California, had located a "nearly perfect" semicircular ring of sink holes forming a crater more than 125 miles in diameter. The scientists believed that this evidence of an impact crater formed by a comet or asteroid might have caused the extinction of dinosaurs and other species about 65 million years ago. The findings were being published in Nature magazine. (NASA Release 91-71; UPI, May 9/91: LA Times, May 10/91; San Francisco Examiner, May 10/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, May 11/91; LA Times, May 27/91; W Times, May 31/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center announced the award to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, of a modification to the Space Station Freedom Schedule A contract. Schedule A provided hardware components for the Space Station and the modification will encompass the Integration, Test, and Verification Environment and Ada Compiler. (NASA Release C91-pp)
Lieutenant General Donald Cromer, commander of the Air Force Systems Command Space Systems Division, told a Space Expo '91 audience that the next generation of rockets would lift payloads into near-Earth orbit for $300 a pound instead of the $3,600 per pound it now costs a Titan 4 launch vehicle. Cromer worked with NASA to develop an advanced launch system (ALS). The goal was to develop engines ready for testing in 1995-96 with a first flight by 1999-2000. (AP, Mar 26/91)
The British journal Nature carried an article by Rodney A. Viereck and Edmond Murad of Phillips Laboratory, a space research center at Hanscom Air Force Base, Bedford, Massachusetts. Their findings indicated that the probable reason for the eerie orange glow of the Shuttles was caused by oxygen in the upper atmosphere striking nitric oxide on the Shuttle's skin, forming excited nitrogen dioxide, which radiates light when it moves off the surface. (NY Times, Nov 12/91; Xinhua, Nov 12/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax, Virginia, made a reputation for fast, frugal flights into space that won it a number of contracts with NASA and the Air Force. It developed the Pegasus rocket, which was launched from under the wing of a B-52 in 1990. Since then it has developed various other rockets designed to boost Shuttle payloads. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
NASA announced that on June 29 its 114th Scout launch vehicle placed an Air Force Radiation Experiment into a 450 nautical mile polar orbit. The launch occurred from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, and was delayed one day by bad weather. (NASA Release 91-102)
The Pentagon was secretly developing a nuclear-powered rocket for boosting heavy military payloads into space as part of the Strategic Defense Initiative, known as "star wars." The program was disclosed by the Federation of American Scientists and was confirmed by government documents obtained by the New York Times. NASA reportedly was quietly evaluating the program. The Federation opposed the program because of the risk of radiation release. (B Sun, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; WSJ, Apr 3/91; W Times, Apr 4/91)
Findings presented at the American Astronomical Society's Division of Planetary Sciences conference suggested that Mercury had an ice cap on its north pole, even though it was the planet nearest the sun. The findings surprised the California Institute of Technology scientists who discovered them and were based on August experiments, the first radar photographs of an entire hemisphere of Mercury. The brightest reflection on the planet's north pole indicated a highly reflective substance such as ice over an area of an estimated 150 square miles. (AP, Nov 6/91; B Sun, Nov 7/91; P Inq, Nov 8/91; LA Times, Nov 11/91)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
Scuba divers exercising on an underwater treadmill at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, are helping gather data to be used in NASA's spacesuit design. (NASA Release 91-11)
An experimental rocket motor being tested for the Air Force Titan 4 rocket exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California. No one was injured in the explosion. The Titan 4, the largest unmanned rocket in the US fleet, was scheduled to replace NASA's manned Shuttle in flying photo reconnaissance spy satellites and other heavy military payloads. (UPI, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
AP quoted Guy Brasseur, director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, as stating that his research indicated the eruption of Mount Pinatubo could lead to reduced levels of protective ozone over North America and Europe in the winter of 1991-92 and the summer of 1992, possibly increasing the risk of skin cancer. Richard Stolarski, ozone researcher at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said the projections were plausible but based on ozone depletion from El Chichon, a Mexican volcano that erupted in 1982, the thought there would be less ozone depletion than predicted. (LA Times, Jul 20/91; P Inq, Jul 20/91)
The wire services commemorated astronaut Alan B. Shepard's flight 30 years ago on May 5 as the first American in space. (AP, May 4/91; UPI, May 4/91)
Space Shuttle Columbia, according to AP, began its trip from an assembly building at Kennedy Space Center to the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, a four-mile journey. (AP, May 2/91)
According to AP, antennas on six major spacecraft had malfunctioned during the preceding 17 months, threatening the crucial flow of information from missions. Accordingly engineers conducted extra reviews of antennas on Atlantis. Henry Hoffman, guidance and control chief at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said part of the problem was that antennas were increasingly large and complex, requiring folding for launch and problems arose when they were extended or unfolded. (AP, Aug 4/91)
NASA announced its closing for security reasons of the public viewing site for watching Space Shuttle landings at Edwards Air Force Base until the end of the Persian Gulf War. (Daily News, Feb 22/91)
NASA announced that its Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resource Information Services, Inc., both of Mountain View, California, would jointly develop a system to allow firefighters to merge elevation and vegetation data with live pictures of forest fires. This would enable firefighters quickly to "see" through a smoky forest fire and plan their strategy. The three-year, $600,000 project called for NASA to expand existing remote sensing technology and for Terra-Mar to develop portable computer work stations and advanced software. (NASA Release 91-56)
Encore Computer Corporation filed an agency protest of a $191 million award by NASA Johnson Space Center to IBM Corporation for a mainframe requirements contract. NASA officials were to meet with Encore representatives over the disagreement, which involved pricing information submitted. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 10/91)
NASA announced that the Antarctic ozone levels had reached the lowest values ever observed on October 6 (110, plus or minus 6), according to preliminary data from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-168; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
NASA announced its launching of the NOAA-D environmental satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The satellite was to collect meteorological and environmental data and ultimately would replace NOAA-10, which was nearing the end of its life. (NASA Release N91-36; W Times, May 15/91; USA Today, May 15/91)
Gerald Fishman, a NASA astrophysicist at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced at a conference of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle that the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) carried on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory was detecting gamma-ray bursts with greater sensitivity than previously. (NASA Release 91-81; UPI, May 28/91)
NASA announced the opening of the new Biocomputation Center at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The center, under Muriel Ross, had the task of studying the neural network to understand how nerves are organized and function. (NASA Release 91-129)
Daniel DeVito, manager of the Central Data Handling Facility (CDHF) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, commented on the way the use of CDHF in the forthcoming NASA Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite mission might lead to similar systems on larger NASA projects. CDHF was a new concept that both the International Solar Terrestrial Physics project and the Earth Observing System mission were looking at to handle data more efficiently and distribute data to scientists through a multiple network. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
According to the Washington Post, as part of U.S.-Soviet discussions leading to a summit, was the possible exchange of American astronauts flying on Mir and Soviet cosmonauts being launched on a U.S. Space Shuttle. (W Post, Jun 29/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that Advanced Computer Systems, Inc. of Fairfax, Virginia, would provide administrative automated data processing services for GSFC's Information Management Division. The contract would take effect April 1, 1991, and would consist of a one-year basic period and four one-year priced options for a total of $58.8 million. (NASA Release C91-d)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, mounted atop NASA's Boeing 747 Shuttle carrier, began its two-day flight back to Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (AP, Dec 7/91; W Times, Dec 8/91)
Lowell Hawkinson, chairman of the Gensym Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts, which created the G2 system, announced that Biosphere II, would be initiated in March. Biosphere II is an environment controlled by the advanced computer program G2 and designed for eight scientists to seal themselves inside for two years. NASA had been using G2 on its Shuttle flights to control certain functions since October 1989. According to Tony Heindel, a light controller at Mission Control at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, G2 monitors 16,000 data points per second, gathering such information as temperature, voltages, availability of jet thrusters, and condition of on-board computers and instruments. (NY Times, Feb 10/91)
NASA postponed the landing of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of high winds at Edwards Air Force Base in California and bad weather at the alternate landing site of Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (P Inq, Apr 11/91; B Sun, Apr 11/91; W Post, Apr 11/91; W Times, Apr 11/91; NY Times, Apr 11/91; USA Today, Apr 11/91; AP, Apr 11/91; UPI, Apr 11/91)
According to AP, the Shuttle Columbia left California on a piggyback jet ride to its home at Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (AP, Jun 19/91)
NASA announced the naming of astronaut Colonel Guy S. Gardner as Commandant of the USAF Test Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, California. He was to leave the astronaut corps in June 1991 to assume his new post, which is part of the Air Force Systems Command. (NASA Release 91-52)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center was testing a beta version of Com's newest OSI routing software. The software was comparable to that known as Open Shortest Path First, which allows intermediate systems to talk to each other and figure out the best way to send information on the network from point A to point B. (Government Computer News, Apr 1/91)
NASA gave an update about the launching of Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket being launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Because of bad weather, the launch was postponed to June 9. (NASA Joust 1 Update, Jun 7/91)
At a news conference at Goddard Space Flight Center, researchers from NASA and from the Soviet Central Aerological Observatory near Moscow announced the success of the first U.S.-Soviet space effort in 16 years. The engineer's model of the first Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS--U.S. technology-transfer laws prohibited the launch of a state-of-the-art TOMS aboard a Soviet satellite) was launched aboard a Soviet satellite August 15, and was sending back "high-quality data", according to Soviet deputy director Vyacheslav Khattatov. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; NY Times, Nov 23/91)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle, research physicist Michael S. Briggs reported finding a second huge source of gamma rays in the Milky Way. The Soviet satellite Granat and a gamma detector aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory were to be used to observe the new source. (LA Times, May 30/91)
The Air Force Eastern Space and Missile Center became the 45th Space Wing on November 12. The East Coast launch organization was responsible for facilities at Patrick, Cape Canaveral, Antigua, and Ascension. (Fla Today, Nov 13/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA researchers produced various vegetables in their imitation space garden, free from soil or sun, at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The experiment, designed to prepare for Space Station existence, could not, however, reproduce weightlessness. (LA Times, Aug 18/91)
Space Shuttle Endeavour arrived at Kennedy Space Center. Considerable work remained to be done on the Shuttle, including the installation of the three main engines. (AP, May 7/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the selection of TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California, for one Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer/Earth Probe Spacecraft (TOMS/EP). The contract was to provide for the design, development, fabrication, assembly, test, integration, launch, and post-launch support of the aircraft. (NASA Release C91-t)
UPI reported that new Space Shuttle Endeavour was delayed an additional day in its trip from the factory in California to Kennedy Space Center in Florida because of stormy weather. (UPI, May 6/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced its selection of Fairchild Space, Germantown, Maryland, for a contract to provide engineering support services for the Space Technology Division. (NASA Release C91-w)
NASA named Margaret G. Finarelli as Associate Administrator for External Relations and John D. Schumacher as Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations. Finarelli, who has served in a number of U.S. government agencies, joined NASA in 1981 as Chief of the International Planning and Programs Office. Schumacher came to NASA in 1989 from a law practice in New York City. (NASA Release 91-3)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
The media reported a study contained in the British journal Nature, written by Brian Toon, senior researcher at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, California, Christopher P. McKay, who also worked at Ames, and James F. Kasting, associate professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State University. The authors concluded it would be relatively easy to alter Mars' atmosphere to make it suitable for plants. Making the planet fit for people, however, would take about 100,000 years. (P Inq, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; C Trin, Aug 8/91; LA Times, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91)
General Thomas S. Moorman, Jr., commander of Air Force Space Command at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado, said orbiting satellites were integral to mid-air and ground operations in the Persian Gulf War. He spoke at a conference at Tufts University on "The United States Air Force: Aerospace Challenges and Missions in the 1990s." (CSM, Apr 12/91)
NASA announced it was scheduled to launch a $3 million U.S. Air Force Radiation Experiment (REX) Scout rocket June 28 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The REX was designed to test sophisticated communications in a high-radiation environment. (NASA Release 91-93)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) sponsored a workshop of scientists, environmentalists, regulators, and aerospace industry representatives the summer of 1991. As a result, a report was issued on October 17, concluding that rockets blasting into space generate pollutants that deplete stratospheric ozone, increase acid rain, contribute to global warming, and reduce air quality. Jerry Grey, science and technology policy director for the AIAA, said all nations that launch rocket-powered vehicles should contribute to an international effort to reduce the problems. The United States used more solid rockets than any other nation. For example, NASA estimated that each Space Shuttle flight deposited about 75 tons of chlorine into the ozone layer. Subsequently, Reuters interviewed Steve Newmann, chief environmental engineer in NASA's Office of Space Flight. He admitted NASA played a minor role in depleting the ozone layer it was studying but said NASA was working to make its next generation of space vehicles more environmentally friendly. (NY Times, Oct 18/91; B Sun, Oct 28/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
An article critical of NASA for emphasizing space at the expense of the domestic aviation industry appeared in the Los Angeles Times. An example cited was Boeing's need to use a wind tunnel research facility operated by the Royal Aerospace Establishment in Britain to test its new top-secret 777 passenger jet because NASA had shut its decrepit wind tunnel in Sunnyvale, south of San Francisco. The aeronautics community reportedly felt neglected because only 6 percent of NASA's budget was allocated to aeronautics. As a result, there was little government support for research and development in U.S. general aviation, which has suffered in relation to government support given by other countries to their aviation industries. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
Fred Gordon, spacecraft operations manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that NASA officially had retired the Dynamics Explorer-1 (DE-1) satellite on February 28, 1991, after nine years of collecting scientific data. The decision was based on an evaluation of the costs for DE-1's operations compared to the expected value of the science gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the program, the spacecraft's cameras could see an entire Auroral zone, and the quality and quantity of data produced by the two DE spacecraft far exceeded expectations. DE-2 ended operations February 19, 1983. (NASA Release 91-42)
The Test Technique Demonstrator program at Langley Research Center, Langley, Virginia, provided hypersonic data on airframe/engine integration applicable to design of the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The program involves an industry consortium, which includes North American Aviation division of Rockwell International, General Dynamics, and McDonnell Douglas for airframe design, and Pratt and Whitney and Rocketdyne for the propulsion system. C. Larry Edwards, manager, NASP Aerodynamics Technology Program, said the hypersonic testing phase should be completed by 1992. (AvWk, Mar 25/91)
The speech of Lennard A. Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, at a September 19 meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, was published in Washington Technology. Fisk first dealt with the causes and effects of negative publicity about NASA and went on to defend NASA's accomplishments and the rationale for NASA's existence as being an absolute rather than a relative one, which made developing a consensus harder. He concluded that "The adventure of space is a vital part of our society. The space program needs to be perceived as the best this country has to offer." (Washington Technology, Oct 10/91)
Scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that the ozone hole over the South Pole did not appear to be improving. The ozone loss in 1990 equaled the previous low detected in 1987 in "depth, duration, and area." The findings were based on NASA's satellite observations of a complete cross section of the ozone layer. The findings complemented measurements at certain altitudes taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sounding balloons. (UPI, Feb 22/91)
NASA unveiled a three-dimensional view of Venus created from images recorded by the Magellan spacecraft. Magellan detected a five-mile high volcano known as Maat Mons, about the size of Earth's largest volcano, Hawaii's Mauna Kea. (P Inq, Oct 30/91; W Post, Oct 30/91; NY Times, Oct 30/91; W Times, Oct 30/91; NY Times, Oct 30/91; Fla Today, Oct 30/91; C Trin, Oct 30/91; AP, Oct 30/91)
Four Israeli high school students paid a two-week visit to the United States after winning an astrophysics contest in Israel. The competition was sponsored by the National Museum of Science, Planning, and Technology in Haifa to encourage Israeli youth to focus on technology and the sciences.  The students visited Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland and NASA's headquarters. (Washington Jewish Week, Apr 11/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Paris Observatory, using data from the Voyager 1 spacecraft, for the first time had described an anti-greenhouse effect on a solar system body. In an article in Science magazine, they also described the temperature structure and energy balance on Titan, Saturn's largest moon. (NASA Release 91-143)
The local newspaper carried an article on an area resident, Dale Reed, who said his "lifting-body concept"--an aircraft shape that eliminated the need for wings, influenced the design of the Space Shuttle. He built scale models of his idea and convinced his boss, Paul Bikle, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, to try it on a glider. Reed was a NASA engineer for 32 years and subsequently worked as senior engineer for PRC, Inc., a NASA contractor. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Sep 13/91)
The California Institute of Technology and the University of California, with funding from the W.M. Keck Foundation, were preparing to build a new $93.3 million Keck II telescope in 1992 on top of Hawaii's Mauna Kea volcano, adjacent to the Keck I being completed. Foundation chairman Howard B. Keck announced that the foundation would pay $74.6 million for the second telescope. Edward C. Stone, director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said scientists were sure NASA would get Congressional approval to finance the remainder. The linked telescopes, according to Stone, "can explore the origin of the visible universe by peering back to the first 1 billion to 2 billion years after the Big Bang, when we believe that galaxies began to form out of the residue of the Big Bang." (C Trin, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 27/91; NY Times, Apr 27/91; LA Times, Apr 27/91; W Post, Apr 27/91; CSM, Apr 29/91)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, Director John M. Klineberg announced that Peter T. Burr had been named Deputy Director of the center. Burr had served as Director of Flights Projects at Goddard since August 1989. (NASA Release 91-28)
An editorial in Florida Today referred to NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's comment about NASA giving serious consideration to consolidating Shuttle operations at Kennedy Space Center. He estimated this would cut Shuttle costs 25 percent. Such a move would also result in consolidating Shuttle management, as recommended in the Advisory Committee report. (Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
The media covered preparations of the Discovery crew for the first Shuttle night landing at Cape Canaveral, scheduled for September 18. As it developed, the bad weather forced a diversion of the Shuttle from Florida, and the actual landing occurred the night of September 18 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. Reportedly, preliminary findings were that the Shuttle was in good shape after its landing. (USA Today, Sep 17/91; AP, Sep 17/91; UPI, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 18/91; USA Today, Sep 18/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; C Trin, Sep 18/91; AP. Sep 18/91; UPI, Sep 18/91; P Inq, Sep 19/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; W Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91; W Post, Sep 19/91; USA Today, Sep 19/91; LA Times, Sep 19/91; AP, Sep 19/91; B Sun, Sep 19/91)
Jim Gunn, an astronomer at Princeton University and designer of equipment for the Digital Sky Survey, was planning a map of the universe that would fit in a desk drawer. Based on Gunn's work on the Hale telescope in California, the Sky Survey's 100-inch "smart" telescope would perch on top of the Sacramento Mountains in New Mexico. (W Times, Feb 8/91; LA Times, Feb 17/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
An international conference at the University of California San Diego, sponsored by the university's Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, the California Space Institute, and Los Alamos, New Mexico's National Laboratory Center for National Security Studies expressed concern over the rising cost of space exploration and the difficulty of justifying such costly ventures as sending humans to Mars. Roger Bonnet, chief scientist of the European Space Agency, which cooperates with the United States on the Space Station, regretted American hesitations on the Space Station. (LA Times, Jan 12/91)
A spy satellite monitoring center, officially known as the Onizuka Air Force Base, near Sunnyvale, California, needed no longer to be considered top secret. The center controlled 80 Pentagon military and spy satellites but this responsibility was gradually being transferred to the Consolidated Space Operations Center at Falcon Air Force Base in Colorado. According to a government report, the transfer would not be complete until 1993. (LA Times, Dec 2/91)
Several newspapers commented on the study by a panel of experts, headed by Edward A. Frieman of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, released by the Federation of American Scientists. The report recommended that NASA scrap plans for six huge scientific platforms to gather data for studies of global warming as part of the Earth Observation System. Instead, experts urged that NASA use smaller satellites that could provide critical data more quickly and more cheaply. (LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; Time, Sep 16/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91)
NASA announced its selection of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC), Fairfax, Virginia, for a contract to provide ocean color data. These data were to support research performed by the Laboratory of Hydrospheric Processes, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The contract would run for about 7.5 years, of which 2.5 years would be development time and five years of data production. The mission's scientific objective was to measure changes in ocean color that indicate where concentrations of phytoplankton and chlorophyll lie on the surface of the ocean. For global change research, measuring concentrations of phytoplankton are essential in understanding the role of oceans in the global carbon cycle. The phytoplankton's photosynthesis stores vast amounts of carbon and understanding better how oceans store and release carbon will help understand global climate.
The media reported NASA's announcement that henceforth the Kennedy Space Center in Florida would be a prime Shuttle landing site beginning with Atlantis's mission in July. However, because of Florida's temperamental weather, Shuttles were expected to return to California 60 percent of the time, according to Robert L. Crippen, director of the Space Shuttle program. (AP, Jun 20/91; UPI, Jun 20/91; NYT, Jun 21/91; B Sun, Jun 21/91; LA Times, Jun 21/91)
NASA announced the appointment of Leonard S. Nicholson as Director, Space Shuttle program, replacing Robert L. Crippen who is to be Director, Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 91-208; AP, Dec 16/91; W Times, Dec 17/91; USA Today, Dec 17/91; Fla Today, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91)
Newsweek carried a feature article about NASA's discoveries regarding the heavens: quasars, galaxies, black holes, dark matter, and the like, as presented at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society. Special credit was given to the instruments NASA developed to explore space. The mysteries remaining to be explored were highlighted and the new telescopes being installed to catch infrared rays to help solve some of the mysteries. (Newsweek, Jun 3/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Assistant Administrator for the Office of Procurement. The highest ranking woman career executive in Air Force contracting, she served previously as Principal Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff for Contracting, Headquarters Air Force Systems Command, Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-94)
The Space Propulsion newsletter commented on the report of the Stanford University professors who, together with Soviet aerospace engineers, projected that at a cost of $60 billion (about one-eighth NASA's estimate) a joint venture using the Soviet Energia heavy-lift rocket could land humans on Mars by 2012. In contrast, the Stafford Synthesis Group estimated 2014 as the earliest date to reach Mars, using lunar bases established in the interim. Some civilian space experts found flaws in the Stanford study. In line with comments on the Stanford report, the New York Times featured a lengthy article on the designer of the Energia rockets, currently visiting New York and seeking a U.S. buyer for the rocket. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91; NY Times, Jul 9/91)
According to the media, a small Prospector rocket, launched by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, was blown up shortly after liftoff when it veered off course. This was Orbital's third attempt to launch the rocket for the University of Alabama in Huntsville, one of 16 NASA commercial space development centers. (AP, Jun 18/91; NYT, Jun 19/91; USA Today, Jun 19/91; W Times, Jun 19/91; WSJ, Jun 19/91; B Sun, Jun 19/91; W Post, Jun 19/91; C Trin, Jun 19/91; LA Times, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91; UPI, Jun 19/91; H Chron, Jun 20/91)
The two astronauts on NASA's first Shuttle flight 10 years ago, John Young and Robert Crippen, returned to Cape Canaveral for an anniversary celebration. The 20,000 workers at Kennedy Space Center and their families were invited for the occasion. (AP, Apr 13/91; B Sun, Apr 14/91)
NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, announced that it had selected BAMSI, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a $140 million preventive and remedial maintenance and services contract. (NASA Release C91-u)
NASA announced information about the flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis scheduled for launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center. The Shuttle was to deploy NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) into orbit to update the satellite tracking network. Details of the TDRS, its size, capacities, and capabilities, were provided. (NASA Release 91-97)
NASA's Earth Observing System faced possible funding cuts as a result of questioning by Representative Ralph Hall, chairman of the House Space Subcommittee, and his colleagues. Concerns exist also within NASA regarding program costs. Tension reportedly existed between NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, over the amount of the data system to be centered at Goddard as opposed to other NASA sites. Some congressional members questioned NASA's accountability and deplored rivalry between NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), through its Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped the distribution of nitrogen throughout our galaxy. The COBE team reported this information at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measurements are unencumbered by atmospheric and instrument emission and enable astronomers to understand better the processes occurring throughout the Milky Way. Scientists can measure the wavelength of emissions from ionized nitrogen atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of three instruments aboard COBE, NASA's first satellite primarily designed for cosmological studies. The data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
The Los Angeles Air Force Base at El Segundo was omitted from the list of proposed base closings of the Department of Defense. The base houses the Air Force Space Systems Division, a 3,200-employee unit that oversees military contracts for procurement of space hardware. (LA Times, Apr 13/91)
The National Research Council in its report The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics, after two years of study recommended that more modest instruments than the Hubble Space Telescope and only a few large observatories be developed. The next instrument, the $617 million Gamma Ray Observatory, was to be launched in April 1991. During the 1990s, of more than 50 proposals made, the report endorsed only four: the $1.3 billion Space Infrared Telescope Facility; an $80 million infrared-optimized telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii; the $115 million Millimeter Array, a group of telescopes to cover star-forming regions and galaxies; and a $55 million optical telescope to operate in the Southern Hemisphere. The report recommended several more modest programs including the $230 million Stratospheric Observatory for Far-Infrared Astronomy; the $250 million Astrometric Interferometry Mission to map positions of celestial bodies more precisely; the $15 million Large Earth-based Solar Telescope; and a $70 million spacecraft dedicated to the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopy Explorer satellite and increasing to five the Explorer satellites to be launched on rockets. (UPI, Mar 19/91; W Post, Mar 20/91; W Times, Mar 20/91; NY Times, Mar 20/91; LA Times, Mar 20/91; B Sun, Mar 24/91)
Washington Technology reported that a major effort is underway to move NASA's Space Station program office to a site near Goddard Space Flight Center (SFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. Other sites being considered are Johnson SFC near Houston or Marshall SFC in Huntsville, Alabama. (Washington Technology, Feb 7/91)
A study by the University of Southern California found that space exploration was viewed as "frivolous" by the average American. These results were disclosed at the 7th annual National Space Symposium. A space journal commented that NASA needed to find new ways of communicating its message more effectively. (Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute announced the cosponsorship of a conference on Advanced Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Technologies at the Cleveland Convention Center September 4-6. The conference is to be part of the Lewis Center's 50th anniversary celebration. (NASA Release 91-140)
The press reported that NASA had staged a mock emergency landing in preparation for Columbia's touchdown at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (USA Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 14/91)
Republican Congressman from California Tom Campbell said he would not object to the closing of a military installation in his district provided that it was "fair." In this connection he would not oppose the proposed closing of Moffett Field, from which NASA tests aircraft and spacecraft in wind tunnels and simulators and the Navy flies its P-3 Orion antisubmarine warfare missions over the Pacific. Local officials and business people argued that closure of the field would cause Lockheed Missiles and Space Company to move elsewhere, taking its 25,000 employees, in addition to the some 12,200 jobs lost from the Navy. (W Post, Apr 22/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, has selected Hughes/Santa Barbara Research Center, Goleta, California as its contractor for the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer-Nadir (MODIS-N) instrument for the Earth Observing System (EOS) program. EOS is central to NASA's Mission to Planet Earth Program. MODIS-N is the key research instrument to fly on a series of EOS unmanned polar spacecraft. Over a 15-year period, it would measure terrestrial, oceanographic, and atmospheric parameters to assess environmental changes. (NASA Release C91-1)
The media reported on the "spectacular" nature for some viewers but confusing for some telescopes of the total solar eclipse. Drake Deming of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt said his team was up most of the night but succeeded in time in solving a problem with one of their instruments. (AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 12/91)
NASA stated that an artificial aurora borealis lasting from five to 15 minutes would be created by its satellite's release of chemicals the evening of January 10. The faux aurora is part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project of NASA and the Air Force, probing the Earth's magnetic field. (W Post, Jan 11/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; AP, Jan 11/91)
In a letter to the editor, Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, and John N. Bahcall, Professor of Natural Science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, declared that "There is strong national support for both a vigorous manned space program and a strong science program." Believing that both were essential, they pointed out that to maintain its space leadership position, the United States must continue such programs as the Advanced X-Ray Astrophysical Facility, missions to a comet and to Saturn, and the Earth Observing System. (W Post, Jun 27/91)
NASA announced that the first demonstration of digital radio broadcasting via satellite to a mobile vehicle, would occur December 2-6 in Washington, D.C. The presentation represented a joint effort of NASA and the U.S. Information Agency's Voice of America. (NASA Release 91-196)
The media reported that because of high winds in California, Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The right tire was severely damaged on landing, but the new stronger brakes worked well. In addition, twice as much fiberglass thermal tile filler would have to be replaced than was customary after a flight. The astronauts accomplished 32 of 33 planned primary observations, 18 of 21 secondary observations, and 41 of 44 category-3 experiments. (P Inq, May 7/91; W Post, May 7/91; NY Times, May 7/91; USA Today, May 7/91; B Sun, May 7/91; WSJ, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; P Inq, May 8/91; AP, May 8/91; UPI, May 9/91)
Queen Elizabeth visited Johnson Space Center in Houston. (AP, May 22/91; W Times, May 23/91; LA Times, May 23/91; UPI, May 23/91)
NASA rolled the Shuttle Atlantis to a launch pad at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for a scheduled April 6 liftoff. (W Post, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, awarded Metric Constructors, Inc., of Tampa, a $56,215,000 contract to build the Space Station Processing Facility. The 457,000-square-foot facility was to contain preflight and processing points for Space Station Freedom as well as 63,000 square feet of dedicated payload processing space. (NASA Release C91-h)
The crew of Atlantis talked with American schoolchildren while in orbit over the United States. (AP, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 7/91; B Sun, Apr 7/91; NY Times, Apr 7/91)
The Baltimore Sun published an article quoting Richard Stolarski, research scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, concerning ozone depletion. He stated that the hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic failed to shrink as was hoped. He wondered whether the same might occur over the North Pole and indicated the need to understand the limits under which ozone depletion occurred. Subsequently, NASA announced the findings of its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, which indicated the ozone depletion in Antarctica was almost as severe as the record year of 1987. (B Sun, Oct 5/91; NASA Release 91-165; AP, Oct 9/91; UPI, Oct 9/91; NY Times, Oct 10/91; USA Today, Oct 10/91; CSM, Oct 10/91; W Post, Oct 11/91)
NASA announced the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite was scheduled to be launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on May 28, 1992. The delay in the originally scheduled launch time was caused by the need for Modular Antenna Pointing System acceptance testing, which was completed, and software/hardware verification, which remained to be completed. (NASA Release 91-207)
A feature article in the New York Times discussed the impact of space rockets on the ozone layer. Reportedly, NASA estimated that each Shuttle flight injected some 75 tons of chlorine into the stratosphere. Dr. Michael J. Prather, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute in New York City, calculated that the lifting of nine Shuttles and six Titan 4s every year would add 0.3 percent to stratospheric chlorine, which in turn would destroy much less than 1 percent of the ozone there. This made the Shuttle a large source of pollution but small by comparison to any other industry such as refrigeration or solvents. (NY Times, May 14/91)
NASA announced that its Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) was maneuvered to point at its first scientific target of opportunity, the sun, on June 7. Controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, repositioned the observatory to gather data from two X-class solar flares. All four GRO instrument teams reported receiving good data on solar activity as a result. (NASA Release 91-91)
The media discussed Forrest McCartney's being asked by NASA to step aside as head of the Kennedy Space Center so that he could be replaced by Robert Crippen. McCartney said he would have liked to stay on another year, but this was not possible. (W Post, Nov 1/91; W Times, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; AP, Nov 1/91; P Inq, Nov 2/91; UPI, Nov 2/91; NY Times, Nov 3/91; SP News, Nov 4-10/91; O Sen Star, Nov 9/91)
The Soviet Union launched a large new space satellite, Almaz-1, using a giant Proton booster rocket. Tass said Almaz-1 was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. The radar satellite would survey territory of the Soviet Union and other countries "in the interest of geology, cartography, ecology, and agriculture." The Almaz-1 was the first Soviet satellite to provide commercial services for the American market under long-term contracts. One of its principal customers was to be the US Defense Mapping Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed images of the Earth. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; LA Times, Apr 2/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center asked for proposals for a follow-on system to its Payload Data Management System (PDMS). The system was to be used to manage data relating to payloads for Space Shuttles and ultimately for the Space Station. The new system was to include a relational data base management subsystem, a project management subsystem, a technical documentation subsystem, and a page printing subsystem and covers a 10-year period. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
The Washington Post featured the space biology team at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, which has created a stir with a government-patented invention that allows large quantities of many types of human cells to be grown by removing the force of gravity. NASA's Rotating Wall Bioreactor had great potential for improving patient treatment and may grow still more cells when used in space. In this connection, NASA announced that the rotating wall vessel developed at the Johnson Space Center's Biotechnology Program, would be tested in space during the Atlantis flight. (W Post, Nov 18/91; NASA Release 91-195)
The paper carried an article featuring Ali Abu Taha, whom it described as "telling NASA things it would rather not hear" over the preceding five years. He filed suit against NASA, Rockwell International (maker of the Shuttle's orbiter), and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. However, the U.S. District Court in Alexandria, Virginia rejected his three suits. (Washington City Paper, Oct 11/91)
According to the press, Al Boggess, an astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, at a news briefing at the Spce Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had observerd that a gas disk that ringed the star Beta Pectoris appeared to include large clumps of matter spiraling in toward it at speeds of up to 120 miles a second. This was a "new phenomenon, not seen around any other star." (NY Times, May 18/91; C Trin, May 19/91; CSM, May 22/91)
NASA announced a number of contract arrangements. A contract extension was awarded to Vitro Corporation of Silver Spring, Maryland, to continue safety and support services at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. NASA further selected Nichols Research Corporation, Huntsville, Alabama, and BDM International, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to compete for a support contract for the Earth Observing System Program Office in Washington. In addition, NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, contracted with Johnson Controls, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida to provide maintenance and operational services at Johnson. (NASA Releases C91-dd, C91ee, C91ff)
Tom McGlynn, a Computer Sciences Corporation software scientist for the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) Science Support Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, described four data analysis systems developed for GRO. The GRO launched by Atlantis carried four instruments designed to study overlapping portions of gamma rays, the highest energy radiation in the electromagnetic spectrum. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California, one day late. It was to be flown to Cape Canaveral atop a modified Boeing 747. The astronauts appeared in excellent condition. (P Inq, Apr 12/91; B Sun, Apr 12/91; W Times, Apr 12/91; USA Today, Apr 12/91; NY Times, Apr 12/91; WSJ, Apr 12/91;  W Post, Apr 12/91; LA Times, Apr 12/91; AP, Apr 12/91; UPI, Apr 12/91)
AP reported that Space Shuttle Columbia was bolted atop a jumbo jet and flown from Cape Canaveral to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, before proceeding on August 11 to Rockwell International's Shuttle assembly plant in Palmdale, California. The arrival of Columbia in Palmdale on August 13 was enthusiastically greeted by the inhabitants. (AP, Aug 10/91; Antelope Valley, Aug 14/91)
Astronomers Joss Bland-Hawthorn of Rice University, Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland, and R. Brent Tully of the University of Hawaii, using the telescope atop Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii have found a huge object. It might be a "supermassive black hole," but if so it would be more than 100 million times larger than the largest black hole thought to exist. It might also be a dead or dormant quasar. Astronomers hoped that the Gamma Ray Observatory of Atlantis would help to resolve the mystery. (NY Times, Apr 9/91; AP, Apr 9/91; P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Post, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 15/91)
An unmanned $45 million Delta 2 rocket carrying a $110 million NATO communications satellite to replace an older military spacecraft was launched on January 7 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The rocket was built by McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company and was the 202d launch of a Delta. The satellite, which would enable political and military leaders in the NATO area to communicate with one another, was the first of two advanced NATO 4 satellites built by British Aerospace. (AP, Jan 7/91; NY Times, Jan 9/91)
An article about the colorful sunsets along the California coast referred to the effects of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo. According to Francisco Valero, chief of atmospherics research at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, Pinatubo probably spewed some 16 million tons of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, causing the spectacular sunsets. However, the aftereffects were that the cloud of sulfuric acid droplets could further accelerate the depletion of the ozone layer. (P Inq, Aug 3/91)
At a press conference associated with the American Astronomical Society meeting in Seattle, Ted Stecher, Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (UIT) Principal Investigator, announced that UIT team members had identified hundreds of newly found young stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud. Several of these hot stars might eventually become supernovas. (NASA Release 91-84)
The Astro three ultraviolet and one x-ray telescopes carried by Columbia showed no traces of the decay processes of tiny invisible particles known as neutrinos, it was announced at the American Astronomical Society conference. These particles are connected with the Big Bang theory. (NY Times, Jan 18/91; W Post, Jan 18/91; LA Times, Jan 18/91; C Trin, Jan 20/91; CSM, Jan 23/91)
A space journal article discussed the likelihood of NASA's taking over Moffett Field in California in order to keep the Ames Research Center, which it shares with the Navy, going. Reportedly, NASA was considering such a move if the Defense Department closed the naval air station. The result would be operating a 1,000 acre airfield with two runways more than 8,000 feet long, the largest airfield complex operated by NASA. (AvWk, Jun 24/91)
The Bush Administration proposed $14.7 billion for NASA for FY1972, an increase of $1.2 billion. The proposal would allow starting a new family of rockets to lift heavy payloads. The budget would also authorize NASA and the Air Force to spend $175 million each to develop a new launching system by the end of the 1990s. The Administration also proposed almost $2 billion to continue development of a Space Station and almost $1 billion for NASA's "Mission to Planet Earth" as part of the study of global environmental change. (NY Times, Feb 5/91; USA Today, Feb 5/91; WSJ, Feb 5/91; UPI, Feb 4/91; UPI, Feb 5/91; Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
An editorial in a space journal commented on the work of cosmonauts in the Soviet Mir Space Station who are conducting advanced materials and fluids experiments in at least five processing systems. In addition, Soviet engineers were preparing several evolutionary unmanned materials spacecraft that would provide Soviet scientists more processing time in unmanned spacecraft than their US counterparts. Whereas these Soviet facilities presented opportunities for use by American researchers for experimental purposes, which they were doing increasingly, a challenge was also presented to the United States. NASA bureaucracy and deficiencies in the US microgravity program, for example, resulted in it taking some researchers two years to book commercial processing flights on the Shuttle. Although NASA planned microgravity budget increases from $125 million in FY 1992 to $225 million in FY 1995, this would require White House and congressional support. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
Florida Today published figures of Kennedy Space Center spending for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1991. The center spent $1.42 billion in Florida, an increase of 3.6 percent over the previous year. Of that amount, $1.03 billion  went for on-site contractors. (Fla Today, Oct 30/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston announced the award of a contract to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, modifying the Space Station Freedom Program Integration Support (Schedule B) contract. Schedule B involved the integration of Space Station components. (NASA Release C91-nn)
NASA announced the renaming of the Gamma Ray Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, by Space Shuttle Atlantis, in honor of American physicist Arthur Holly Compton. (NASA Release 91-151)
NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced that it had selected Johnson Controls World Services, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, for a JSC plant maintenance and operation support contract. (NASA Release C91-q)
The Sunnyvale, California City Council approved a position paper prepared by the Moffett Field Committee, composed of representatives of NASA's Ames Research Center, and several neighboring city councils and chambers of commerce. The paper proposed that if Congress approved closing the Moffett Field Naval Air Station, NASA operate the field instead to ensure that research and transport activities continue. (San Jose Mercury News, Apr 17/91; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 18/91)
The Synthesis Group, a White House study group, planned to recommend US development of nuclear-propelled rockets to send manned expeditions to Mars, according to Aviation Week and Space Tehcnology. NASA established the group, chaired by retired Air Force General Thomas P. Stafford, an Apollo astronaut, to gather innovative ideas for lunar and Mars exploration. (AP, Mar 15/91;
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of an extension to the United Technologies Corporation's Hamilton Standard Division's Extravehicular Mobility Unit hardware contract. (NASA Release C91-rr)
NASA technology developed by the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, designed sensors to monitor potentially damaging heat build-up in electronic circuits. Such technology was to be used in connection with the huge television Jumbotron screen for the Superbowl game on January 27. NASA's Technology Utilization program is cited as an example of the applications that can be made from NASA findings. (NASA Release 91-10)
The media carried the discovery, announced on August 23, by three astronomers, Donald P. Schneider of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Maarten Schmidt of the California Institute of Technology, and James E. Gunn of Princeton University of the oldest and most distant object yet found, a 900 million year-old quasar. The discovery resulted from the use of a supersensitive digital camera, developed by Gunn for the Hubble telescope. The camera was attached to Mount Palomar's Hale telescope and special filters were used. (B Sun, Aug 26/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91)
The Antelope Valley Press quoted John Young, special assistant for engineering, operations, and safety at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston as saying that for NASA to land Shuttles at Kennedy Space Center instead of Edwards Air Force Base in California posed an increased risk. Although the Florida landing saved NASA the cost of ferrying a Shuttle back from California and the five to seven days involved, Florida weather was more problematic. Furthermore, Edwards had more runway alternatives whereas Kennedy had only one. John E. Pike, space policy analyst for the Federation of American Scientists said NASA should wait on Florida landings till all Shuttles were equipped with drag chutes to slow them down. (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 9/91)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
Construction of NASA's Ames-Dryden Integrated Test Facility at Edwards Air Force Base was 18 months behind schedule and $3.1 over its original cost estimate because three successive contractors pulled out of the job, NASA said. Efforts were underway to find a new contractor. NASA spokesman Don Haley asserted that the construction delays had not hindered aircraft tests. (Los Angeles Daily News, Apr 15/91; Californian, Apr 19/91)
Atlantis returned to Kennedy Space Center from MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa. (AP, Apr 18/91)
William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said NASA hoped to cut the operating cost of its Space Shuttle program by 15 percent over a five-year period. It planned to do this by eliminating a layer of management and merging the offices of the Program Directorate in Washington, Level I, with the Program Office located at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Level II. The reorganization plan as yet lacked final approval. (W Times, Dec 13/91; Fla Today, Dec 13/91)
The New York Times reported that fuel cells, first developed for use in space in the 1960s, were being used increasingly in commercial plants. A fuel cell is a device that converts the energy of a fuel directly to electricity and heat, without combustion. The United States had developed an experimental plant in San Ramon, east of San Francisco, and other plants were considering use of the new technology. (NYT, Jun 30/91)
NASA announced the selection of Taft Broadcasting Company of Houston for a contract providing television support services for the Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-x)
NASA announced that the last of three SR-71 aircraft, loaned to NASA by the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to arrive at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, in late July. The Antelope Valley Press earlier reported the successful check flight of the Blackbird on July 10, prior to delivery to the NASA facility. The "Blackbirds" were to be used for high-speed, high altitude research in such areas as aerodynamics, propulsion, structures, and thermal protection materials. (NASA Release 91-111; Antelope Valley Press, Jul 11/91)
UPI reported that NASA managers reviewed plans to resume routine Shuttle landings at the Kennedy Space Center. The unpredictability of Florida's coastal weather was at issue but it was felt that improvements NASA made in the Shuttle fleet were such that routine landings could now occur. (UPI, Jun 19/91)
NASA spokeswoman Vera Hirschberg said former American University president Richard Berenzen was working for Booz-Allen and Hamilton in investigating the societal benefits of the Space Exploration Initiative on behalf of NASA. (AP, Mar 11/91)
NASA announced that its John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, had awarded EG&G Florida, Inc., a one-year extension of its contract for base operations services. (NASA Release C91-qq)
NASA announced that two additional releases, one of barium and one of lithium, would be made during February as part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CCRES). CCRES was a joint NASA-US Air Force program to study the Earth's magnetic fields and the effect of space radiation on spacecraft components. (NASA Release 91-22; AP, Feb 7/91)
NASA indicated that the Shuttle Atlantis had landed 200 yards short of its lakebed runway at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The reason was that astronauts were unaware of the wind shift, of which ground controllers did not inform them because they thought the information was not needed. Measures have been taken to prevent similar incidents in the future by installing more efficient brakes and a drag chute to help slow the aircraft after touchdown. (O Sen Star, Apr 23/91)
Randy Berridge of the Astronauts Memorial Foundation stated that the memorial to American astronauts killed in the line of duty was closed for inspections after strange noises were heard coming from the monument. After engineers checked the structure, it reopened on August 17. Subsequently, Representative Vernon Peeples, chairman of the Florida House Transportation Committee, questioned whether money for the monument had been misused. (UPI, Aug 6/91; P Inq, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91; USA Today, Aug 7/91; LA Times, Aug 19/91; P Inq, Aug 20/91)
The Washington Times reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center near Houston had 842 pounds of moon rocks brought back by 12 moonwalkers on six Apollo flights between 1969 and 1972. The rocks are loaned to scientific groups for study. Each nation in the world also has a small piece of moon rock, sent at President Nixon's instruction in the early 1970s. (W Times, May 24/91)
According to UPI, the new Shuttle Endeavour's maiden voyage in April 1992 faced a significant delay because of numerous problems discovered after it was delivered to the Kennedy Space Center. Among other reasons for the delay were the parts cannibalized from Endeavour to avoid major launch delays of other orbiters. As the Shuttle was inspected, more than 1,400 problem reports were filed regarding work needed. (UPI, Oct 19/91)
The New York Times reported that the United States would announce today at a scientific meeting in New Mexico its intention to buy an advanced Soviet nuclear reactor, known as Topaz 2, built to power systems in space. The United States at present has no working nuclear reactors in orbit and this purchase constitutes a high point in East-West cooperation on technical matters. Topaz 2 is designed to operate up to five years in space and will be set up in the Albuquerque area. It was to be tested by the University of New Mexico, the Sandia National Laboratory, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Air Force Phillips Laboratory. The Topaz 2 can generate from 6,000 to 10,000 watts of electricity. (NY Times, Jan 7/91)
Bill Moyers, a member of a national panel of experts involved in Project Censored, a compendium of the most underreported stories of 1990, dealt with NASA and the ozone. Soviet scientists first raised environmental questions about the solid rocket fuel used by the Space Shuttles. They said it left 250 tons of hydrochloric acid eating up the ozone layer after every launch. The Earth Island Journal and the San Francisco Chronicle reported the story. On the program, environmental activist Helen Caldicott spoke of chlorine molecules that chomp up ozone molecules. (P Inq, Feb 25/91)
NASA announced details of Space Shuttle mission STS-42, a worldwide research effort in the behavior of materials and life in weightlessness. This would be the 15th flight of Discovery and was scheduled for launch on January 22, 1992 from Edwards Air Force Base, California. Scientists from NASA, the European Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, the French National Center for Space Studies, the German Space Agency, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan cooperated in planning experiments aboard the International Microgravity Laboratory-1, which Discovery was to carry. This was to be the first of eight Space Shuttle flights planned for 1992, five of which were to feature international participation. (NASA Release 92-211)
According to AP, a communications satellite needed to transmit long-distance telephone calls made in Alaska was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. (AP, May 29/91; W Post, May 30/91)
NASA announced the selection of seven Historically Black Colleges and Universities to receive Core Research Center grants to develop further their research capability and research infrastructure. The institutions were: Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta; Fisk University, Nashville; Florida A&M University, Tallahassee; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia; Howard University, Washington, D.C.; North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro; and Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-193)
Media coverage was extensive of NASA's cutting short by three days the mission of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of a failed navigational unit. Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, December 1. The Shuttle landed in good condition although it lost a small electrical connector part on landing. (W Post, Dec 1/91; W Times, Dec 1/91; NY Times, Dec 1/91; B Sun, Dec 1/91;P Inq, Dec 1/91; P Inq, Dec 2/91; NY Times, Dec 2/91; W Post, Dec 2/91; W Times, Dec 2/91; B Sun, Dec 2/91; USA Today, Dec 2/91; AP, Dec 2/91; C Trin, Dec 2/91; UPI, Dec 2/91; B Sun, Dec 3/91; NY Times, Dec 3/91; W Times, Dec 3/91; USA Today, Dec 3/91)
NASA's Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) program was featured in the Christian Science Monitor. Harvard University professor Paul Horowitz, designer of the Planetary Society equipment, was cited as an enthusiastic listener for signals from space over the past eight years. (CSM, Dec 4/91)
NASA satellite observations indicated that Earth's protective ozone layer was thinning twice as fast as previously believed. The Environmental Protection Agency made the announcement. Richard S. Stolarski, a research scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, found a 4 percent to 5 percent average decrease over the 11-year period he studied. During the winter, the depletion was 8 percent to 9 percent of the layer. Several scientists have stressed the importance of the public developing "good sun habits" in relation to the ozone depletion and reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).(B Sun, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; WSJ, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; CSM, Apr 9/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the award of a contract to the Ball Corporation, Boulder, Colorado, to complete construction of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement for the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release C91-oo; AP, Oct 16/91; PR Newswire, Oct 16/91; B Sun, Oct 17/91; WSJ, Oct 17/91)
The media reported that a private study by American scientists concluded that an international manned mission to Mars could be done within 21 years for less than $60 billion. These figures represented faster and cheaper estimates than those of a proposed United States-only project. (USA Today, Jun 27/91; UPI, Jun 27/91; AP, Jun 27/91; H Post, Jun 30/91)
Gerard K. O'Neill, a visionary Princeton physicist who popularized the idea of colonizing space, died in Redwood City, California. O'Neill, 65, was the author of The High Frontier, a 1977 book that proposed the construction of giant solar-powered cylinders in which as many as 20 million people could live in space. (P Inq, Apr 29/92)
A panel of experts at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science said that computers now perform some medical functions better than doctors and that machines are going to get even smarter in the future. Terrell Ward Bynum of Southern Connecticut State University said that NASA and the Department of Defense were working on a "smart" battlefield stretcher, which as envisioned, could provide expert diagnostic capabilities and would be able to dispense drugs or even jolt the heart back into normal rhythmn. (AP, Feb 7/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
James Abrahamson, former Strategic Defense Initiative Director, left Hughes Aircraft to serve as co-chairman of Oracle Systems. A former Air Force general, Abrahamson was expected to supervise such projects as NASA's Space Shuttle and the Air Force's F-16 fighter. (Bus Wk, Sept 28/92)
At a press conference of the 179th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Atlanta, astronomers reported that recent ultraviolet observations with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) suggest that what were thought to be randomly distributed, nearby primordial clouds of hydrogen may actually be associated with galaxies or clusters of galaxies. (NASA Release 92-4)
The Kennedy Space Center awarded three indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contracts for its Personal Computer Acquisition contract program. The three winners were to provide a range of personal computers, peripherals, and software packages and would be required to compete against each other for NASA orders throughout the duration of the contract, an arrangement designed to provide NASA with the most up-to-date equipment at the lowest cost. (Federal Computer Week, July 13/92)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
Congress planned to give the fledgling U. S. commercial space business a boost next year by pumping $10 million into launch site improvements. Most of that money was expected to be spent on upgrades to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station facilities. (Fla Today, Oct 8/92)
Cornell University astrophysicist Thomas Gold said in the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences" that there is probably more life inside the Earth than there is on its surface. This life would be in the form of bacteria and other microorganisms, and its overall volume probably surpasses that of all the plants and animals living on the planet's surface. NASA scientist Stephen Maran said that if Gold's ideas prove correct, "they will revolutionize scientific theories of geology and the evolution of life on Earth." Gold speculated that similar life forms may exist inside the moon and other planets in our solar system. "The surface life on Earth, based on photosynthesis for its overall energy supply, may be just one strange branch of life. The deep, chemically supplied life, however, may be very common in the universe," Gold commented. (P Inq, Jul 1/92)
Officials at NASA's John F. Kennedy Space Center in Florida said that the agency had selected I-Net, Inc., of Bethesda, Maryland, for negotiation of a contract to provide engineering support services to the center's Engineering Development Directorate. The contract was to  run for five years and have an estimated value in excess of $100 million. (NASA Release C92-12)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
In a letter to the British journal Nature, two American scientists at the University of Arizona's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, David Kring and Willima Boynton, said that they had found what they believe to be the location where a gigantic object from outer space crashed into the Earth 65 million years ago, possibly ending the age of the dinosaurs. The site is a buried crater 110 miles across on the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. (The Sun, Jul 9/92; WSJ, Jul 9/92)
American space scientists said the hottest star ever recorded--33 times hotter than the sun--had been photographed in a faraway galaxy by the Hubble Space Telescope. Burning at 360,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the white star at the heart of a glowing red nebula in the Great Magellanic Cloud galaxy is going out in a "blaze of glory," said Sally Heap, an astrophysicist with NASA. (NY Times, Apr 21/92; AP, Apr 21/92; W Times, Apr 21/92; USA Today, Apr 21/92)
A team of American and British astronomers detected the flare of a supernova almost halfway to the edge of the known universe--five billion light-years away, the most distant such supernova ever observed. Light from the supernova was expected to help astronomers grapple with the questions of whether the universe is infinite and will expand forever or whether it is finite and will eventually slow down and collapse. (NY Times, Nov 15/92)
NASA announced that scientists from the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and across the United States would participate in a Russian biomedical space mission later this month. The Cosmos '92 "biosatellite" was to be an unpiloted, recoverable spacecraft that carried plant and animal experiments. Cosmos '92 would become the eighth Russian biosatelite mission in which NASA had participated. (NASA Release 92-223)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
John L. Sloop, 76, an electrical engineer who was a retired official of NASA, died in Washington, DC. Mr. Sloop retired in 1972 as assistant associate administrator for advanced research and propulsion after a 30-year career with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. (W Post, Oct 7/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the conclusion of the longest-ever Shuttle flight, a 14-day research mission intended as a rehearsal for NASA's Space Station. The arrival was diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base in California, because of rain. (P Inq, Jul 10/92; The Sun, Jul 10/92; LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 9/92, 10/92; CSM, Jul 10/92; NY Times, Jul 10/92; WSJ, Jul 10/92; AP, Jul 09/92; UPI, Jul 9/92)
Dr. Mark M. Phillips, acting director of Cerro Tololo, an American operated observatory in Chile, said the New Technology Telescope developed in Europe was capturing images up to six times more revealing than those obtained by comparable American telescopes of conventional design. The new European telescope contained advanced optical elements that automatically correct the distortions caused by gravity and wind as the telescope moves. There was an uneasy feeling among some scientists that the salad days of United States astronomy were drawing to a close and that the new European telescopes would leave American astronomers far behind. (NY Times, Feb 4/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in San Francisco, California, NASA Administrator Samuel S. Goldin said that NASA should decide within five years whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005. A decision in the matter should be made by 1997, Goldin said, although in any event, the space agency would continue to fly the Shuttles until at least 2005. Shuttle costs would have to come down in the meantime, however, even as safety improvements continued. (Space News, Dec 7-13/92)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
The North American Air Defense Command said that it was tracking nearly 7,000 spacecraft and pieces of debris bigger than a square yard that were in orbit around the Earth. The proliferating use of satellites has resulted in a ring of several hundred of the spacecraft around the Earth's equator, most in low-Earth to mid-Earth orbit. As a result, concerns were being raised about possible interference from one satellite to another and about the need for adequate distance between satellites in view of plans for more satellites in the 1990s. (W Times, Jul 19/92)
The U.S. Air Force, NASA, and Grumman aircraft company said they had reached the mid-point of the X-29 vortex flow control (VFC) program at Edwards Air Force Base in California, producing yaw rates of up to 20 degrees. The use of VCF to yaw the aircraft while at high angle-of-attack is an aviation first according to Col. William Gotcher, X-29 program manager.(Flight International, Aug 19-25/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery, which flew in space nine days in January, returned home after 14 days on the ground in California and a cross-country piggyback trip on a Boeing 747. The Shuttle left for the Kennedy Space Center, stopping overnight at Biggs Army Air Field in El Paso, Texas and at Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. (AP, Feb 16/92)
It was reported that on March 17, 1992, that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel will present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly at NASA headquarters, Washington, D.C. The panel reviews, evaluates, and advises the NASA Administrator on present and future NASA programs and activities. Priority is given to programs that involve the safety of manned flight. (NASA Note 92-21)
In an experiment co-sponsored by NASA and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, D.C., a novel cell culture system for growing bone cells was to undergo its first test in weightlessness on a Space Shuttle mission. The objectives of the Space Tissue Loss-1 (STL) experiment involve studying the effects of the microgravity environment on the biochemistry and functional activity of various tissues including muscle, bone and blood cells. Post-flight electron microscopic analyses of cells from the flight experiment were to be conducted by Dr. Stephen Doty of the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York City.(NASA Release 92-30)
U.S. scientists solved a 20-year-old mystery about the nature of Geminga, one of the brightest emitters of high-energy gamma rays in the sky. Using data from two different spacecraft, scientists now know that the power plant in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern of Columbia University and Dr. Stephen Holt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center reported that they had observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga using data from the German/American Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT). These observations firmly establish Geminga as a close cousin of the Crab and Vela nebulae, which also have pulsating neutron stars at their cores. The rotating neutron star produces focused beams of radiation much like the periodic flashing or pulsating lighthouse beacon. (NASA Release 92-69)
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)
Hugo Wahlquist, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said that Italian and American scientists would spend nine to 12 months looking for signs of gravity waves--distortions in space and time caused by gigantic black holes--in tape recordings of radio transmissions between Ulysses and stations on Earth. Discovery of gravity waves would provide strong confirmation of Albert Einstein's theory of how the universe works, and could prove the existence of black holes. (W Times, Mar 19/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
Evgeny Sverdlov, director of the Institute of Molecular Genetics in Moscow, told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), that the demise of the former Soviet Union had created a "brain drain" that challenged the future existence of the Russian scientific research community. Because of the lack of funds, many research centers were on the verge of collapse. He added that it was good for young scientists to hone their skills abroad. But he said it would be a disaster for science in his country if they did not return. (CSM, Feb 13/92)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
Final preparations were made for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hoped to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain of the Earthwinds and a former crew member of both the trans-Atlantic balloon flight in 1978 and the trans-Pacific flight in 1981, predicted a successful voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. Included in the crew, was to be Maj. Gen. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, chief of astronaut training in the Russian air force. The balloon, which is higher than the Statue of Liberty, would carry scientific experiments built in the former Soviet Union and NASA. (NY Times, Jan 29/92)
Leaders of the world's space nations attending the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C., last week said that they lacked the money to go it alone in space, yet the will to cooperate internationally seemed also to be lacking. Two views about space exploration emerged among scientists. An optimistic view held that space exploration methods could worthwhile projects at affordable prices. The pessimistic view held that space cost too much, lacked public support, and that ideas must be constrained. The congress, the largest gathering of space experts ever convened, attracted more than 5,000 delegates from 70 nations and featured more than 2,700 technical papers. (Space News, Sept 7-13/92)
The Delta launch team at Cape Canavaral Air Force Station reported that the McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company group was gearing up for two launches in the next 25 days. The first, a mission to deploy an Indonesian communications satellite, and the second, a mission during which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer would be hurled into orbit, was scheduled for launch June 4, 1992. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
On the second day of Discovery's mission, astronauts took turns being spun in a chair, strapped blindfolded onto a lurching sled, and jolted by electrodes high above the Earth in a study of space motion sickness. Between medical tests, the seven astronauts tended to organisms carried into orbit for research, including roundworms, fruit flies, stick insects, lentil roots, bacteria and billions of single cells. The mission was scheduled to end at Edwards Air Force Base in California. (NY Times, Jan 24/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, selected the New Mexico State University, Physical Science Laboratory of Las Cruces, New Mexico, to negotiate a cost contract for the operation and maintenance of scientific balloon facilities and engineering support for the NASA Balloon Program. The total cost for the 5-year program was $65 million. (NASA Release C92-6)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
It was reported that for the first time in a generation, NASA and the Air Force were developing a new rocket engine and launch system. The National Launch System (NLS), which was to consist of three new vehicles, would become operational in 2002, and will, among other missions, carry supplies to Space Station Freedom. (W Times, Apr 2/92)
The Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science announced in Washington, D.C., that scientists from the United States, Japan, Russia, and Europe were mounting a coordinated, multi-mission effort in solar-terrestrial science during the next four years. The effort began with the launch of Japan's Geotail satellite in July 1992 and was to continue with the 1993 launch of NASA's WIND spacecraft and missions from Russia in 1993 and Europe in 1995. NASA's Interplanetary Monitoring Platform and Japan's AKEBONO spacecraft were to provide important data as well. (NASA Release 92-193)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
Harrison A. Storms, Jr., an aeronautics pioneer, died at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, at age 76. Storms's designs and leadership played a key role in developing B-25 and P-51 Mustang fighters in World War II and in Project Apollo's billion-dollar race for the moon in the 1960s. He served as an advisor to NASA, the Air Force, and the Pentagon. (NY Times, Jul 16/92)
At a meeting with NASA employees at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA chief administrator, Dan Goldin, emphasized the need for increased attention to aeronautics research in the face of competition from Europe and Japan. Goldin also said that NASA would have to do things "better, faster, cheaper"--the message Congress had just sent the agency by not increasing its $14 billion budget. Goldin also urged senior managment to place more minorities in its ranks and indicated that agency personnel would be reshuffled in the future. (Daily News, Sept 4/92; Antelope Valley Press, Sept 4/92)
Milan J. Krasnican, 68, a retired aerospace engineer with NASA, who was a member of the Project Mercury Space Task Group and a project engineer on the orbiting geophysical observatory spacecraft program at Goddard Space Flight Center, died at Sibley Hospital. A long-term resident of the Washington area, he lived in Bethesda. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
Three American astronauts took a historic spacewalk using their gloved hands to make a last-ditch rescue of a wayward satellite. It was the first time so many astronsuts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands. All previous salvage operations had mainly used some type of high-technology hardware. At 230 miles above the Earth, the three astronauts of the Space Shuttle Endeavour grabbed the wobbling 4.5 ton, 17 foot satellite and stopped its rotation, holding it motionless for about a minute while sloshing fuel settled down. (NY Times, May 14/92; B Sun, May 14/92; USA Today, May 14/92; W Times, May 14/92; W Post, May 14/92; P Inq, May 14/92; AP, May 14/92)
A Japanese amateur astronomer detected Comet Swift-Tuttle on its return to the inner solar system. Swift-Tuttle, last seen during the American Civil War, is currently the longest predictable periodic comet, returning approximately every 130 years. (W Post, Sept 29/92; NY Times, Sept 30/92)
Paul Beaver, editor of the military affairs magazine Jane's Defense Weekly, said in an interview that the U. S. Air Force was operating a new generation of secret spy planes capable of reaching eight times the speed of sound. Code-named "Aurora," the plane was believed to operate at night and to incorporate the latest radar-evading technology. Pentagon officials denied that such an aircraft existed or was contemplated. For years, some scientists and aviation fans had speculated that a successor to the famed SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane was under development and testing. (The Sun, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 12/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
David Wolf, Ray Schwarz, and Tinh Trinh of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) were selected by NASA's General Counsel Office to receive the Inventor of the Year Award for their development and design of a new class of horizontally rotating tissue culture systems--also known as the rotating wall bioreactor--that in some ways simulate microgravity. Bioreactors are cell maintenance devices used for research in growth and culturing cells or tissues and have been recognized as valuable tools for pioneering research in lung tissue, skin growth, intestinal disease, cartilage growth, colon cancer, brain tumor growth, and therapeutics. (NASA Release 92-33)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin issued a call to restore America's leadership in aeronautics that is threatened by failure to invest adequately in research facilities and advanced technology. Goldin told the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics meeting in Arlington, Virginia, that additional spending had to be directed to high speed research, advanced subsonic and systems integration, critical research facilities, and hypersonic research. Top priority needed to be given to developing a hypersonic commercial plane that could carry 300 passengers at least 6,000 miles nonstop at two-and-one-half times the speed of sound by the year 2005. NASA's budget provided for $1.1 billion for aeronautics, or 7.9 percent, Goldin said, a funding level that had to increase. (NASA Release 92-219; The Sun, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 10/92; H Post, Dec 10/92; AvWk, Dec 14-21/92)
Air Force Secretary Donald Rice voiced strong support for designing a National Aero-Space Plane capable of flying into orbit. Rice's statement came in response to news reports about plans to lower the aerospace plane programs' goals in response to Congressional concerns about the cost of the program. France and Russia were also reported to be working jointly to develop aerospace-plane type engines that could threaten America's leadership in the field. Known as the X-30, the plane would be the world's first single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. (Antelope Valley News, Dec 19/92)
Scientists from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said they planned to seek answers to such problems as the development of frog eggs in weightlessness and control of space motion sickness on the next Shuttle flight scheduled for mid-September. Space Shuttle Endeavour was slated to carry a crew of seven, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J, a science laboratory containing 43 experiments, 34 of them provided by Japan, on a six-day mission. (NASA Releases 92-130 and 92-128)
Ceremonies at Edwards Air Force Base marked the 50th anniversary of the birth of the jet age. On October 2, 1942, Bob Stanley first flew the XP-59 above Rogers Dry Lake Bed at Muroc Air Base (now Edwards Air Force Base). (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 2/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
The Kennedy Space Center, Florida, said it had awarded first-of-a-kind contracts to three firms under NASA's Personal Computer Acquisition Contract program. Throughout the five-year life of the contracts, the three companies would have to compete against each other for NASA orders to supply personal computer hardware and software to Kennedy Space Center and other NASA locations. NASA established this competitive arrangement so that the agency could be assured of a steady supply of high-quality products for the best price. (NASA Release C92-10)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Astronauts had to wait more than two hours before debarking because of toxic fumes from a leaking thruster. The main mission, the deployment of a secret Pentagon satellite, occurred soon after launch in what was the last Shuttle mission for the U. S. military. The day before, the Shuttle had to swerve in orbit to avoid a four-inch piece of space junk, the third such incident in two years. (The Sun, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; UPI, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; NY Times, Dec 10/92; WSJ, Dec 10/92; P Inq, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 13/92; USA Today, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 11/92)
General Dynamics Corporation said its space systems unit had won a $112.6 million Air Force contract to modify space-launch facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. (WSJ, Nov 6/92)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
NASA scientists at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco said that a NASA satellite had provided overwhelming evidence that industrial pollutants were responsible for the hole in Earth's protective ozone layer above Antarctica. The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, launched in 1991, also had produced evidence that the Antarctic ozone hole may act as a "sink," sucking in and destroying ozone from much of the Southern Hemisphere. (AP, Dec 10/92)
The Air Force reported that a Titan 2 rocket was launched into space carrying a secret military payload into a polar, low-earth orbit. The two-stage rocket, a modified Titan intercontinental ballistic missile, was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, about 250 miles northwest of Los Angeles. (W Times, Apr 26/92)
The Air Force and NASA announced that they were developing a new family of rockets to meet the unmanned launch needs of the next century. As currently conceived, the National Launch System would include three new vehicles designed to lift cargoes ranging from 20,000 to 130,000 pounds into low Earth orbit. The new rockets were expected to become operational in 2002 and would carry supplies to Space Station Freedom at less cost than present U. S. delivery systems. (W Times, Aug 18/92; Birmingham News, Aug 19/92)
McDonell Douglas Space Systems Company's Kennedy Space Center division was chosen as a finalist for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy, which is given annually to the NASA contractor which makes the greatest achievements in applying Total Quality Management (TQM) principles to their day-to-day operations. The goals of the award are to incorporate more efficient ways of 222doing business throughout NASA and its contractors and to transfer the performance improvement methods of award winners from company to company. "It is clear from your company's application that you have positive steps to advance quality, productivity and the continuous improvement process," NASA safety chief George Rodney told division officials in a recent letter. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Space Center Houston opened on this date. The $70 million non-profit center, which expected to lure two million visitors a year, is designed to bring the "wonder days" of the early space program to a generation of children that has known only the Space Shuttle. The center, on the periphery of NASA's space campus, supplants the former visitor facility inside the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.  (USA Today, Oct 14/92; H Chron, Oct 14/92, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92; Newsweek, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
NASA's plan to transfer work modifying Space Shuttles from Palmdale to its Kennedy Space Center in Florida triggered protests from California's congressional delegation and the governor's office. The NASA decision would affect about 500 jobs at Rockwell International's Palmdale facility, where five of the orbiters had been assembled since the 1970s and where the space agency had done major modification work on the Shuttle fleet. (LA Times, Feb 1/92)
NASA launched the first of its new, low-cost spacecraft, the Solar, Anomalous, and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer satellite (SAMPEX) aboard a four-stage Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The spacecraft was designed to study anomalous cosmic rays in an effort to improve understanding of the evolution of the sun, the solar system, and the Milky Way Galaxy. (NASA Release 29-102; The Sun, Jul 4/92; P Inq, Jul 4/92; W Times, Jul 4/92; W Post, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
The Argentine weather service reported that the outer edge of the "ozone hole" has shifted for the first time to a populated island in Tierra del Fuego off the southern tip of the South American mainland. Data from NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer on the Nimbus 7 satellite confirmed that the area of depleted ozone extended for some 8.9 million square miles over the south polar region, an increase of about 15 percent from 1991, the largest ozone hole ever observed. (W Times, Oct 11/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; P Inq, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said it had selected Lockheed Missiles & Space Company  of Sunnyvale, California, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee, level-of-effort contract for the Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations, Systems Engineering, and Software effort. The contract was in excess of $100 million and was a follow-on to existing contracts. The proposed effort included maintenance of the spacecraft's health and safety, efficient operation of the observatory, systems management, and servicing mission support. (NASA Release C92-11)
The Air Force test-fired a new booster for the Titan IV rocket and said it was the second successful test since an explosion ruined a firing last year. The new booster would allow Titan IVs, which launch U. S. spy satellites, to carry heavier payloads. (AP Oct 16/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
In an interview with Final Frontier magazine, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin gave his views about NASA and its contribution to American society. "I took this job because I believe NASA is critical to America's future. NASA provides hope, opportunity, and inspiration to the American public. It does this through its primary mission: to reach for the stars, in the broadest sense, of course. . . . For the last 30 years it has been demonstrated over and over again that the space program helps take America's value-added industry right to the cutting edge and provides jobs and opportunity." (Final Frontier, Sept/92)
A $25 million, five-year program to expand the ability of helicopter pilots to fly close to the ground, around obstacles and in bad weather, was initiated by NASA and the U.S. Army. Experiments conducted at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would study displays that give pilots information, better guidance and navigation systems and ways to improve helicopter weapons systems. The program's main research tool would be a modified UH-60A Black Hawk helicopter called the Rotorcraft-Aircrew Systems Concepts Airborne Laboratory or "RASCAL." In addition to Ames, flight tests were also to be conducted at Crows Landing, a U.S. Navy facility in California's San Joaquin Valley. (NASA Release 92-28)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
It was reported that the Kennedy Space Center was about to break gground on a second Space Station project, a new building to service the outpost's propulsion modules. The 3,000 square foot building, to be located behind and south of the operations and checkout buildings in Kennedy Space Center's industrial area, would be the space center's third hazardous processing plant. This one was to be dedicated to servicing a single type of payload: 800-gallon modulles filled with propellant, which would be used to keep the space station positioned properly in orbit. The new buildingg wouldbe able to accomodate testing, cleaning, and servicing of two to four modules simultaneously. The Kennedy Space Center was soliciting bids for construction of the plant, which was to be 70 feet high, 135 feet longg and 65 feet wide. A contract, worth about $11 million, was expected to be awarded in June 1992, with construction beginning in July, said payload projects manager JoAnn Morgan. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Results from a recently completed U.S. multi-agency aircraft study indicated that the ozone shield of the Northern Hemisphere was increasingly vulnerable to depletion by man-made chemicals. Dr. James Anderson of Harvard University, the study's Mission scientist, and 80 other scientists of the second Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE II) used two NASA aircraft to examine the ozone-related chemistry and air motions of the lower stratosphere from early October 1991 through late March 1992. The extensive measurements, combined with satellite and meteorological data, provide the first detailed picture of the factors that drive changes in the Arctic ozone layer from fall, through winter, and into spring. (NASA Release 92-55; NASA Release 92-56)
For the first time, virtually every nation with an interest in space or its practical benefits sent delegates to the World Space Congress. Meeting in Washington, D. C., at the invitation of President George Bush, almost 4,000 representatives began a week of meetings that were expected to usher in a new era of international cooperation in space exploration. The conference was sponsored by the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions, NASA, the U. S. Academy of Sciences, the International Astronautical Federation, and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (The Sun, Aug 31/92;  CSM, Aug 31/92)
NASA announced that it would kick-off a nationwide tour of its full-scale traveling Space Station Freedom model in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. The model, which is housed in two connected tractor trailers, features the U.S. living quarters and the U.S. laboratory module of the international space-based research facility. (NASA Note N92-47)
A status briefing marking the 20th anniversary of Pioneer 10's launch was scheduled for March 2 at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The briefing was to examine new and past space accomplishments and a spacecraft signal was scheduled to be "piped in" to the briefing from five billion miles away. Also featured in the briefing would be a launch-identical, full-scale replica of Pioneer 10 shown for the first time. (NASA Note N92-16)
The U.S. Air Force said that budget realities had necessitated cuts in plans to have the National Aero-Space Plane reach orbit and fly 25 times the speed of sound. The experimental hypersonic craft's top speed was likely to be cut from Mach 25 to Mach 12 or Mach 15 and its runway-to-space approach might be abandoned in favor of launch from the back of another airplane. Cost was projected to drop from $10 billion to $3 billion. (W Times, Dec 9/92)
At the American Astronomical Society's semiannual meeting in Atlanta, a team of scientists announced that, using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had made the most precise measurement to date of the percent of heavy hydrogen in space, which better determines the physical conditions present in the theorized Big Bang at the origin of the universe. Deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen, differs from ordinary hydrogen by having one neutron in addition to one proton in its nucleus. A measurement of the ratio of deuterium to ordinary hydrogen provides a critical test of conditions in the universe at the time of the Big Bang because it is believed that essentially all of the deuterium now present was created at that time. If further research finds no evidence for large amounts of "missing matter," then the new deuterium measurements strengthen the idea that the universe will expand forever. If true, the universe had a brilliant beginning but will have no end. (NASA Release 92-2)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
Thorsten L. Gunther, 76, a retired geodesist who worked on Goddard Space Flight Center contract involving earth measurement, died April 25 at Washington Hospital Center of combinations after surgery for an aterial aneurism. A resident of Washington area since 1947, he lived in Bethesday. Gunther was an expert onsatellite geodsy and author of the NASA Directory of Station Locations. (W Post, May 5.92)
In a carefully hedged report, the General Accounting Office said that crucial American high-technology industries including consumer electronics and robotics may have lost ground in the 1980s to foreign competitors, particularly Japan. The sectors examined were: semi-conductors, semiconductor equipment, supercomputers, pharmaceuticals, telecommunications, fiber optics, robotics, consumer electronics, civilian aircraft, advanced materials, and flexible manufacturing systems. (NY Times, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 18/92)
NASA delayed the maiden flight of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour from May 4 to May 7 to allow a daylight liftoff. Tom Utsman, acting associate administrator for space flight at NASA, said officials had reviewed the criteria and decided that it would be prudent to delay the flight so detailed photographs and documentation could be made for analysis. A dalylight liftoff also would allow Endeavour's seven-member crew to make a daylight landing back at the Kennedy Space Center in case of an engine failure early in flight. (UPI, Apr 28/92; W Post, Apr 28/92; USA Today, Apr 28/92; NY Times, Apr 28/92)
Dr. Everett Gibson of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, Dr. Haraldur Karlsson, and scientists at the University of Chicago analyzed drops of water extracted from several meteorites believed to have come from Mars and concluded that the oxygen isotopes in the water were extraterrestrial. Photographs returned to Earth from the Mariner 9 and Viking spacecraft show features that suggest Mars once may have had a water-rich atmosphere and flowing water on its surface. Through the years, several meteorites have been collected on Earth that scientists have identified as Martian by comparing them to information gleaned by the Viking spacecraft. Six of these meteorites were used in the water extraction procedure. Findings from the work completed by the team may answer some questions about the processes operating in the solar system. (NASA Release 92-35)
Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company was awarded a three-year extension of its existing contract for payload ground operations services, valued at approximately $561.4 million, at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (NASA Release C92-21)
NASA announced the departure of Navy Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein, Chief of the Astronaut Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, since 1986 and a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, effective about October 1. Selected by NASA in 1978, Brandenstein first flew as a pilot aboard the Shuttle Challenger in 1978 and holds the record for time in space (789 hours) among Space Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 92-100)
NASA selected 28 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The proposals were submitted by 65 small, high technology firms located in 16 states. Total value of the 28 awards was $14 million. SBIR objectives are to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally funded research innovations. The SBIR program is managed by NASA's Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., and all individual SBIR projects are managed by nine NASA field centers. (NASA Release 92-27)
NASA announced plans to consolidate some management functions for the Space Station Freedom program and to create a contractor-led integration team to ensure the successful building and deployment of the international Space Station. The consolidations affected operations in Reston, Virginia, and at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The consolidation came amid charges of cost growth and delays at Johnson Space Center and among the center's team of contractors led by McDonnell Douglas. The problems associated with the $5 billion contract had prompted two audits and one investigation by NASA's inspector general. (NASA Release 92-214; W Post, Dec 2/92; Space News, Dec 7-13/92; AvWk, Dec 7/92)
Some leading American astronomers complained about the failure of the Federal Government to provide dependable financial support for astronomical research in the United States. The absence of dependable funding put American astronomy at a serious disadvantage in the competition with its counterparts in Europe and Japan, the astronomers charged. Federal financing had flagged, they said, just as a steam of new telescopes and telescope-enhancing devices were ready to be exploited. There were also management problems. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, chief scientist for NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, charged that poor management of America's space and astronomy programs had hobbled efforts to compete with European science. (NY Times, Aug 18/92)
To help bolster the competitiveness of American industry, NASA and the Department of Energy announced that they had formed a partnership to enhance the transfer of technologies developed in their laboratories to American enterprise. Areas of cooperation included outreach to business and non-profit research organizations, access to federal technology resources, training and education, dissemination of scientific and technical information, and technology transfer policy and program analysis.
The National Space Club named the NASA/TRW observatory team that built the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory the winner of the 1992 Nelson P. Jackson Award at an awards ceremony April 10 in Washington, D.C. This award honors the firm responsible for "an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft and space fields." (Business Wire, Apr 15/92)
Researchers at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said that they would take part in a Russian biomedical space mission. Ames scientists expected to use monkeys to study the effect of lengthy space travel on bones, eyes, and inner ear receptors. The space mission would involve experiments from several nations and was expected to be launched December 29. (UPI, Dec 14/92)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were investigating the importance of gravity to life on Earth. They also were studying whether intermittent exposure to gravity might help keep future space explorers healthy. Volunteers were confined to their beds for 24-hours a day in the head-down position to induce the physical changes associated with exposure to the microgravity of space. Results of the study indicated that these volunteers could avoid the changes simply by standing quietly for 15 minutes of each hour over a 16-hour period. Standing for two hours a day or walking at three miles per hour were almost as effective, according to Dr. Joan Vernikos, the study's Principal Investigator and Acting Chief of Ames's Life Science Division. (NASA Release 92-67)
The Air Force reported that a YF-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter, prototype of the planned F-22, had slammed onto the main runway of Edwards Air Force Base with its wheels retracted during a practice approach. The radar-eluding plane, designed to be the hottest air combat fighter going into the 21st century, slid several thousand feet and burned for 90 seconds. A Lockheed pilot escaped with only minor injuries. (B Sun, Apr 29/92)
Jeremiah Pearson, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said NASA planners were studying ways to cut up to 25 percent from the Space Shuttle budget by 1997, a much more extensive reduction than previously projected. The 25 percent cut would produce savings of about $3 billion, Pearson said. Managers at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida were already working to cut 10 percent from the Shuttle's 1994 budget. (Space News, Aug 24-30/92)
NASA announced that a group of Alaskans had started a three-year experiment in the use of a small emergency radio transmitter known as a Personal Locator Beacon to communicate with a 10-year-old search and rescue satellite system that up to now had been used primarily for aircraft and ship emergencies. The locator beacon has the potential to save lives when used in emergencies in remote areas. The experiment was being carried out by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U. S. Air Force, and the U. S. Coast Guard. (NASA Release 92-115)
It was reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center plans to award a broad computer services contract later during the year to support the center's host computers, networks, workstations, application software and telecommunications systems. The contract, which analysts estimate will cost up to $180 million, was to include software acquisition, development and maintenance, installation, engineering, integration and costumer services. (Federal Computer Week, Feb 17/92)
Lockheed Corporation's Space Operations Company unit won the competition for a $200-million-a-year contract to manage the Kennedy Space Center in Cocoa Beach, Florida. NASA said the contract would run for an initial period of four years, plus three two-year options, for a total potential contract period of 10 years. Its estimated value over the 10-year period was $1.9 billion. (WSJ, Nov 19/92; W Post, Nov 19/92; Fla Today, Nov 19/92)
L. Eugene Root, a pioneer U.S. aircraft builder who led Lockheed Missile and Space Company to maturity and was a member of the RAND think tank died in Menlo Park, California, at the age of 87. As president of the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences in 1962, Root combined his organization with the American Rocket Society, co-founding the major U.S. aerospace society, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (LA Times, Jan 25/92)
NASA, in conjunction with the nation's two leading aircraft engine makers, reported that it would be developing advanced materials that could make a next-generation supersonic airliner possible by the year 2005. A five year, $88 million partnership with General Electric Aircraft Engines, Cincinnati, and United Technologies, Pratt and Whitney Division, East Hartford, Connecticut, was to center on critical composite materials and processes that U.S. industry would need to design and build a fleet of high-speed civil transports. The planes would fly at more than twice the speed of sound and at much higher altitudes than today's commercial airliners. A cost-effective, environmentally compatible supersonic airliner could cut long-distance trip times in half. For example, a future high-speed civil transport could fly from Los Angeles to Tokyo in 4 1/2 hours instead of the 10 hours taken by present subsonic passenger planes. While NASA, Pratt and Whitney and General Electric will form the core of the team, many other U.S. engine companies, materials suppliers and composite fabricators also will play an integral part. This interaction will provide the base for a future U.S. manufacturing capability in high-temperature composites and will let the involved firms take early advantage of the program's technical results. The composites also will help American manufacturers of subsonic airplanes, power systems and military aircraft. (NASA Relese 92-21)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he would act promptly to implement the recommendations of a Management Review Team for enhanced security at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The team considered Ames high risk for hostile intelligence operations. (NASA Release 92-207; UPI, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 19/92; USA Today, Nov 19/92; W Times, Nov 19/92; P Inq, Nov 19/92; AP, Nov 18/92, 19/92, and 20/92; W. Post, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 22/92; Space News, Nov 23-29/92)
NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)
NASA issued its strongest warning yet about the quickening deterioration of the ozone layer over large, populated areas in northern latitudes. Experts warned that thinning ozone will let in more harmful ultraviolet rays from the sun and lead to more skin cancer and cancer deaths. An ozone layer hole could appear as early March 1992 if certain meteorological and chemical conditions occur, said the scientists. Even if the hole does not appear right away, the chances are "very high" that it will occur over the next decade, said James Anderson, a Harvard University chemistry professor who is involved in the project. (WSJ, Feb 4/92; P Inq, Feb 4/92; NY Times, Feb 4/92; USA Today, Feb 4/92; W Post, Feb 4/92; W Times, Feb 4/92; LA Times, Feb 4/92; B Sun, Feb 4/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
Shuttle managers said budget-cutting goals recently mandated by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin could mean the loss of as many as 800 jobs on top of the 300 to 400 being phased out during the new fiscal year at the Kennedy Space Center. The cuts were part of Goldin's pledge to run a leaner, more efficient space agency. (O Sen Star, Sept 30/92)
A panel of experts recommended that the Air Force assume sole responsibility for developing a new all-purpose national launch system called the "Spacelifter" by the end of the decade. NASA's fleet of Shuttles would be phased out at the earliest opportunity, having become too costly and fragile a system to dominate the space program much longer. The report did not call for a large, heavy-lift vehicle but focused instead on development of lower-cost, medium-size rockets that could satisfy virtually all known payload needs and be tailored to carry cargo or people. (W Post, Nov 19/92 and Nov 21/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92 and Nov 22/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92)
Two American scientists presented a new theory on the evolution of Earth's continents and on early mass extinctions of life. Michael Rampino of New York University and Verne Oberbeck, a geologist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, discussed evidence that suggests that a huge asteroid struck Earth 250 million years ago, helping break up a super land mass called Gondwanaland and contributing to Earth's worst mass extinction of life forms. The new theory, presented during the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, was met by disbelief and skepticism, even by scientists who believe there is overwhelming evidence that another later asteroid impact wiped out the dinosaurs and other species by disrupting Earth's climate 65 million years ago. (P Inq, Dec 10/92; The Sun, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 20/92)
NASA and a contractor team headed by Rockwell International said they were conducting supersonic laminar flow experiments using two General Dynamics F-16XL demonstrators on loan from the U. S. Air Force. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
Facing a tight budget, National Aerospace Plane officials proposed extra steps to slow the program aimed at building two runway-to-orbit research planes. The program's goal was to make the first flight of an x-30 aerospace plane by late 1999. The revised program director Robert Barthelemy presented the revised schedule to top Air Force and NASA officials in a quarterly technical review at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. Congress approved $250 million for the program for the 1992 year after slashing nearly $100 million from the Bush adminstration's $303.8 million request. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
NASA reported that astronaut Bruce E. Melnick, Commander USCG, will be leaving NASA in July 1992. Melnick, who flew on Space Shuttle missions STS-41 and STS-49, accepted the position of Director, Shuttle Processing Contract Process Improvement Technology with Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 92-68; USA Today, May 20/92; AP, May 19/92)
Air Force officials employed a revised and more accurate computer model of wind direction and speed in the launch of the Mars Observer. The officials insisted on ideal weather conditions before allowing the launch because of concerns that a plume of harmful nitrogen tetroxide could drift over nearby populated areas should the Titan 3 rocket explode within the first 20 to 30 seconds of flight. The new computer model allows the Martin Marietta-built Titan family of rockets to continue as launch vehicles, although the modelling may make it more difficult to launch on time. (Fla Today, Oct 4/92)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Lockheed was leading a six-member industry team in an effort to develop an unsolicited National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) proposal for the Air Force. The team was to recommend scrapping the NASP in favor of a much lighter hypersonic research vehicle called NORA, for National Orbital Research Aircraft. NORA's $5 billion price tag was far less than the $10-15 billion slated for the NASP. (AvWk, Mar 8/93)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Space & Rocket Center was operating two nonprofit Space Camps, one in Huntsville, Alabama, and the other in Florida, near the Kennedy Space Center. The programs at the camp were designed to encourage young people to think about careers in science, technology, and the aerospace industry when they grow up, or to encourage them to try to become astronauts. Since the program began in 1982, more than 150,000 students have graduated from the program. (W Post, June 1/93)
NASA announced that it was adapting an existing, cutting-edge x-ray system to improve inspections of aging aircraft while saving American industries money. The x-ray system, which combines TV-like scanning by x-ray beams with digital data acquisition, was originally intended for medical, dental, and other industrial purposes.  NASA was to adapt the system to inspect aircraft wings, turbines, and propeller blades for corrosion, cracks, and disbonding.  The system was developed by the Digiray Corporation. (NASA Release 93-137)
Using the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), NASA scientists measured thermal radiation differences across the universe and come up with more conclusive evidence than ever to support the "Big Bang" theory that the universe was created by a single blast 15 billion years ago. Measurements made by COBE revealed that 99.97 percent of the early radiant energy of the universe was released within the first year after the Big Bang itself. "This is the ultimate in tracing one's cosmic roots," said NASA scientist John C. Mather, who announced the findings at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society. (NASA Release 93-5; USA Today, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 8/93; AP, Jan 8/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
The Freedom Forum, a group that funds journalism programs, presented a $100,000 grant to the Mercury Seven Foundation to establish a lecture series about space. The series, which was intended to help improve public understanding of space issues, was to be held annually in Florida's Brevard County, the location of the Kennedy Space Center. (AP, Mar 22/93)
Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Allan H. Meltzer, professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that if the Clinton Administration were serious about reducing spending it would eliminate the $30 billion Space Station, reduce entitlements, and cut wasteful projects. (WSJ, Feb 22/93)
A modified troop and cargo plane described as a "flying laboratory" crashed and burned after taking off from Dobbins Air Force Base in suburban Atlanta. The seven people aboard, all Lockheed employees, were killed. The plane, a modified troop and cargo plane, was used by Lockheed for testing new technologies.
A Russian would-be cosmonaut, now in the United States pursuing a doctorate in space policy at American University in Washington, was in Houston for three months on a U.S. government subcontract, helping two Russian cosmonauts prepare for flights in U.S. spaceships in 1993 and 1995. (LA Times, June 7/93)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation of Germantown, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract. The seven-year, $91 million contract would provide instrument support services to the Engineering Directorate at Goddard. (NASA Release C93-h; W Post, June 15/93)
A fighter plane shaped like an arrowhead flew into NASA's Langley Research Center this week. The plane, a heavily modified version of the Air Force F-16 fighter, has a wing that is narrow near the front of the plane and flares out near the tail. The plane was part of a program to build an efficient supersonic jetliner. (Daily Press, Apr 16/93)
NASA announced that scientists from the University of Hawaii and NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had determined that the planet Pluto is covered with surface ices that are 98 percent nitrogen.  The scientists concluded that with such abundant nitrogen surface ice, Pluto's thin atmosphere must be primarily gaseous nitrogen. (NASA Release 93-142)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, hosted six three-day sessions of Aerospace for Kids, designed to teach children about aerospace technology and Goodard this summer.  The program was to host 150 children over a six-week period this summer. (Prince George's Sentinel, Jul 29/93)
Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."
NASA announced that under a recently signed agreement NASA engineers and Learjet Inc. engineers, based in  Wichita, Kansas, would work on the development of a new high performance business jet. The engineers were to study aircraft size and aerodynamics to create the plane; they would use state-of-the-art supercomputers and wind tunnels at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-46; AP, Mar 15/93)
The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)
NASA announced that it had postponed the Space Station Freedom Utilization Conference, planned for June 21-24 in San Francisco, California. NASA managers decided to postpone the conference because of recent instructions to redesign the Space Station. (NASA Media Advisory)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it had selected NSI Technology Services Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for integration and test support services. The contract, which covered seven years, had an estimated value of $200 million and would provide services to all of Goddard and portions of NASA's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release C93-e)
NASA selected Allied-Signal Technical Services Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at $40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The contract was to directly support Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The SLR technique measures the round-trip flight time of very short laser pulses from ground-based stations to retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release C93-n)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)
NASA contracted with Stanford University to do additional work on the Gravity Probe-B experiment. The experiment tests predictions of the general theory of relativity. Gravity Probe-B determines how space and time are warped by the presence of the Earth and its rotation by measuring small changes in the spin of four gyroscopes in a satellite at 400 miles altitude in a Earth polar orbit. The first Shuttle test flight was scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release C93-b)
NASA announced that it had awarded Government Technology services Inc. of Chantilly a contract to provide Unix work station products to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland (W Times, Mar 4/93)
NASA and the seven Central America nations began a program to study, preserve, and protect the  region's rain forest by expanding the use of satellite data by Central American scientists. Under an agreement with the Central American Commission for Environment and Development, NASA would train and provide equipment to scientists from all the Central American countries. By using data from the Advanced Very High-Resolution Radiometers flying aboard several U.S. weather satellites, the scientists would be able to estimate the amount and type of vegetation cover and forest cover in the region and to conduct costal studies. (NASA Release 93-47)
NASA announced that the agency would design and install an acoustic lining in the wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The improved wind tunnel ultimately would help U.S. industry design quiet engines for a future high-speed civil transport and for new helicopters. (NASA Release 93-81; San Francisco Examiner, May 9/93)
Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)
A White House panel recently called for the American space program to cut back its program significantly. The panel's report, issued on December 17, said that duplication among agencies had to be eliminated and cold-war secrecy reduced. The panel added that the United States should seek to make international cooperation an essential component of its space exploration strategy. (NY Times, Jan 26/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center Director Robert Crippen and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles had signed an agreement that would transfer benefits derived from the U.S. space program to the private sector and industries in Florida.  The two parties agreed to set aside $1 million each for the next two years to implement projects under this agreement. (NASA Release 93-155)
NASA, the Alaskan Volcano Observatory (AVO) and Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, have agreed to a second robotic volcano exploration involving Dante, an eight-legged robot that attempted to explore Mt. Erebus in Antarctica earlier this year. (NASA Release 93-195; AP, Oct 26/93; W Times, Oct 31/93)
A satellite was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying a military satellite designed to improve the accuracy of radars that track planes, missiles, space junk, shuttles, and other spacecraft. (AP, June 26/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) contract award protests were settled. EG & G Florida, Inc; BAMSI, Inc.; and Westinghouse KSC Company, Inc. protested the awarding of the contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, charging that there were deficiencies in the agency's activities during the original proposal submission. As part of the settlement, NASA agreed to rescind its original selection and said that each of the four competitors would be able to submit a revised proposal. (NASA Release 93-18; WSJ, Feb 2/93; AP, February 2/93; O Sen Star, Jan 19/93; Fla Today, Jan 29/93)
Fourteen scientists, most of them from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that world ozone had dropped to its lowest levels since scientists began monitoring the protective layer. The drop might be a delayed effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The scientists emphasized that the findings did not mean that the Northern Hemisphere was experiencing an "ozone hole" like the one that forms over the South pole, and that the ozone hole did not pose a significant health threat. The new findings were based on observations by several Earth-orbiting satellites operated by NASA and NOAA and confirmed by ground-based ozone monitoring instruments. (NASA Release 93-74; AP, Apr 22/93, Apr 23/93; USA Today, Apr 23/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; WSJ, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, selected Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Corporation, Houston, for the Engineering, Test and Analysis contract worth $12.5 billion over 10 years, beginning January 1, 1994.  (NASA Release C93-y)
Bad weather delayed the landing of Space Shuttle Endeavour at Kennedy Space Center. The landing was rescheduled for June 30, weather permitting. (UPI, June 29/93, June 30/93; W Post, June 30/93; USA Today, June 30/93; NY Times, June 30/93; B Sun, June 30/93; AP, June 30/93; RTw, June 30/93)
Air traffic controllers reported that their new  $839 million radar system has some serious flaws: planes vanish from screens, phantom images appear, and even a squirrel can chew up the network.  NASA said that it has received many complaints at its Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, California, home of NASA's aviation safety reporting system. (AP, September 21/93
Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)
The Department of Justice filed a complaint accusing Paul Buchanan, director of NASA's Biomedical Operations and Research Office at Kennedy Space Center, of submitting false vouchers claiming lodging expenses for time spent in Washington, DC, while on temporary duty for NASA. (Fla Today, Dec 4/93; C Trib, Dec 5/93)
The government-backed computer chip consortium Sematech announced Thursday that it had produced chips with electrical devices just 0.35 microns wide using American production equipment. The announcement indicated that the American chip industry was coming back on track technically. The state-of-the-art in chip production was 0.6 microns; however, Japanese companies recently began demonstrating their ability to produce 0.35 chips. Achieving 0.35 micron capabilities by the end of 1992 was one of Sematech's goals at its founding in l987. (LA Times, Jan 22/93)
NASA scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that depletion of stratospheric ozone over Antarctica in 1992 was as severe as in any previous year. Ozone is destroyed by chorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, which are used as solvents, propellants, and coolants.  On September 23, 1992, the surface area of the ozone hole reached 8.9 million square miles. Measurements were taken by the Nimbus-7 and Meteor-3 Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) instruments. (NASA Release 93-14; UPI, Jan 19/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
Thirteen high school students from Laurel, Maryland, took control of a 400-pound, $20 million satellite as it beamed information for a solar particle study to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. To be on the safe side, a team of engineers stood by to make sure nothing untoward happened.
The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.
Western Europe's Ariane 42P rocket deployed an American communications satellite into space on June 24. The rocket, which was launched from French Guiana after a long series of delays, was owned by the Los Angeles based Hughes Space and Communications Company. (RTw, June 24/93)
Two NASA scientists told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that a cosmic collision as powerful as the one that many scientists think killed all the dinosaurs on Earth 65 million years ago may take place on the planet Jupiter in 1994. The scientists speculated that the impact might come from the comet Shoemaker-Levy, which last year came so close to Jupiter that the planet's powerful gravitational field shattered the comet into about a dozen large chunks. Recent calculations show that most of the comet's remaining chunks may hit Jupiter in July 1994. Because of uncertainties about the comet's orbit, however, it was possible that the collision might not occur at all. (C Trib, June 13/93; P Inq, June 20/93; W Post, June 28/93)
Robert McClure of Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in Victoria, British Columbia, said that Canadian and U.S. astronomers had used a telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, to obtain the first clear pictures showing galaxies colliding and merging on "a really grand scale." The pictures supported a theory that postulates that elliptical galaxies were formed by galactic mergers such as those observed. (W Times, June 20/93)
NASA announced the solicitation of proposals for the Technology Reinvestment Project, a $471 million federal interagency effort to develop and deploy dual-use technologies and at the same time give a competitive advantage to American companies. (NASA Release 93-85)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
NASA announced the assignment of Dr. John Cox as acting Deputy Director, Program and Operations, Space Station Freedom Program, and Robert Moorehead as Chief engineer for the Office of Space Systems Development (OSSD), NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release 93-136)
NASA announced that it would soon begin tests using a modified Convair 990 commercial jet airliner to expand the operational landing capabilities of the Space Shuttle system. The Convair has been undergoing modifications for two years in preparation for tests that would help Johnson Space Center researchers better understand the operational capabilities of the Shuttle system. (Desert Wings, Jan 8/93)
The military's plans to test a Russian Topaz 2 nuclear reactor in orbit were criticized by the governing council of the American Astronomical Society and some other scientists. Council members were concerned because experience with previous Russian reactors had shown that they emit radiations that "can significantly disrupt x-ray and gamma-ray astronomical observations." Society officials noted that they were not opposing the mission or the use of nuclear reactors in space; rather they were asking that the test be conducted at higher levels, which would presumably be safer.
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee voted June 9 to prevent NASA from moving about 90 Space Shuttle jobs from Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to Johnson Space Center in Houston. (Space News, June 21-27/93)
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) recommended eliminating the JPL Edwards Test Facility, staffed by 28 JPL employees and 18 contractors, at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert. If NASA managers accepted the recommendation, the facility could shut down by 1996. (UPI, Feb 8/93; Feb 9/Antelope Valley Press, Feb 9/93)
Arthur L. H. Rudolph, a German-born scientist who played a crucial role in developing the Saturn 5 rocket used in the American moon landings, lost his attempt to regain his American citizenship. He gave up his citizenship in 1984 when he faced deportation for Nazi war crimes.
NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of the deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, are the principle data source providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms.  NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) were cooperating on a project to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning system. (NASA Release 93-213)
Donald K. Slayton, one of the original seven American astronauts, died June 13 at his home in League City, Texas, of brain cancer. He was 69.
NASA announced that it had selected SYSCON Services, Inc., Washington, D.C., for negotiations leading to the award of a contract to provide technical and support services at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California.  (NASA Release C93-j)
NASA released four new images gathered by the Cosmic Background Explorer. The images, which were released at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, showed infrared sources such as dust within the Solar System, stars in the Milky Way Galaxy, and dust and stars in other galaxies. The images were created from Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE) data. (NASA Release 92-256)
NASA announced that beginning in February, NASA would test "technology incubation," a new laboratory-to-market approach designed to help space technology contribute to U.S. industrial competitiveness. NASA was funding two centers, the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The three-year experiment, which was being operated by the University of Texas, Austin, was receiving funding of $800,000 this year. (NASA Release 93-037)
An x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunctioned while scanning the space between stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, were attempting to correct the problem. The spectrometer measures low-energy x-rays emitted from the space between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped to prove or disprove the theory that a bubble of hot gas in the Milky Way Galaxy was produced by a nearby exploding star. Meanwhile, Endeavour crew members conducted medical tests and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school classroom presentation called "Physics of Toys." (NY Times, Jan 15/93; AP, Jan 15/93)
A Titan 4 rocket carrying an expensive military spy satellite system exploded minutes after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base.  This, the first failure of the four-year-old Titan 4 program, was a $2-billion accident, said John Pike, director of the space policy project at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, a liberal group that researches classified aerospace projects. Pike consistently has criticized U.S. spy satellites. The accident wiped out most of the savings Congress took from the intelligence budget during the year. (RTw, Aug 2/93; AP, Aug 3/93; USA Today, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; LA Times, Aug 3/93; W Times, Aug 3/93; NY Times, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93)
The Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of five landed January 19 at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Endeavour circled Earth 96 times and traveled 2,501,277 miles during its six-day flight. The Shuttle and its five crew members were said to be in good shape. (LA Times, Jan 20/93; W Times, Jan 20/93; NY Times, Jan 20/93; B Sun, Jan 20/93)
As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use.
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had created the first geographically precise image of the Earth "breathing"--removing and releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. The dynamic computer model shows monthly changes for carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere as microbes decompose plant debris in the Earth's soil. (NASA Release 93-223; UPI, Dec 20/93)
NASA announced that during the third week in July  it had delivered the first data sets from the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) to the National Space Science Data Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. As a result, researchers from around the world now have access to the COBE data that provided the scientific community with an unprecedented look at how the universe began. (NASA Release 93-145)
The New York Times reported that a radio telescope spread across 5,000 miles had been finished.  The new telescope, called the Very long Baseline Array (V.L.B.A.), has 10 antennas scattered across United States territory from the central Pacific Ocean to the Caribbean. All 10 antennas are very well synchronized as a single telescope of gigantic size, an arrangement that gives the V.I.B.A. far sharper vision than that of any other telescope. The telescope's revolving power is such that an observer in New York City would be able to read a newspaper in San Francisco. The V.I.B.A. was to be used to probe the depths of time and space. (NY Times, Aug 17/93)
Germany's space agency was scheduled to be in charge of the scientific aspect of Shuttle Columbia's next research mission. NASA would oversee Shuttle operations during the flight. Ninety-three experiments were planned, two-thirds sponsored by German institutions and the rest by other European countries, the United States, and Japan. This would only be the second time in 32 years of American manned spaceflight that a mission had been managed from outside the United States. (AP, Jan 20/97)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were measuring how the human body reacted to exercise done on Earth and comparing those measurements to the exercise measurements of astronauts working in the microgravity environment of space. The goal was to try to improve the productivity of astronauts involved in space walks. (NASA Release 93-93)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
A team of astronomers from the University of Arizona told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that they had found convincing new evidence that a black hole the size of a million suns is at the center of the Milky Way galaxy. The astronomers reported that they had detected faint infrared emissions from an area at the galactic core that is the source of a powerful radio signal possibly produced by forces surrounding a black hole. The team detected the emissions by using a new adaptive optics system known as FASTTRAC, developed by graduate student Laird Close and Donald W. McCarthy Jr., of the University of Arizona. (W Post, Jan 6/93; NY Times, Jan 6/93; USA Today, Jan 6/93)
NASA announced that researchers had recorded unexpected, huge flashes of light in the upper atmosphere that might affect atmospheric ozone and present potential problems for high-altitude research planes. The flashes occurred above a severe thunderstorm in the Midwest in the summer and were recorded aboard NASA's DC-8 Airborne Laboratory, based at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-167; W Post, Sep 24/93; AP, Sep 23/93)
NASA announced that an American satellite had detected the most intense flash of gamma radiation observed in the two years of its operation. The burst, known as "the super bowl" event because it occurred on the day of this year's National championship game, appeared to produce 10 times more energy than any previously observed gamma-ray burst. The burst also led scientists to say that the bursts were not the product of merely hot "cooking objects, but of particles being accelerated to near the speed of light and being emitted in focused beams, or jets. The new findings suggested that the bursts originated far beyond the Milky Way galaxy. (NASA Release 93-72; Reuters, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; APn, Apr 4/23)
In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
Space scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, think they have identified what matter in deep space is absorbing certain wavelengths of light from distant stars. Researchers Farid Salama and Louis Allamandola demonstrated that the light is absorbed by unexpectedly large organic molecules spread throughout the vacuum of space. These molecules, shaped like chicken wire, are called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
America's technological leaders were scheduled to meet  in Anaheim, California, from December 7-9 1993, to explore innovative ideas that could be used to solve engineering problems, create new products and industry opportunities, and facilitate the transfer of government-sponsored technologies to American industry. TECHNOLOGY 2003, the fourth annual national technology transfer conference and exposition, was sponsored by NASA, "NASA Tech Briefs" magazine, and the Technology Utilization Foundation. (NASA Release 93-212)
Bernard A. Harris, MD, an African American, was set to make his first Shuttle flight aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in late February. He was scheduled to conduct experiments exploring the behavior of humans, living organisms, and materials.
The W Times reported that a joint U.S.-German experimental fighter jet had completed a revolutionary rapid turn in flight. The aircraft slowed from a speed of about 300 miles an hour and reversed direction in only nine seconds using a tight, looping turn. According to the Pentagon, the turn was far beyond the aerodynamic capability of any conventional fixed-wing aircraft. The test flight took place at Edwards Air Force Base, California.
Robert M. Rados, 73, a retired NASA meteorologist, died of cardiac arrest February 3 at Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, D.C.
NASA announced that the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and California wine growers would use aerial and satellite images to battle an insect problem encountered by California's wine industry. Sensitive electronic scanners on aircraft and satellites would help a group from government, industry, and several universities map and analyze root louse damage in northern California's wine growing region this summer. (NASA Release 93-55; UPI, Mar 31/93; SF Chron, Mar 31/93; P Inq, May 2/93)
Twenty-six Prince George's Country students with physical, mental, or learning disabilities spent six weeks in a jobs program at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, during the summer.  The program, which was under the auspices of the President's Commission on Employment for Persons With Disabilities, aimed to steer more young people into fields like science, engineering, and computer programming. (W Post, Aug 12/93)
NASA engineers believed that they had identified the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine section. A Kennedy Space Center spokesman said that probably a
NASA announced that it had joined with American Bio-Technologies Inc. of Cambridge, Massachusetts, in an attempt to arrive at a better understanding of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). The goal was to use advanced x-ray technology and expertise developed by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, to advance knowledge of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and AIDS, to develop new therapeutic approaches for HIV and AIDS, and to develop superior biological materials for vaccine development and HIV detection. (NASA Release 93-88)
NASA announced that a study at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, might lead to a reduction in the lightheadness astronauts feel after returning to earth from space. A reduced level of plasma was believed to contribute to the tendency to feel faint. (NASA Release 93-030)
NASA announced that the IC2 Institute, Austin, Texas, had appointed John S. Gee as the Director of the Ames Technology Commercialization Center (ATCC) located in Sunnyvale, California. IC2 Institute, a unit of the University of Texas, was contracted by NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts Technology, Washington, D.C, to assist NASA centers in the transfer of technology to the private sector.  (NASA Release 93-185)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
NASA announced that recent discoveries from the agency's Extreme Ultravioilet Explorer (EUVE) would be presented at the National Meeting of the American Astronomical Society, University of California at Berkeley on June 7 and 8.
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Jackson and Tull Chartered Engineers of Washington, D.C. for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for multidisciplinary research and development. (NASA Release C93-p)
NASA announced that a new camera to fix the Hubble Space Telescope's blurry vision had been shipped from Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, where it was built, for testing at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. It was scheduled to be sent into orbit later in the year. (AP, June 2/93)
NASA announced that NASA and industry engineers had designed and built a new measuring device that would save American taxpayers more than $1 million on a NASA project. The device, an improved "inlet rake,"  measures the air flowing into one of the engines on the F/AS-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle (HARV), based at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Engineers would be able to use the air flow data to help give fighter-type aircraft more power and better handling qualities. (NASA Release 93-035; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 19/93)
Miles "Mike" Ross, former deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center, died of cancer Wednesday at his home.  He was 74.  Mr. Ross joined NASA in 1967 as deputy director of the center's engineering and technical operations.  He became deputy center director in 1970. (Fl Today, Oct 15/93)
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (M.I.T.) reported that a powerful new x-ray camera had been shot into orbit just in time to focus on the newly discovered supernova. The scientists reported that the camera was providing very detailed information about the cosmic explosion. The M.I.T. camera was one of several Japanese and American instruments put into orbit aboard a Japanese spacecraft launched on February 20. (NY Times, Apr 13/93)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
NASA astronaut Bernard A. Harris Jr., M.D. was scheduled to present a National Urban League (NLU) banner, flown on the STS-55 Space Shuttle mission, to NLU president John Jacob during the organization's opening keynote ceremony on Sunday, August 1, in Washington, D.C. (NASA Media Advisory)
The New York Times reported that at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, Dr. Douglas N.C. Lin of the University of California at Santa Cruz had described the Milky Way as practicing "galactic cannibalism." Lin explained that the gravitational force of matter in the vast halo encompassing the Milky Way galaxy was causing the Milky Way to consume the stars and gases of its nearest galactic neighbor, the Large Magellanic Cloud 160,000 light-years away. (NY Times, June 8/93; LA Times, June 8/1993; USA Today, June 8/93; B Sun, June 8/93; P Inq, June 8/93)
Guy Bluford, the nation's first African American astronaut in space, was scheduled to retire later in the month.  Bluford, 50, who went on four Shuttle missions, planned to work for a Maryland aerospace company. (AP, Jul 13/93)
Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)
NASA announced that it had selected the Universities Space Research Association, Columbia, Maryland, to negotiate a cost-plus-fee contract for the Visiting Scientists Program at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The five-year contract was expected to take effect September 1, 1993; the proposed cost for the five-year period was $31 million. (NASA Release C93-g)
The media reported that the Space Shuttle Columbia landed May 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California, after low clouds at Cape Canaveral, Florida, forced it to divert to California.
During Take Our Daughters to Work Day on April 26, daughters of Johnson Space Center employees got to see where astronauts prepare for space flights and were even able to test the pressurized spacesuit gloves worn by astronauts. Daughters were also welcomed at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, where they toured the control room, investigated an SE-71 cockpit, and crawled around inside a modified Boeing 747. (AP, Apr 27/93; W Times, Apr 29/93; Antelope Valley, Apr 29/93)
The Washington Times reported that a conference of scientists and policy makers had discussed the question of what to do with the "junk science" that makes its way into public policy. The conference, which was held in the Washington, DC area, was sponsored by the International Institute of George Mason University and the Science and Environmental Policy Project. (W Times, May 25/93)
NASA announced that 40 college students had started a six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The summer residence training program was for college students interested in life sciences, bioengineering, ecology, or related fields. (NASA Release 93-117)
The Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce announced that it had awarded NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, U.S. Air Force Lt. General Edward Barry, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) its Kitty Hawk, Sands of Time Award. The chamber annually recognizes individuals and companies in the aerospace industry as a means of promoting the industry. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
NASA announced that scientist Dr. Robert Watson would receive the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) on February 15.
Rockwell International Corporation Chairman and CEO Donald R. Beall presented the Chairman's Team Award to National Aero-Space Plane engineers in recognition of the Engine Flowpath Team's significant contributions to hypersonic propulsion development in the United States. The team was composed of 11 engineers from General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Pratt & Whitney, Rockwell's Rocketdyne and North American Aircraft businesses, and NASA's Langely Research Center. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 26/93)
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California announced that nearly two dozen engineers from the center would visit 22 schools in the Antelope Valley next week to celebrate National Engineer's Week. (LA Times, Feb 13/93)
The Navy announced that it was turning over the Moffett Naval Air Station, located 40 miles south of San Francisco, California, to NASA's Ames Research Center, which is located on the base. The Center was to continue developing and testing space and aircraft-related technologies. The center's wind tunnels, flight simulators, and other facilities have helped produce and test generations of spacecraft and commercial aircraft, including the Space Shuttle. (AP, Jan 4/93)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Joint Astronomy Centre, Hilo, Hawaii, discovered an unexpected type of molecule in the ices of a star-forming cloud.  The scientists have detected large amounts of molecular hydrogen frozen into the ice grains in a dense molecular cloud in Rho Ophiuchus. Rho Ophiuchus is known as a stellar nursery, a region in the Milky Way galaxy where new stars are being formed. (NASA Release 93-187)
Speaking at a press conference at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, John Gibbon, President Clinton's science advisor, said that science and technology would take center stage as the dual engine for economic growth in the United States. He added that the Administration would need to make some hard choices about expensive projects such as the Space Station, find ways to gain more practical benefit from basic scientific research without limiting its creativity, and learn to be a true international partner. (CSM, Feb 18/93; W Post, Mar 3/93)
NASA's exhibit at the Experimental Aircraft Association Fly-in Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin on July  29-August 6, was scheduled to focus on general aviation technology. The exhibit was to explain how NASA was addressing the challenges of aircraft in every speed regime. It also planned to stress how NASA's "customers," that is, the government, industry, universities, and, ultimately, the American taxpayer, benefitted from the agency's advances in aeronautics.  (NASA Release 93-128)
NASA announced that it had successfully boosted its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory into a higher orbit around Earth, a move that would keep the 17-ton satellite from reentering the atmosphere. The reboost extended the mission life of the observatory by five years and prevented a reentry in which large parts from the spacecraft could have struck Earth, said officials at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, which managed the spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-224)
The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)
Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18)
NASA announced that findings by scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, challenge the theories of how galaxies evolve. The  U.S. team included a scientist from the Max Planck Institute, Heidelberg, Germany.
Charles H. Vermillion, chief of the international data systems office at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was charged in a six-count indictment with violating federal conflict-of-interest laws and converting government property to his own use. Vermillion, who said he was innocent, was charged with taking NASA-developed plans for a programmable frame synchronizer, assembling the synchronizers at his own plant, and selling them privately. (W Post, Jul 23/93)
The media reported that NASA and the astronomical community had differing views on an orbiting billboard that would beam a moon-sized message back to Earth. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond said that the "space billboard" was in line with the space agency's aims, that is, to encourage commercial development of space. A quite different view was expressed by Carl Sagan, a well-known U.S. astronomer and university professor, who called the project an "abomination" and said that it was "the thin edge of a wedge which may  destroy optical ground-based astronomy...."  An American Astronomical Society spokesman said the billboard would hamper Earth-based astronomy, add to the growing pollution of the night sky by light, and even infringe on everyone's enjoyment of nature's sunsets." (RTw, May 17/93)
NASA scientists reported in the British journal Nature that a supernova may have caused a huge void known as the "Local Bubble" that envelopes the solar system and many nearby stars. Researchers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that evidence suggests that the bubble, an area about 300 light-years across, was formed by the supernova or explosion of a star about 340,000 years ago. The blast was strong enough that its radiation could have disrupted earth's protective ozone layer and caused extra sunburns on the ancestors of modern humans. (NASA Release 93-036; USA Today, Feb 25/93; NY Times, Feb 25; P Inq, Mar 5/93)
The San Francisco Chronicle reported that NASA was renewing its interest in aeronautics.  In 1992, aeronautics accounted for about 8 percent of NASA's $14.3 billion budget; if the agency got the funding it had requested, NASA planned to spend $8.6 billion on aeronautics from 1994 though 1998--an increase of 50 percent. (San Francisco Chronicle, Aug 11, 1993; LA Times, Aug 25/93)
Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle, legendary Army aviator and World War II hero, died at the age of 96.  He was best known for leading "Doolittle's Raiders" in a daring bombing run on Tokyo and other Japanese cities in April 1942.  The raid brought the war home to Japan for the first time and lifted American morale when the country was still reeling from a string of Axis victories.  After the war, General Doolittle served as president of the Institute of Aeronautical Science and chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, the forerunner of NASA.  (B Sun, Oct 1/93; AP, Oct 1/93; W Post, Oct 2/93)
A 240-pound Array of Low-Energy X-ray Imaging sensors (ALEXIS) satellite was launched into orbit April 25 aboard an Air Force Pegasus rocket for the Los Alamos National Laboratory in Mew Mexico. Officials at the New Mexico laboratory had hoped to demonstrate that they could handle space missions faster, better, and cheaper than NASA. However, one of the satellite's four solar panels was damaged during the launch, and the satellite was deemed a loss.
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.
Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, announced that he had accepted an appointment as the Zachry Professor of Engineering at Texas A&M University and would retire from NASA on August 20. Cohen joined NASA in 1962.  He became Director of the Johnson Space Center in 1986. (NASA Release 93-131; AP, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 16/93; UPn, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)
The Houston Chronicle reported on a new nationwide poll of registered voters conducted by Yankelovitch Partners and sponsored by NASA contractor Rockwell International Corporation. The poll revealed that 70 percent of American voters supported the construction of a permanently staffed Space Station and 63 percent believed that the United States should spend "whatever is necessary" to preserve its lead in space activities. Some of the poll results, however, reflected wide swings of support for the space program. (H Chron, May 25/93)
The Washington Times reported that the launch of a rocket with a "star wars" payload had been scrubbed on May 22, just a minute before its scheduled launch. The Air Force blamed the failed launch on a power outage in a computer. The launch was rescheduled for May 23. (W Times, May 23/93)
Speaking to a meeting of the American Astronautical Society, Representative Alan Mollohan warned that unless NASA could prove it contributed to U.S. economic competitiveness, politicians would view it as a "Cold War anachronism." According to an article in Space News, Mollohan's comments reflected the view of both the White House and members of Congress. The message: change or become irrelevant. (Space News, March 15-21)
Researchers writing in the current issue of the journal Nature announced that they had detected a guitar-shaped nebula attached to the fastest known star in the galaxy; the star is at the tip of the neck of the "guitar." The speed of the star, a pulsar, which scientists calculated travelled at least 500 miles per second through the Milky Way galaxy, created a "bow-shock" wave in the rarified gas of outerspace. The shock wave heated the gas it encountered and made it give off energy, now appearing as the outline of the star's wake. The wake was detectable only with the world's most powerful telescope, according to Cornell University astronomer James M. Cordes. (W Post, Mar 15/93; Time, Mar 22/93)
NASA selected USN Commander James D. Wetherbee to command the STS-63 mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in mid-1994.  Other crew members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foal, Janice E. Voss, Bernard A. Harris, Jr., and Russian Air Force Colonel Vladimir G. Titov. Collins is the agency's first woman pilot.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that Space Station Freedom needed to be everything from a scientific laboratory to "an inspiration to children."  Disagreeing with Goldin, Robert L. Park, representing the American Physical Society, argued that the "Space Station is unlikely to make any significant scientific contribution." (AP, Jul 1/93, Jul 2/93)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly at Edwards Air Force Base after 14 days in orbit, ending the Shuttle program's longest flight with a wealth of new data on weightless in humans. Columbia's mission was only the second in U.S. history totally devoted to medical research.  The Shuttle logged 5.8 million miles and circled Earth 225 times during its journey, which began October 18.  Columbia performed well but sustained damage to thermal barriers around engine heat shields and to its protective tiles.  Both problems have occurred before and will continue to be investigated, a NASA spokesperson said.
Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
In an address to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, said that the redesign effort for Space Station Freedom was making "great progress." (AvWk, May 10/93)
NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)
According to  Luke Dones, a visiting Assistant Research Astronomer at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, the Earth's rotation rate may be caused by early collisions with rocks as large as Mars. Without the large impacts, the Earth would rotate only every 200 hours instead of the 24 hours it rotates today, said Dones. (NASA Release 93-012; AP, Jan 14/93; NY Times, Jan 19/93)
NASA unreeled 1,640 feet of cooper wire above Earth and conducted electricity through the line in a space tether test. When refined, such tethers could be used to dispel electrical charges from spacecraft and change spacecraft orbits. The tether spool was carried into space by a Delta 2 rocket launched by the Air Force. (AP, June 26/93; RTw, June 26/93; NY Times, June 27/93; W Post, June 27/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of two astronauts, William M. Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, to senior management positions at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release June 24/93)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, had awarded the Space Shuttle Orbiter Avionics Software contract to IBM Corporation, Houston.  The contract was for the development and maintenance of the primary avionics support software, tool development and maintenance, and certification of primary flight software. (NASA Release C93-s)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
NASA researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the University of Hawaii have discovered a faint spot of infrared emission that moves across Jupiter in concert with the orbital motion of its moon Io. The image is caused by the electrical interaction between Io and Jupiter's magnetic field. (NASA Release 93-208)
A conference committee of the Senate and House eliminated $12.3 million earmarked for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project. Angry astronomers began seeking private funds to continue their work, which had been underway for barely a year. (SF Chron, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 7/93; San Francisco Examiner, Oct 4/93)
Federal Computer Week recognized three NASA employees for their work in procurement. Don Lovall, Chief, Technical and Information Systems, Design engineering Directorate at the NASA Kennedy Space Center, was recognized, together with his team, for awarding the Personal Computer Acquisition Contract (PCACP), an innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's First consolidated microcomputer buy. PCAC was unusual because it fostered competition among three chosen vendors throughout its five-year life. Skip Kemere, ADP Procurement Branch Chief, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, was also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in the SEWP BOWL, its first agency wide buying vehicle for high-powered work stations. Darleen A. Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement at NASA, was recognized for her action on the awarding of NASA's Earth Observing System Data and Information System core contract. Instead of accepting low-ball bids from major firms, she sent the bids back to the bidders and asked that they be adjusted--upward--to reflect more realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93)
The first flight of NASA's Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS) was scheduled to be launched aboard a U.S. Air Force Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, no earlier than March 18. The SEDS tether system would be a secondary payload on the Delta 2 launch vehicle. (NASA Advisory, Mar 11/93)
After conferring with Space Station contractor McDonnell Douglas, space officials confirmed that a cost overrun of at least $500 million was expected if costs were not brought under control. They told a congressional panel that the Station was now a $31.3 billion project. The increases appeared to be mainly in the Johnson Space Center portion of the program. NASA's Marty Kress, the Space Station project's new deputy director, said managers were determined to lower costs and were considering various means for doing so. Key congressional aides expressed anger at the news of the overrun, noting that for years NASA had ignored their advice on a design strategy to lower costs. (W Post, Jan 31/93; Space News, Feb 1-7/93; O Sen Star, Feb 3/93)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
NASA announced that the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, would lead a multi-year research program effort to develop technology for a future high-speed civil transport. According to Louis Williams, Director of the High-Speed Research Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., "The program is laying a technical foundation for an environmentally compatible, economically practical commercial transport that could contribute up to 140,000 jobs and $200 billion to the national economy in the next century." (NASA Release 93-52; Daily Press, May 24/93)
The U.S. Postal Service unveiled a new $2.90 stamp featuring the image of a futuristic spaceship. Deputy Postmaster General Michael Coughlin and ex-astronaut Robert Crippen, director of the Kennedy Space Center, dedicated the stamp at a brief ceremony that was to have occurred the same day as the launch of Shuttle Endeavour. That launch was delayed for two weeks because of engine problems. (AP, June 3/93)
NASA selected Hughes STX Corporation, Lanham, Maryland, to negotiate a five-year contract, proposed at $121,7 million, to provide support of computer systems management for Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C93-m)
Antarctic ozone levels have reached record lows, according to data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Climate Monitoring and Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record low levels were recorded at the South Pole Station, Antarctica, at the end of September and early October 1993 and confirmed by satellite measurements. (NASA Release 93-190; B Sun, Oct 16/93; AP, Oct 18/93; NY Times, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93)
According to a report in the Baltimore Sun, Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off with a pair of pliers stuck on a rocket booster. Officials said the pliers posed no danger during liftoff, but the incident was getting much attention in management circles. A Kennedy space center spokeswoman said that the pliers were noted missing in a daily tool inventory at Discovery's launch pad on April 2 but that a proper lost-and-found report, which would have prompted a search, was not filed. Nasa was also investigating how a foot-long metal scrap that could have set off an explosion became lodged in one of four launch-pad posts that held up one of Shuttle Discovery's rocket boosters. (B Sun, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)
A team of astronomers from the University of Massachusetts in Amherst and Arizona's Kitt Peak Observatory announced at a gathering of the American Astronomical Society in Phoenix that they had gotten a glimpse of hundreds of sun-like stars shortly after the stars emerged from the clouds of dust that would have obscured their birth. The team found that many stars begin life in small, tight-knit families and at that stage are surrounded by orbiting disks of dust grains and gas. Scientists believe that this is the material from which planets like Earth are derived. (W Post, Jan 11/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
Harris B. Hull, 83, a retired Air Force brigadier general and former special assistant to the administrator of NASA, died January 29 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington after a heart attack. General Hull was assigned to NASA in 1963. After retiring from the Air Force in 1964, he remained with NASA until retiring in 1986. (W Post, Feb, 1/93; NY Times, Feb 2/93)
Alumni of the Aerospace Human Factors Division office of NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, south of San Francisco, reportedly were exerting pressure to maintain the division as a separate entity in the restructuring taking place under new director Ken K. Munechika. These alumni had prominent positions in the airline industry, aircraft manufacturing, and government. Moreover, NASA created human factors research and a human factors pioneer such as John Lauber, of the National Transportation Safety Board, maintained that a separate organizational structure, combining computer sciences, engineering, psychology, medicine, and other disciplines, was essential. (W Post, Jun 24/94)
NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center released their annual economic impact statement in terms of the effect of the Center on Brevard County. Despite budget cuts, the 1994 impact on the economy was $1.18 billion in comparison to $1.32 billion in 1992; the total workforce (including contractors, civil service, and construction) was 16,500 in 1994 in contrast with 18,700 in 1992. The review of NASA operations should result in more job cuts, which would occur in early 1995. (Fla Today, Nov 24/94)
Kathryn Hire, who worked at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) for Lockheed Space Operations Company, became the first KSC worker to be selected as a future astronaut. (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
Scientists of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which managed the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanography satellite, had been studying data it developed. The findings from two years of monitoring the oceans, which were to be announced at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, indicated that the average sea level had risen about 0.12 inches a year from December 1992 to September 1994. Such a rise was an indicator of global change and supported theories than an increase in "greenhouse" gases was causing long-term global warming. (Pasadena Star News, Dec 7/94)
NASA announced that it had begun resurfacing the runway at the Kennedy Space Center, which would improve the wear on Shuttle tires and potentially lead to an expansion of the Return to Launch Site landing crosswind flight rule beyond the present constraint of 15 knots. (NASA Release 94-153)
The impact of a huge Fragment G, a two-mile-wide piece of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, was as great as 6 million megatons of TNT when it hit Jupiter early July 18, according to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. A similar piece hit late July 18, and a further piece was expected on July 20. In contrast the total energy that could be created on Earth with atomic bombs was 10,000 megatons. The comet left a scar larger than Earth's diameter on Jupiter's gaseous surface. Scientists began to study the long-term effects on Jupiter of the comet's impact. The media also focused on the work of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in tracking developments on Jupiter and the excellent view of Jupiter for astronomers at the South Pole. In the final stage of the comet barrage that ended late July 21, four large comet fragments hit Jupiter, creating tremendous fireworks for watching astronomers. Furthermore, as a result of the scars made by the fragments, white hot gases from the planet's interior erupted through the holes in great fireballs. In measuring the dazzling light produced, astronomers believed they had detected hydrogen sulfide, which could contribute to Jupiter's colors. The potential dangers associated with the comet collision with Jupiter led the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology to propose legislation that, if passed, would direct NASA to submit a plan by February 1995 for a 10-year program to catalog "all comets and asteroids that are greater than one kilometer in diameter" traveling along orbits that intersect that of the Earth. (LA Times, Jul 18/94; C Trib, Jul 18/94; LA Times, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; W Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; B Sun, Jul 19/94; C Trib, Jul 19/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; W Times, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 20/94; B Sun, Jul 20/94; CSM, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; P Inq, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; C Trib, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 22/94; NY Times, Jul 22/94; W Post, Jul 22/94; B Sun, Jul 22/94; USA Today, Jul 22/94; W Times, Jul 22/94; Time, Jul 25/94; LA Times, Jul 26/94; NY Times, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 26/94; CSM, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Aug 1/94)
NASA announced the selection of Raytheon Service Company, Burlington, Massachusetts, to provide logistics support to the Mission Operation and Data Systems Directorate at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-h)
The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket with a Defense Department secret payload from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (Reuters, May 3/94; H Chron, May 4/94; H Post, May 4/94)
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced the selection of Loral Space Information Systems of League City, Texas, to provide support services for JSC's Safety, Reliability, and Quality Assurance Office. (NASA Release C94-cc)
NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Systems, Inc., Vienna, Virginia, for a contract to provide information resources and management support services to NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release C94-ll)
NASA announced the near completion of a $115 million restoration of a unique NASA wind tunnel located at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, which began operating nearly 50 years ago. (NASA Release 94-193)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston as his first stop on a fall tour of all NASA facilities. In a tough speech to all employees, he said he wanted more innovation and less bureaucracy. He stressed that in a time of tight government budgets, "every single person is going to have to justify their activity--all the time." In emphasizing the need to improve business practices, he cited the NASA worker-to-manager ratio on some projects as 2-to-1, whereas 12-to-1 was the private sector goal. (H Post, Sep 13/94; H Post, Sep 14/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Brian Welch as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-116)
NASA determined it was cheaper to tear down the giant hammerhead crane originally built for the Apollo moon landing program rather than to refurbish it. Therefore, the crane was in the process of being dismantled at the Kennedy Space Center launch pad. (Fla Today, Dec 11/94)
NASA announced that a new satellite, the NOAA-J, a joint project of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to be launched on December 4 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The new satellite would circle the Earth every 102 minutes, passing over the North and South Poles on each orbit. The satellite would collect meteorological data and transmit them directly to users around the world to enhance local weather analysis and forecasting. (NASA Release 94-189)
NASA announced that a small quantity of nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) was accidentally released from the Thermochemical Test Area at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, during a test setup. The resulting cloud of N2O4 gradually dissipated, but area traffic was halted briefly and some 46 people were treated in local medical facilities for mild respiratory symptoms. Nitrogen tetroxide is an oxidizer used in some rocket engines. (NASA Release 94-030; AP, Apr 21/94; Reuters, Apr 21/94; H Chron, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; UP, Apr 22/94)
NASA scientists would like to send an unmanned spacecraft to look for ice inside craters on Mercury, the solar system's hottest planet with temperatures reaching 800 degrees at its equator. However, inside the craters at Mercury's poles the temperatures were 235 below zero and scientists conceived that life might exist. Robert M. Nelson of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena discussed JPL's proposal for a mission to Mercury, named Hermes, which NASA was considering. The discussion occurred at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union. (AP, Dec 6/94)
The International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers filed unfair labor practice charges against NASA because of the April 4 memorandum from Jeremiah Pearson, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, transferring several positions from headquarters to Johnson Space Center and Kennedy Space Center without collective bargaining. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)
U.S. firms such as Martin Marietta and Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force were interested in learning from the Moscow-based Design Bureau of Transport Machinery (DBTM) ways in which the United States could modernize its aging launch site structure. DBTM was working with Martin Marietta in evaluating upgrades to the company's Atlas launch sites. Lockheed was interested in Russian automated launch pad technology for its propose single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. And the U.S. Air Force was impressed by the simplicity and operability of Russia's Zenith prelaunch process: "There is no need for human presence on the launch pad as the booster is automatically erected, connected, and launched." According to DBTM managers, the highly automated techniques used at the Baikonur Cosmodrome Zenith launch site enabled two of the powerful boosters to be launched from the same pad within five hours. Robert Ford, Martin Marietta Astronautics' manager of Russian programs, said his firm was looking at seven potential jobs for DBTM on the Atlas launch pads, ranging from introducing higher levels of automation to controlling burn-off effects after each liftoff. In the future Martin Marietta might also have DBTM look at its Titan launching system as well. In other Russian-related activity, Martin Marietta was moving ahead on its evaluation of two Russian enginers for use on an upgraded Atlas. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
A feature article described the potential scenario envisaged by David Morrison, chief of space science research at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, and Clark Chapman of the Planetary Science Institute and Science Applications International Corporation, Tucson. Their 20-year study of asteroids led them to predict that the Earth was on a calamitous collision course with an asteroid that could kill 1 billion or 2 billion people. The odds of the collision in any one year were 1 in 500,000. (USA Today, Feb 8/94)
NASA announced that the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) was awarding the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon management team the CNES Medal in recognition of their achievements. Seven team members from NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, and the CNES project office received the awards.Launched August 10, 1992, TOPEX/Poseidon continued to study the topography of the oceans. (NASA Release 94-132)
Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)
The Analytic Sciences Corporation (TASC) signed a three-year cooperative agreement with NASA to make NASA's space and Earth science data available to elementary school students and their teachers over the Internet. TASC was scheduled to work with the staff at Franconia Elementary School in Fairfax County, Virginia, to design and develop software allowing kindergarten through 6th grade students to access NASA's vast remote sensing weather data. Fritz Hasler, manager of the project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said that the project should not only help students learn about the weather but also improve their knowledge of the information highway. (PR Newswire, Oct 19/94)
Ken Szalai, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, said that construction of the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane (NASP), the X-30, and its first flight scheduled for 2000 were no longer goals. Funding for the plane runs out in 1994, but Szalai said research into supersonic flight would not end. John Bass, deputy program manager for the NASP consortium of government and industry, including five aerospace firms, the Department of Defense and NASA, considered the decision a great loss. The one area remaining a problem was that of propulsion, which engineers could not test because the scramjet engine required to power the X-30 needed an environment where wind speeds reach 25 times the speed of sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May 30/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
Abe Martinez, assistant U.S. attorney in Houston, said that one corporation and eight individuals, including a NASA contracting officer, Stephen Cleland, had pleaded guilty to criminal charges in connection with Operation Lightning Strike at NASA's Johnson Space Center. The U.S. attorney's office was to ask a grand jury to indict another Johnson official, David Proctor. (SP News, Apr 4-10/94)
NASA Program Manager for Human Systems Technology in the Office of Aeronautics, Washington, D.C. announced that NASA was designing an electronic chart to make flying safer for aerial firefighters who often fly in potentially dangerous conditions above forest fires. The Electronic Chart Display being developed at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, shows pilots an area's terrain and obstacles on a computer screen. (NASA Release 94-69)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of a contract for logistics services to Pioneer Contract Services, Inc., Houston. (NASA Release C94-ee)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)
Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
Some 100 astronomers from around the world, including Tim Livengood from the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, traveled to the European Southern Observatory at La Silla in the mountains of northern Chile, to view the collision of the comet with Jupiter in July. (W Times, Aug 7/94)
Two groups of astronomers, one centered at Indiana University and the other at Harvard University, announced, based on findings from the Hubble Space Telescope, that the universe was billions of years younger than previously estimated. The Indiana group said the universe could be as little as 7 billion years old whereas the Harvard group estimated the age of the universe at between 9 billion and 14 billion years. The Indiana study was published in the September 29 issue of Nature and the Harvard study in the current Astrophysical Journal. According to Stephen Maran, a senior astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Center and a spokesman for the American Astronomical Society, the findings should lead to further research to explain the discrepancy beween the oldest stars and the age of the universe. (LA Times, Sep 29/94)
Although NASA as yet lacked congressional approval for a proposed $2 billion wind tunnel complex for testing commercial aircraft, California's congressional delegation lobbied NASA's Administrator Daniel Goldin to have the wind tunnel built in California at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View. Goldin refused to discuss the subject. Virginia also expressed interest in being a site for the wind tunnels, according to Representative Robert C. Scott. (LA Times, Apr 12/94; SF Chron, Apr 12/94; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 12/94; LA Times, Apr 12/94; Daily Press, Apr 20/94)
NASA announced the development at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, of a new tile known as Toughened Uni-Piece Fibrous Insulation (TUFI). The low-density composite thermal insulation was to undergo its first flight test on the Endeavour in April. (NASA Release 94-54)
In anticipation of spending cuts when the new fiscal year would begin October 1, NASA had begun to cut civil service and contractor positions at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at Cape Canaveral. Although NASA was eliminating four times as many jobs as in the previous two years, KSC contractors were obliged to let 17 workers go for every government job eliminated. These cuts were taking place despite NASA's plan for eight Shuttle launches in the coming year. (O Sen Star, Aug 14/94)
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)
John F. Kennedy Space Center Director Robert L. Crippen announced he would leave NASA January 21 after more than 25 years with the Agency. Crippen indicated in a press conference that NASA budget slashing had made him uncomfortable and concerned about the safety of Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 94-211; C Trib, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94; H Post, Dec 14/94; CSM, Dec 14/94; Fla Today, Dec 14/94)
NASA announced its selection of NSI Technology Services of Sunnyvale, California, for a contract to provide engineering, technical, logistical, and administrative technical services to support two airborne science aircraft at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-bb)
Terri Bracher, Patrick Air Force Base spokeswoman, said the first nighttime practice rescue operation for Space Shuttle crew who might be downed at sea is to be conducted on May 18 near Kennedy Space Center. More than 200 members of the Air Force, Air National Guard, Marines, Air Force Reserve, Coast Guard, and NASA were to take part. Rescuers were to use night vision goggles and NAVSTAR Global Positioning System receivers to find the floating crew members. (O Sen Star, May 17/94)
A study released by the Virginia-based Teal space consulting group said that since the space age began, 271 missions have failed or malfunctioned. Of the 271 missions, 108 were considered failures and of these, two-thirds or an estimated 71 were Soviet. The remaining 34 failures were American. The most failure-prone spacecraft over the period appeared to be the Soviet-made Cosmos satellite. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)
NASA announced the selection of a system to control microbial contamination in drinking water as both the NASA 1993 Invention of the Year and the NASA 1993 Commercial Invention of the Year. NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Deputy Chief of the Biomedical Operations and Research Branch Richard L. Sauer developed the system together with Gerald V. Colombo and Clifford D. Jolly of Umpqua Research Company, Myrtle Creek, Oregon. The process had applications for long-term space flight as well as commercial use in developing nations particularly. (NASA Release 94-33)
Space Shuttle Columbia was moved to the launch pad to begin preparations for a July launching at Kennedy Space Center. (Reuters, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 18/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and its affiliated sites--Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island, Virginia, and NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C.--announced the selection of Cortez III Services Corporation of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to provide comprehensive logistics services to these sites. The services included transportation, flight project planning and coordination support, supply management, warehousing, property management and disposal, mail services, forms and records management, and interior design. (NASA Release C94-s)
NASA was learning to "fly leaner" as a result of a shrinking budget. Examples given were that launches now were no longer scheduled on weekends when overtime would need to be paid and if the weather were bad, liftoff was called off before fueling, saving $400,000 in tanking costs. More than 1,400 Shuttle-processing jobs had been eliminated at the Kennedy Space Center in the previous three years and various Shuttle improvements had been deferred. (W Times, Nov 13/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a life sciences support services contract to Dynamac Corporation, Rockville, Maryland. The contract supported Kennedy's Biomedical Operations and Research Office and the Payload Management and Operations Directorate in program management support for life sciences activities. The work included processing medical, biomedical, and biological flight experiments for launch and landing in addition to continuing research on NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support System, a bioregenerative concept for long-term space travel. In addition, Dynamac would be responsible for environmental and ecological monitoring of Kennedy's premises, located on a national wildlife refuge. (NASA Release C94-kk)
A former NASA researcher and subcontractor at the Johnson Space Center, Jong-Hun Lee, was ordered deported as a suspected North Korean agent. The action followed a hearing at which he was not allowed to see all the evidence against him. (AP, Sep 24/94)
NASA announced the selection of 38 college students for an intensive six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The summer residence training program was for undergraduate students majoring in life sciences, bioengineering, and related science and engineering fields. (NASA Release 94-95)
Ecologists Christopher Potter and Steven Klooster of NASA's Ames Research Center processed ten years of data to construct a map charting one month's exchange of the heat-trapping gas carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and the Earth's land plants and soils. This is a key process in determining the extent to which the release of this gas through burning fossil fuels and land-use changes might cause global climate warming, and this is the first time satellite data have been combined with computer simulation of soil processes. A 1990 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change gave estimates in billions of tons of carbon per year to try to answer the question of where missing amounts of extra human-released carbon dioxide go. Princeton University geochemist Jorge L. Sarmiento hypothesized a terrestrial sink, while Harvard University geochemist Steven Wofsy agreed with Potter that simulation also needed detailed studies of plant-soil processes. (CSM, Jan 19/94)
An Air Force Titan 4, the most powerful U.S. unmanned rocket, boosted a $1 billion military communications satellite (Milstar) into space. The satellite formed the initial link in a controversial $17.3 billion data relay network designed to provide secure communications during a nuclear conflict. (W Post, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
NASA announced its selection of Brown & Root Services Corporation, Houston, as a contractor to provide minor construction, modification, and rehabilitation to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-y)
An interview was published with retired Princeton physicist Freeman Dayson in which he strongly criticized NASA. He advocated that NASA be dismantled like AT&T, feeling it was overly expensive and inefficent. Instead, science should be done by individuals following their own curiosity and creativity. (CSM, Dec 7/94)
Businessman James Robertson of James M. Beggs Associates consulting firm of Arlington, Virginia, pleaded guilty to accepting inside bid information involving NASA contracts at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (AP, Mar 2/94)
Although Congress killed NASA's search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) program, the subject survived as Project Phoenix. The SETI Institute in Mountain View, California, indicated existing contributions of $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the project. NASA renamed the project High Resolution Microwave Survey to reflect the technology's ability to screen out Earth-based radio interference while listening for cosmic signals on millions of channels at once. (CSM, Feb 2/94; W Post, Feb 15/94)
NASA announced that Jack Farmer, a paleontologist and geologist at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a strategy to search for microfossils on the planet Mars. Farmer presented his strategy, which was based on principles of Precambrian paleontology, at the Geological Society Meeting of America in San Bernardino, California. (NASA Release 94-49)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had discovered the best evidence yet of a black hole in the constellation Virgo. The proof consisted of a whirlpool of hot gas at the core of galaxy M87, which lies more than 52 million light-years from Earth. The stars in the whirlpool appeared to be streaming toward the galaxy's center and then into orbits bound to an apparent black hole hidden at M87's core. Data from the Hubble spectrometer, used to measure the velocity of stars orbiting within the nucleus of the M57 galaxy, also appeared to confirm the black hole. Sally Heap, a NASA astronomer, at a national meeting of the American Astronomical Society, commented on the Hubble findings in terms of her own research. (NASA Release 94-82; Fla Today, May 25/94; B Sun, May 26/94; USA Today, May 26/94; W Post, May 26/94; NY Times, May 26/94; W Times, May 26/94; Fla Today, May 26/94; WSJ, May 26/94; O Sen Star, May 26/94; AP, May 26/94; CSM, May 26/94; Oregonian, May 27/94; Fla Today, May 29/94; AP, May 30/94; H Chron, May 31/94; C Trib, May 31/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 2/94; Newsweek, Jun 6/94)
NASA Kennedy Space Center spokesman Bruce Buckingham said that that NASA had worked out a plan that would allow NASA employees to have the Labor Day weekend off and still would permit the launching of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (Fla Today, Aug 15/94)
NASA named John C. Lynn to head the new office of Chief Information Officer within the Office of the Administrator at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-199)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
NASA continued tests of the Research External Vision Display (REVD), a new optical system allowing pilots to see a runway during nose-high landings without computer-generated views. The REVD, basically an upside-down periscope, is a system of lenses and mirrors that reflects the view of the runway under the aircraft nose to the pilot. NASA started the first of up to 20 tests on the device on an F-104 aircraft at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The REVD approach differs from that used in the European Concorde and Russian Tu-144 supersonic transports, which drop the entire nose of the aircraft in front of the windshield. It could be used on a future U.S. supersonic airliner. (NASA Release, 94-2)
Air Force Colonel Sanford Mangold told members of the House of Representatives Government Operations Committee of his dismissal for recommending the cancellation of the $27 billion military satellite program Milstar. He considered Milstar, intended to provide worldwide military communications during a nuclear war, to have "fundamental, insurmountable problems," including "unacceptable" costs of $1.4 billion for each satellite. (NY Times, Feb 3/94)
An Air Force panel was completing the space launch modernization study mandated by Congress; and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy was preparing recommendations on vehicle developments. The trade Aviation Week & Space Technology publication advocated the United States' developing a modern expendable launch vehicle with money both from government and industry. The next step, which would need multi-billion-dollar investment, would require "leapfrog technology" such as the use of propulsion, and could benefit from cooperation with the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AvWk, Mar 21/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science told the NASA Advisory Council that NASA wanted to launch one Discovery mission every 12 to 15 months on a Delta or smaller expendable launch vehicle (ELV). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center planned to issue a competitive procurement later in the year for up to 15 ELVs, paying $25 million to $30 million per vehicle. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers task force studying budgeting for NASA issued its report to the subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee. It said that "The proposed funding levels are inadequate to support both a balanced aerospace science-technology program and an active program of human spaceflight, including the redesigned space station." The report maintained that the work intended for the proposed Space Station could be done by robotic spacecraft or other efforts. (H Chron, May 21/94)
NASA announced the selection of Scientific Applications International Corporation, of San Diego, California, for a contract to provide occupational safety, industrial hygiene, and environmental services to support NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-jj)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named Jay F. Honeycutt as Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center upon the departure of Robert L. Crippen on January 21, 1995. (NASA Release 94-214; AP, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 16/94; O Sen Star, Dec 16/94; H Chron, Dec 16/94; H Post, Dec 16/94; AP, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
Clementine spacecraft, launched January 25 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, took just released high-resolution color photographs of the moon. The purposes of the spacecraft were to test anti-missile military technology and explore space. Reportedly, the pictures, which were available to the public, were of high quality and the cost of the program was relatively low. (Reuters, Mar 2/94; W Times, Mar 20/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center obtained an Andros robot to increase the safety of its workforce and save time and money. The robot could perform such tasks as deflating Space Shuttle tires and checking for bombs, which would be dangerous for humans. (Fla Today, Oct 30/94)
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)
At a conference at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., officials of NASA and of Spacehab Inc., the Arlington, Virginia, company that built and leased the laboratories that fly in the Space Shuttle, described progress made in the more than 80 missions that had included research payloads. Other private and university researchers were encouraged to join in such projects. (UP, Sep 28/94)
Students and teachers at Alvin High School in Texas, with the assistance of a neighboring community college and members of the Consortium for Aerospace Technology Education (CATE), were building their own space center similar to that at the Control Center Complex of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC). Frank Hughes, chief of the Flight Training Division at JSC, initiated the CATE program, which integrated cooperation from industry (Rockwell) with that of community colleges and universities. (H Chron, Dec 14/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Sidney M. Gutierrez would leave NASA effective August 8 and retire from the Air Force to become Manager for Strategic Planning and Development at Sandia National Laboratories in his hometown of Albuquerque, New Mexico. (NASA Release 94-129)
In a report by the House Government Operations Committee it concluded that NASA's sloppy management had resulted in some $14 billion of NASA equipment--including computers and construction equipment--ending up in the hands of contractors. Moreover, NASA had failed to curb unallowable contract costs. Furthermore, NASA's recordkeeping was so bad that it was almost impossible to edit NASA's books. In addition, Committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, said NASA's "planning is so unrealistic that budgets are hopelessly optimistic." A report in another context concerning Houston's Johnson Space Center, dealt with equipment failures and human errors resulting from carelessness or stupidity. (Tampa Tribune, Nov 24/94; O Sen Star, Nov 24/94; H Post, Nov 30/94)
NASA reported that tests of corrections made to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) were proceeding well and that the first new pictures were expected within days. David Leckrone, Hubble project senior scientist and NASA public information officer Mike Finneran at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, expressed great satisfaction with progress made. To perform one of its primary mission objectives, the study of the universe's infancy, the HST must concentrate 70 percent of an object's light within a core image only 0.1 arc-second in diameter, but the HST's previous spherical-aberration defect distorted its 2.4-meter (94.5-inch) main mirror to the extent that only 15 percent of the light reached the sharp-focus zone. Two sets of corrective optics were installed--the Wide-Field Planetary Camera (due for replacement, anyway) and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replecement (Costar), a two-meter-long set of five pairs of coin-size mirrors. A problem of jittering caused by solar-cell arrays was also resolved, and new gyroscopes, magnetometers, and computer electronics were installed and have been tested. (CSM, Jan 11/94)
Of the 250 people who flew in orbit on U.S. spaceships since 1961, only six astronauts were black. This surprised J. Alphred Phelps, a retired Air Force master sergeant and author of a just published book: They Had a Dream: The Story of African-American Astronauts. The author described two black Americans who almost became astronauts in the 1960s, as well as the six who made it: Guion Bluford, Ronald McNair, Frederick Gregory, Mae Jemison, Charles Bolden, and Bernard Harris. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
NASA announced that the Clementine mission, sponsored by the Department of Defense Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, had completed systematic mapping of the lunar surface to produce the first global digital map of the moon. NASA's Clementine science team mapped the topography and composition of major regions of the moon in detail and produced other important science results released at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore, Maryland. The digital data cover 38 million square kilometers of the moon mapped in 11 colors in the visible and near infrared parts of the spectrum during the mission's 71 days in lunar orbit. (NASA Release 94-84; B Sun, May 27/94)
Swales and Associates, Inc., Beltsville, Maryland, received an eight-year small-business set-aside cost-plus-award-fee contract of $275 million to support the Mechanical Systems Division of the Goddard Engineering Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). (NASA Release C94d)
The U.S. attorney confirmed that David R. Proctor, an engineer assigned to the Life Sciences Project Division, was the first NASA Johnson Space Center employee indicted as part of the FBI's Operation Lightning Strike. The Operation began in December 1991 as an undercover probe into aerospace contractors. Proctor was indicted on charges of conspiracy and bribery, among others. (UP, Jun 9/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a contract to Rockwell International Corporation, Downey, California, to continue providing Shuttle Orbiter logistics operations requirements. (NASA Release C94-hh)
Over 200 scientists at a conference at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, planned observations of the coming impact of the newly discovered comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 into Jupiter. University of Maryland astronomer Lucy McFadden, the conference organizer, discussed the preparations. Twelve observatories in Europe and the United States were scheduled to work in a joint effort called the Comet Impact Network Experiment. The astronomers were organizing observations by nearly every large observatory on the Earth as well as by the Hubble Space Telescope, other orbiting observatories, and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. Astronomer Michael A'Hearn compared the anticipated power of the impact of the comet's train of 21 two-mile-diameter fragments in terms of nuclear explosions with that of the 6-12-mile-diameter comet that hit Yucatan, Mexico, 65 million years ago. Harvard University astrophysicist George Field said each fragment would unleash energy equal to 10 million megatons of TNT. Paul Chodas of the California Institute of Technology discussed the problems of predicting the impact for observations by the Galileo spacecraft. Both visible, infrared, and spectrographic observations were to be performed. (B Sun, Jan 11/94; AP, Jan 12/94; W Times, Jan 12/94)
NASA announced that aerospace industry engineers were finding NASA's Remote Access Wind Tunnel (RAWT) at the Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, was saving them time and money in testing a model of a next-generation supersonic transport. The RAWT was equipped with a computer and video camera that allowed them to send real-time test data to engineers at aerospace companies nationwide. (NASA Release 94-186)
In connection with the July 16 projected smashing into Jupiter of fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at a speed of about 130,000 miles an hour, numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were scheduled to occur on the far side of Jupiter, the impact sites should rotate into view in less than an hour, so lasting effects could be studied by observatories on earth and by NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA was setting up an around-the-clock Comet Impact Newsroom at Goddard Space Flight Center to assist scientists interpreting the event. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; LA Times, Jul 11/94; NY Times, Jul 12/94; LA Times, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94)
NASA Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn L. Huntoon announced a number of changes designed to assure the success of the Shuttle and International Space Station programs. Changes included the establishment of a new Projects Office, a new Business Management Directorate, and a new Information Systems Directorate; encouragement of rotational assignments and "teaming"; and new leadership appointments. Larry Bourgeois became head of the Projects Office, Terrence Hesse became director of the Business Management Directorate, and Jane Stearns became director of the Information Systems Directorate. A number of other appointments also were announced. (NASA Release 94-036; H Chron, Jun 17/94; H Post, Jun 17/94)
Orbital Sciences Corporation launched the Taurus rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, placing two military satellites into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 14/94; W Post, Mar 15/94)
The joint Air Force-NASA space plane program, which involved NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, ended September 30. It was replaced by a program that focused on the plane's engine rather than the entire plane. Engineers at Langley had conducted space plane engine research for 35 years under the Hypersonic Systems Technology Program and were attempting to solve the most challenging problem: how to propel the space plane into space. Currently they were testing a scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet). In addition to Langley, engineers were working on the space plane at NASA centers in Ohio, California, and Mississippi, and at Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. (Daily Press, Nov 6/94)
Burton J. Squires, an engineer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, in a letter to the editor, commented on the media's failure to commend the outstanding success of the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. (W Post, Feb 5/94)
Former General Electric Aerospace employee Vincent S. Maleche was sentenced to a two-month prison term and a fine for providing confidential NASA documents to an undercover agent. The charge of fraud occurred in connection with Operation Lightning Strike. On June 15, former Armstrong Laboratory employee at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, William C Alexander, pleaded guilty to providing documents to an FBI undercover agent. (Reuters, Jun 14/94; UPI, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 16/94)
A feature article described the Voyager spacecraft and the work of Paul Schenk, who had been a college summer intern at NASA'S Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California and was now with the Lunar and Planetary Institute (LPI) in Houston. Schenk became fascinated with Voyager and its images. With his colleagues, Daniel G. Wilson and Robert D. Morris of LPI and Jeffrey M. Moore of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, he created stereo views of various bodies in the outer solar system using images provided by Voyager. (Science News, Nov 12/94)
Lawrence Dietlein, assistant director for life sciences at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, said that in 1963 and 1974 the Center conducted experiments involving the use of very small doses of radiation on humans. The experiments, done with the consent of the subjects, concerned bone loss and weightlessness during space flight. (Reuters, Feb 17/94; W Times, Feb 18/94; USA Today, Feb 18/94)
Shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral carrying for the first time a Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had spent 15 months aboard Mir Station, and five American astronauts. Discovery's eight-day research flight was to include deployment and retrieval of the Wake Shield Facility, designed for growing experimental semiconductor materials, and various microgravity and life science experiments. (AP, Feb 3/94; UPI, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Times, Feb 4/94; P Inq, Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY Times, Feb 4/94; USA Today, Feb 4/94; WSJ, Feb 4/94; C Trib, Feb 4/94; AP, Feb 4/94)
NASA announced the selection of a research consortium headed by IBM to carry out research and test computer systems for a new national aeroscience research program using parallel computer technology. NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was to be the main computational site for the new program (NASA Release C94-k)
The six pilots at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base believed that they had the best flying job in the world. Their work entailed a great deal of variety, flying in different types of planes and conducting numerous research experiments. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Apr 18/94)
Following a final flight ceremony at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA retired its last F-104 fighter jet of the 1950s. NASA used the plane, known as the Starfighter, for biomedical research and to simulate the X-15 jet. The F-15 was to replace Lockheed's Starfighter. (Bakersfield Californian, Feb 4/94)
Free-lance journalist Alcestis Oberg maintained that following the November elections NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin planned to cut jobs at Johnson Space Center drastically. According to the article, Goldin hoped to reduce the Space Shuttle operations work force by 50 percent in five years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of 30 percent in 1995. (H Post, Oct 20/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, refitted over a 19-month period at a cost of $96 million to enable it to dock with Mir, was expected to arrive at Kennedy Space Center from its overhaul at Rockwell Space Systems Division in Palmdale, California. The plan was for Atlantis to dock with Mir during a series of 10 shuttle flights between 1995 and 1997. Other modifications were designed to make Atlantis safer. Atlantis's return means limited space at Kennedy Space Center for processing the various Shuttles. (Fla Today, May 27/94; AP, May 29/94; W Post, May 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 1/94)
The National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC), the world's largest wind tunnel, turned 50 in 1994. The NFAC, located on 12 acres of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, tested World War II aircraft and continued to operate by testing the Space Shuttle and other aircraft and equipment. (UPI, Jul 25/94)
University of Maryland radio astronomers indicated they had spotted water clouds near the center of a galaxy called Markarian 1, which is about 200 million light years away in the constellation Pisces. The finding was reported at the Minneapolis meeting of the American Astronomical Society. At that meeting, Johns Hopkins University astronomers reported several days previously having "very strong" evidence of a black hole at the center of the Andromeda galaxy. (B Sun, Jun 2/94; P Inq, Jun 3/94; W Post, Jun 3/94; USA Today, Jun 3/94; NY Times, Jun 3/94)
Dr. Carolyn Huntoon, the new Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), appointed George W.S. Abbey as Deputy Director of JSC. He succeeded Paul J. "P.J." Weitz, who was to serve as Acting Associate Director during transition of the new Center management team and who had been the Center's Deputy Director since 1987 and Acting Director since August 1993. (NASA Release 94-26; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA announced the award of a supplemental agreement to Martin Marietta Astro Space of the Martin Marietta Corporation East Windsor, New Jersey. The agreement provided for two additional advanced meteorological satellite spacecraft through the Televisision Infrared Observation Satellite project contract at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-mm)
At a press briefing at the Kennedy Space Center, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Jeremiah Pearson said NASA was currently undertaking a review to gauge the Shuttle program's health after budget cutbacks and to identify possible additional savings. The review was scheduled to be completed in early January. Bryan O'Connor, Shuttle program director at NASA Headquarters, said 13 teams at NASA field centers across the country were examining jobs, procedures, and requirements to improve efficiency. However, he indicated that much of 1994's $141 million cut in the Shuttle program's operating budget could be made up with expected reimbursements and reassignment of funds. For example, Congress had suggested that the program use a $22 million reimbursement from Japan for Shuttle flights to that end. (Fla Today, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94; AvWk, Oct 17/94; AP, Oct 24/94)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
A 20-month long Justice Department sting operation centered on NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston resulted in criminal fraud and bribery charges against nine men and one contractor. Two other contractors, General Electric Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, which had employed two of those charged, agreed to pay the government $1 million to cover cost of the undercover operation, code named Operation Lightning Strike. The two firms cooperated with the probe and might continue to do business with the government. Among the charged were Astro International Corporation of League City, Texas, and two NASA employees. The sting, conducted by the FBI, NASA's Office of Inspector General, and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, particularly targeted NASA's Space and Life Sciences Division in Houston. In October 1993 NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin told Congress that NASA had some 400 criminal fraud investigations underway. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; W Post, Feb 23/94; W Times, Feb 23/94; USA Today, Feb 23/94; NY Times, Feb 23/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94; WSJ, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 23/94; C Trib, Feb 23/94)
NASA announced that its Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, Washington, D.C., was to receive valuable data from a flight test in June of a new laser-diode initiated ordnance system on Orbital Science Corporation's Pegasus air-launch space booster. (The intent is that space flight operations be safer and more efficient than with present electrical systems.) (NASA Release 94-36)
Johnson Space Center denied one of its largest prime contractors, Martin Marietta Services of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, an "award fee" or profit on its contract for the six-month period ending March 31, 1994. The action resulted from a much more stringent contract compliance policy by NASA and the fact that the contractor did not control its labor costs under the terms of the contract. (H Chron, Dec 3/94)
SETI Institute President Frank Drake announced that the organization in Mountain View, California, will work with private backing, despite cancellation by NASA due to a funding cut by Congress. SETI--the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence--was to continue as the new Project Phoenix, with some NASA scientists doing the latter half of the former NASA project, which had been a sky survey by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and a targeted search by NASA's Ames Research Center. They planned to target areas around 1,000 nearby sun-like stars. The NASA project was begun as a $100-million, ten-year project on October 12, 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus' landing in the Americas, but was stopped less than one year into its planned ten-year life. Observations were now planned to last into the next century. Major donors included Arthur C. Clarke through the British Interplanetary Society (BIS) and the founders of Hewlett-Packard, Intel, and Microsoft. It was announced that $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the next year had been raised. (Reuters, Jan 12/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Richard O. Covey would leave NASA as of July 11 and would retire from the Air Force on August 1. He was scheduled to become Director of Business Development at Calspan Services Contracts Division, a part of Space Industries, Inc. (NASA Release 94-110)
GOES-8, a sophisticated weather satellite, was the first of five advanced GOES-NEXT satellites scheduled to be deployed by 2003. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the GOES program but engineers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center oversaw development of the spacecraft. These engineers redesigned weather instruments used by polar-orbiting weather satellites that flew 500 miles high to operate instead at 22,300 miles high. The system had vast potential benefit for firefighters, farmers, marine and aviation navigators, and others through improving the accuracy of weather forecasting. (W Post, Mar 28/94)
Dr. Edward Tagliaferri, a physicist and consultant for the Aerospace Corporation, an engineering firm in El Segundo, California, that helps the Air Force run its many satellite programs, was lead author of a report discussing declassified Air Force studies of meteors and their possible threat. The report is a chapter in a book edited by Dr. Tom Gehrels, a planetary astronomer at the University of Arizona, and published by the university. The potential threat is viewed in the light of occurrences such as the strike in Tunguska, Siberia, and the probable strike in Yucatan, Mexico. (NY Times, Jan 25/94)
NASA announced that the U.S. component of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) program, the Wind and Polar spacecraft, would experience launch delays to give NASA a chance to examine the materials and process used to build two power subsystem electronic boxes on each spacecraft similar in design to those determined to be the cause of the NOAA-13 spacecraft failure in 1993. The decision followed a GGS technical review at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Instead of launches occurring in April and June 1994, they probably would occur in the next fiscal year. (NASA Release 94-30; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
An Air Force Titan 4 rocket was launched successfully from Cape Canaveral Air Station and deployed "in the desired orbit." The classified satellite was thought to have an electronic eavesdropping platform capable of tapping into military and civilian communications. (Reuters, Aug 27/94; W Post, Aug 28/94)
Diane Farrar of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, stated that NASA, the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, and the National Science Foundation were conducting an eight-month airborne study of the Antarctic ozone hole and its possible effects. The study, which was to use high-altitude ER-2 NASA aircraft, was to be based in Hawaii and New Zealand. This was the first NASA-sponsored airborne study of the southern polar region since the 1987 campaign that confirmed chlorofluorocarbons were the primary cause of ozone destruction. (UP, Mar 16/94)
The crew for the STS-66 mission aboard Atlantis in the Fall of 1994 was selected. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Donald R. McMonagle was to command the mission, called ATLAS-03. This third Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) would continue Spacelab studies of solar energy effects on the Earth's climate and environment. USAF Major Curtis L. Brown, Jr, was named pilot; Scott E. Parazynski, M.D., Joseph R. Tanner, and ESA astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy, mission specialists; and Ellen Ochoa, PhD., Payload Commander. Tasks included the CRISTA-SPAS Cryogenic Infrared Spectrometer Telescope for Atmosphere on the Shuttle Pallet Satellite, jointly with Germany. (NASA Release 94-4; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
Jeffrey E. Carr, a spokesman at NASA's Johnson Space Center, confirmed that NASA had ordered a safety investigation of a medical experiment scheduled for spaceflight in 1995 after an astronaut collapsed and required emergency treatment during a test of a chemical used in the research. It was later revealed that the incident occurred to Bonnie J. Dunbar, while in Houston for training in October; a review board was to examine the incident. (AP, Nov 3/94; H Post, Nov 4/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94)
In a speech to the American Geophysical Union, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin challenged scientists to establish an ambitious new goal for space science that would unite competing research disciplines and resurrect public excitement. As a possible goal, Goldin suggested that NASA commit itself to finding habitable planets outside the solar system. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
NASA announced that as a result of a 10-year joint NASA-Army research program (the UH-60 Airloads Program) at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on helicopter rotor vibration, noise, motion, and airflows, future helicopters would be quieter and more efficient. (NASA Release 94-21; UPI, Feb 9/94)
Kevin Zahnle, a research scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was quoted concerning the large amount of information gathered by spacecraft Galileo about Jupiter that would be lost because of the crippling of Galileo's communications capabilities. Nevertheless, much remained to be learned from the data already transmitted, as was seen at the recent meeting of the Planetary Sciences Division of the American Astronomical Society held in Bethesda, Maryland. (Contra Costa Times, Nov 20/94)
Flight tests of the X-31 at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base were featured. Dryden director Kenneth J. Szalai noted that the X-31 had completed more flights than any other experimental aircraft, demonstrating methods of enhancing fighter maneuverability. Gary Trippensee was NASA project manager and director of the International Test Organization that included the Department of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Navy, Air Force, Rockwell Aerospace, the German government, and Deutsche Aerospace. The program focused on technology transfer--industrial use of data gathered during government research projects. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/94; Bakersfield Californian, Apr 21/94)
McDonnell Douglas awarded Computer Sciences Corp (CSC), with EER Systems and CTA, Inc., a five-year, $49 million subcontract to support NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The Systems Engineering, Integration and Management Support Services contract would support several space observation missions. (Def Daily, 12 Jan/94)
NASA and Carnegie Mellon University scientists gave a preliminary test to an eight-legged robot name Dante II. They sent it down a gravel quarry to test the $1.8 million robot's satellite and fiber-optics links and software. On July 22 or soon thereafter they planned to send it down Mount Spurr, an active volcano, 80 miles west of Anchorage. Such robots would be useful in extreme terrains and climates. On July 28 a NASA scientist, Butler Hine, said that a communications problem resulting from a poor satellite link with the robot was delaying the robot's mission into the volcano. The robot took its first steps on July 29 and was scheduled to walk 12 hours a day. By late on July 31, the robot was about 150 feet from its goal, a field of volcanic vents on the bottom of the crater. As of August 2, the robot was sending back valuable scientific data from inside the crater, despite being hit by a falling rock. On August 3, Dante II began its steep walk out of the crater. The climb halted on August 4 because of a faulty power unit on the crater rim. Scientists fixed the electrical problem but on August 6 the robot fell on its side. Possible methods for retrieving the robot were under consideration. An attempt to airlift the robot by helicopter on August 9 failed when the cable snapped, dropping Dante II further down the crater. On August 13 two experienced climbers climbed into the crater and manually wrapped a sling around the robot and attached it to a line from the helicopter, which then pulled Dante II up. (AP, Jul 21/94; AP, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 27/94; Reuters, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Jul 30/94; AP, Jul 30/94; W Times, Jul 31/94; C Trib, Jul 31/94; NY Times, Aug 2/94; Reuters, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 4/94; USA Today, Aug 5/94; Reuters, Aug 6/94; USA Today, Aug 8/94; NY Times, Aug 9/94; USA Today, Aug 9/94; AP, Aug 9/94; Reuters, Aug 9/94; B Sun, Aug 10/94; W Post, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 10/94; Chronicle of Higher Education, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 13/94; Reuters, Aug 14/94; W Post, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 15/94; USA Today, Aug 15/94; CSM, Aug 15/94; Time, Aug 15/94; AvWk, Aug 15/94; Chemical and Engineering News, Aug 15/94; AP, Aug 22/94; LA Times, Aug 28/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
As a result of an investigation by NASA's Inspector General, Omniplan Corporation, with offices near the Johnson Space Center, four related companies, and five employees, together with the Chief Executive Officer Ralph Montijo Jr. and his wife, Guillermina, were named in a federal grand jury indictment. They were charged with conspiracy to present false claims to NASA, embezzling from an employee benefits plan, money laundering, and making false statements to NASA, the Internal Revenue Service, the Small Business Administration, and the Defense Contract Audit Agency. The company had been previously indicted for allegedly swindling $4 million from NASA and its own employees. Omniplan subcontracted through Rockwell Space Operations Company to write flight plan documentation for the Space Shuttle. The government filed a lawsuit to try to recover $3.75 million. (H Post, May 28/94)
Two American scientists, Clark Chapman and David Morrison, wrote in Nature magazine that society might want to decide whether to pay for a sky survey to track comets and asteroids that could crash into the Earth with catastrophic results, so that governments could use nuclear arms to smash or divert them. NASA proposed a Spaceguard Survey to map all asteroids large enough to cause global catastrophe. It would cost $50 million to set up and $10 million in annual operating costs. (Reuters, Jan 5/94)
A ceremony held at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility marked its return to its former status as an independent NASA center. For 13 years it was administered by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, and designated a facility. Kenneth J. Szalai, formerly deputy director of Ames Research Center for Dryden, was named Dryden director. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 1/94)
Bernadette Cardenas, an aerospace engineer at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, filed a civil suit against astronaut Lt. Col. Charles (Sam) Gemar and his wife Charlene, also a NASA employee. The suit claimed the Gemars had harassed her mentally and physically; Mrs. Cardenas wanted to force Col. Gemar to submit to blood tests to establish paternity for her two-year-old son. NASA said the lawsuit would not prevent Gemar's participation in the forthcoming shuttle mission. (AP, Feb 24/94; NY Times, Feb 25/94; B Sun, Feb 25/94; USA Today, Feb 25/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the New York Medical College (NYMC) in Valhalla, New York, were using satellite remote sensing and computer technology to predict the risk of Lyme disease transmission. The NASA team, working with Dr. Durland Fish of NYMC and Westchester County Health Department investigators, found that the higher the proportion of vegetated residential area next to woods within a municipality, the higher the transmission risk. (NASA Release 94-123)
A feature article gave high praise to the achievements of the Hubble Space Telescope quoting John N. Bahrall, professor of natural science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University, as saying "Hubble is bowling us over every day with what it does." A number of Hubble's discoveries were outlined, including data on the age of the universe, the Big Bang theory, and the size of the universe. (P Inq, Dec 12/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
A feature article described ways in which Pittsburgh was becoming "Robot City, USA." One of the reasons was NASA's $2.5 million grant in May 1994 to Carnegie Mellon University's Robotics Institute to establish an engineering consortium that would transfer robotics technology to U.S. industry. Other robotic firms also came to Pittsburgh recently. Other than industrial uses for robots, NASA wants to use robots to explore Mars and get instruments on the planet's surface. David Pahnos, director of the new NASA-CMU consortium, saw an opportunity for Pittsburgh to become a technical center that pushed technology forward. (CSM, Jun 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave an impassioned defense of NASA to a group of aerospace executives attending an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference in suburban Washington. He described the budget fight as part of Congress's continuing effort to turn the space program into a "debating society" and said it was time for the talk to stop. He deplored the fact that NASA was not given enough money to create a space program that American youth could dream about. Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, who sat next to Goldin, in contrast spoke of "a fatally flawed space station program" on which space dollars should not be risked. (O Sen Star, May 5/94; Space News, May 9/94)
A retrospective article looked at the role that NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California had played in the past, beginning with its establishment in 1947. It asserted that although now Dryden was used only for Space Shuttle landings when bad weather prevented the Shuttle from landing in Florida, it still managed to keep some 1,000 government and civilian employees busy. (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 30/94)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes in the Office of Space Flight (OSF) at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. These included the appointment of Bryan O'Connor, currently OSF Deputy Associate Administrator, to assume the post of Space Shuttle Program Director. O'Connor's position was to be assumed by Richard Wisniewski, who retired from NASA in 1990 after 35 years of government service. (NASA Release 94-66; WP, May 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)
NASA announced the development by the Ames Fatigue Countermeasures Program of a training course that taught pilots steps to be used against fatigue. The first workshop was to be held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on May 18-19. (NASA Release 94-64)
NASA faced tough opposition over Russian participation in the International Space Station during hearings of the House Subcommittee on Space. Both committee chairman Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas, and James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking Republican member, believed strongly that it should be an American Station. (O Sen Star, Apr 21/94)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar, who are training in Russia, returned to Johnson Space Center with the four Russian cosmonauts with whom they will fly in March 1995. The six were in Houston for three weeks to learn about U.S. science experiments planned for their flights. (H Post, May 17/94)
Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)
On April 9-10, radio astronomy experts from Stanford University and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena sent a signal from the Clementine spacecraft, which was engaged in a moon-mapping mission for the Pentagon, into a huge crater on the lunar South Pole. NASA's Deep Space Network picked up the reflection of the signal, and the Pentagon was scheduled to undertake a preliminary review of the data to determine whether the moon contained ice. (AP, Apr 16/94)
The projected testing of the SAFER (Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue) device during an Extravehicular Activity (EVA) by the astronauts in the September Discovery flight was discussed at some length. SAFER was developed by engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was designed to stabilize an astronaut, allowing the astronaut to fly back to safety should the astronaut drift too far from a structure during an untethered EVA. The 83-pound SAFER was intended to be attached to the bottom of an astronaut's spacesuit. Other objectives of the Discovery flight were to orbit the Langley Research Center's LITE (Lidar In-space Technology Experiment) payload, a laser-observation of the Earth, and to release and retrieve the Goddard Space Flight Center's Spartan 201 solar-wind research satellite. (AvWk, Sep 5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94)
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) since 1987 had cooperated to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning System (FEWS). NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, were the principal data providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms. Using daily data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites, scientists measured the density of green vegetation every 10 days. When drought conditions were detected, an AID-FEWS team could begin to coordinate relief efforts, if needed. The same data also were used for locust control purposes. (Black Media News, Apr 94)
The House Appropriations Committee approved a NASA budget of $14 billion, $240 million less than the Administration's request. The approved budget included full funding, $2.1 billion, for the Space Station. However, opponents threatened a major fight once the budget came to the House floor. Following receipt of assurances "protecting the American taxpayers from any unforeseen failure in the U.S.-Russian space partnership" in a letter from President Clinton the evening of June 22, the ranking Republican on the House subcommittee on space, James Sensenbrenner from Wisconsin, said he would support the Space Station. (AP, Jun 22/94; Reuters, Jun 22/94; W Times, Jun 23/94; W Post, Jun 23/94; H Post, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 24/94; USA Today, Jun 28/94; W Times, Jun 28/94 )
NASA announced that the fifth annual technology conference and exposition, Technology 2004, would be held November 8-10 at the Washington Convention Center, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-184)
A feature article described three women engineers who worked at the Kennedy Space Center and were among the 120 finalists being interviewed by NASA's astronaut selection board for assignment as astronaut candidates. (Fla Today, Oct 7/94)
An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)
Findings about the moon resulting from the 71-day rendezvous of the military probe Clementine were reported at the recent American Geophysical Union meeting. It developed, according to geophysicist Maria Zuber of Johns Hopkins University and NASA's Goddard Spaceflight Center, that "Now we know that we don't understand the moon as well as we thought we did." Instead of no activity on the moon in the preceding 3 million years, there was volcanic activity as recent as 1 billion years ago. The crust was very variable and the moon had a crater large enough to span the continental United States as well as another fresh-looking crater created by an impact recorded by 12th century monks. (LA Times, Dec 15/94)
NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)
NASA officials said that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) had not been home to any secret radiation tests on humans, and no workers were unknowingly exposed to any harmful materials. "We do not do anything like that here," KSC spokeswoman Lisa Malone said. Life science research underway at the space center mostly involves growing plants and food in an environmentally controlled chamber at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station as well as some muscle fatigue research in long-term bedrest studies to simulate weightlessness. The Johnson Space Center in Houston and the Ames Research Center near San Francisco are the facilities where most medical research on humans is conducted.
Charles Bigot, chairman of Arianespace, told a news conference that the company hoped to resume launches of Ariane missiles in two months' time. Following the failure of the December 1 launch, which sent an American PanAmsat-3 communications satellite to the bottom of the Atlantic, 21 corrective measures had been taken. French-based Arianespace had captured more that 60 percent of the world's satellite launch market and had orders to launch 37 satellites. (Reuters, Dec 22/94)
NASA announced that the second mission of its Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS-2) was scheduled for launching from a U.S. Air Force Delta II rocket no sooner than March 9 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The project was designed to demonstrate an economical way of delivering smaller payloads, such as micro-satellites, to higher orbits. (NASA Release 94-35)
Retired Air Force Colonel Ken Munechika, former chief of Onizuka Air Force Base's Satellite Test Center, was designated the new chief of NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC). (Sunnyvale Sun, Jan 12/94)
NASA's last SCOUT (Solid Controlled Orbital Utility Test) launch vehicle was scheduled to blast off May 6 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Lompoc, California, the final of 118 space missions that began July 1, 1960. Called the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration spacecraft, the satellite is one in a series of military spacecraft being launched to develop sensors for ballistic missile devices. Since the mid-1960s, NASA gradually has gotten out of the unmanned rocket business, which was transferred to commercial manufacturers. (Fla Today, May 2/94; NASA Release 94-72; Fla Today, May 9/94; Reuters, May 9/94)
More than 700 Space Shuttle support personnel at NASA's Kennedy Space Center had been on strike for 15 weeks in a labor dispute with contractor EG&G Corporation. The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, the labor union representing the striking workers, said negotiations were deadlocked over an EG&G demand to limit health insurance benefits for its employees. NASA denied charges that safety had been compromised during the three Shuttle flights launched since the strike began July 5. On October 21 negotiators reached a tentative agreement in their meeting at the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service headquarters in Washington, D.C. The contract proposal covered health insurance, wages, and pensions. The contract remained to be approved by three EG&G subcontractors and then ratified by the striking union members. (Defense Daily, Oct 14/94; AP, Oct 21/94)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
NASA announced that together with the American Geophysical Union it was honoring pioneer space scientist James A. Van Allen on his 80th birthday. Dr. Van Allen, Professor Emeritus at the University of Iowa, over a 50-year period studied planetary magnetospheres and cosmic rays. He discovered the belt of radiation around the Earth that bears his name. (NASA Release 94-81; Fla Today, May 25/94)
An Air Force Delta 2 rocket blasted into orbit carrying the final advanced satellite in the U.S. military's Global Positioning System, Navstar. Delta 2 also carried NASA's experiment to test a space tether 12.5 miles long to determine how long it survived in orbit among space junk. The tether could ultimately be used for various purposes such as generating electricity or changing spacecraft altitudes. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94; AP, Mar 10/94; NY Times, Mar 11/94; NY Times, Mar 15/94)
Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)
The digital data representing the first direct image of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 slamming into Jupiter reached Earth from Galileo. The impact of the explosions was presumed to have created waves in the atmosphere, and these were being sought by the Infrared Telescope Facility that NASA operated atop Mauna Kea mountain in Hawaii. The explosions sent substantial amounts of helium hundreds of miles above the top of Jupiter, which was a surprise and which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Satellite detected. (NY Times, Aug 16/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin made a state-of-the-agency address to all staff members in which he stressed that NASA intended to become less costly and quicker during the next four years, ending with as many as 4,000 fewer workers. Kennedy Space Center Deputy Director Gene Thomas, who answered questions after the televised address, said it would be a year of "significant change." (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
NASA announced that it had assumed the satellite-development contract for Landsat 7 from the Department of Defense. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was to manage the contract with Martin Marietta Astro Space, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. Landsat 7 was to provide essential land remote-sensing data critical to understanding environmental change. (NASA Release 94-78)
Lieutenant General Malcolm O'Neill, Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), proposed to Pentagon Acquisition Chief John Deutch cancellation of the purchase of four Russian Topaz II space nuclear reactors--believed to be the last in Russia's inventory--to be used in the DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, said that the Air Force might take over the ground test program. The Nuclear Electric Propulsion Space Test Program, with which they might have been used, was also dropped. These moves continued a trend in the cancellation of several NASA and Air Force efforts to develop space nuclear power. A White House Space Nuclear Power Interagency Working Group was scheduled to draft administration policy by July 1994 and a U.S. position for the February meeting of the United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPOUS) Science and Technology Subcommittee. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center began moving into a new $72 million building where all U.S., European, Japanese, and Canadian station hardware were to be prepared for launch. The modern computers and equipment in the new control rooms were commended particularly in the media. (Fla Today, May 13/94; B Sun, Jun 2/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; O Sen Star, Jun 2/94; CSM, Jun 3/94)
NASA announced that its Office of Space Communications, Headquarters, Washington, D.C., was initiating an opportunity for private industry to conduct experiments of future telecommunications technologies via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS). Called the Mobile Satcom TDRSS (MOST) Experiment Program, it was designed to enhance U.S. competitiveness in the global satellite telecommunications area. (NASA Release 94-43)
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and Chairman of the independent investigative board studying the Mars Observer failure, delivered the report on the Mars mission to NASA. The spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. Despite lack of any communication with the craft, the board found that the probable cause of the loss of communication was a rupture of the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine - MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have caused the craft to enter a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. The board discussed a number of other concerns of a procedural nature. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, announced the award of a contract for information and communications support services for Ames to I-Net, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-bb (sic); duplicates number on contract announcement of August 3)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, selected Pioneer Contract Services for a five-year, $42 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for logistics support, such as all handling of property, warehouse, and bondroom operations. (NASA Release C94f)
A NASA B-52 successfully launched a standard Pegasus booster carrying an Advanced Photovoltaic and Electronic Experiments (APEX) spacecraft, which Orbital Sciences Corporation had developed for the U.S. Air Force. APEX was the first satellite developed using Orbital's standard satellite platform and represented the first Pegasus mission that maximized the payload and weight capability of the standard booster. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
NASA announced the development and testing of a new integrated flight and propulsion control system to help pilots land under difficult conditions. Aerospace engineers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, were developing the digital fly-by-wire control system to reduce a pilot's workload and help stabilize landing aircraft. NASA was testing the new system in the Vertical/Short Takeoff and Landing (V/STOL) Systems Research Aircraft (VSRA) to improve takeoff and landing capabilities for V/STOL aircraft in reduced visibility. The VSRA was a modified version of the U.S. Marine Corps' AV-8B Harrier jet fighter, which could take off and land vertically. (NASA Release 94-209)
NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham at Kennedy Space Center said the tether launched by the Space Shuttle was working well. It could be used to move satellites around in different orbits in space. Originally about 12 miles long, atomic oxygen and tiny meteorites ate it so that it was now only about five miles long. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/94)
A lengthy review of the four-hour TBS documentary film "Moon Shot," described the extraordinary footage obtained from NASA, primarily from the Johnson Space Center, and the story behind the U.S. 10-year race to beat the Soviet Union to the moon. (TV Times, Jul 10-16/94)
A leak of toxic rocket propellant on an Air Force Titan 4 rocket forced the postponement of the rocket's launch to December 20. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
The Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, Inc. held a legislative conference in Washington, D.C., at which NASA had the largest government career recruiting exhibit of any agency. NASA's Associate Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, Yvonne B. Freeman, said that NASA was now aggressively recruiting future black scientists as early as elementary school and paying for their training. Of the $740 million NASA spent on education each year, $70 million now went to historically black colleges and universities, up from $6 million two years previously. Representative Louis Stokes, Democrat from Ohio, who formerly criticized NASA for doing little to hire blacks or enter into contracts with black companies, said NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had really made a difference in NASA's programs. Stokes's appropriations subcommittee was responsible for NASA funding. (Plain Dealer, Sep 16/94)
Intermetrics, Inc., of McLean, VA, was awarded an $81 million, 10-year contract as part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. It provide Independent Verification & Validation (IV&V) of the Earth-Observing system (EOS) Data and Information System (EOSDIS), for the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland. EOS was projected to generate about 1 trillion bytes of new data per day, offering access to data on the Earth's ecosystem, permitting scientists to distinguish natural from human-made changes. (NASA Release C94-b)
An experimental X-31 aircraft crashed at Edwards air Force Base in California. Its German military pilot ejected safely. The craft, one of two X-31's operated at NASA Dryden Flight Research Center, was returning from a one-hour test flight when it crashed. First flown in 1990, the aircraft had proven its ability to outmaneuver other fighters, particularly at low speeds. The cause of the crash was under investigation. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 20/95; H Chron, Jan 20/95; Daily News, Jan 20/95; APn, Jan 19/95; UPn, Jan 19/95; USA Today, Jan 20/95; W Post, Jan 20/95; C Trib, Jan 20/95; LA Daily News, Jan 20/95; LA Times, Jan 20/95; Bakersfield Californian, Jan 20/95;)
A new Mission Control center at the Johnson Space Center began operating about 10 hours after the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery. It replaces the 30 year old Mission Control which began controlling manned space flights in Houston rather than at Cape Canaveral, Florida. A network of 200 computer work stations are replacing the lumbering and inflexible, but highly reliable mainframe computer. Launchings and landings, the most dangerous parts of space flight, will be monitored from the original Mission Control at least through the end of the year to be sure there are no glitches with the new center. (NY Times, Jul 15/95;W Post, Jul 16/95; Fla Today, Feb 12/95 & 15/95; Space News, Dec 11/95; H Chron, Jul 9/95; AP, Jul 15/95; Reuters, Jul 14/95; AvWk, Jul 31/95)
Two astronomers at the American Astronomical Society's annual meeting in Tucson, Arizona, presented an extraordinary photograph of a nearby star in red-hot death throes similar to the cataclysm that astronomers theorize will destroy the solar system in several billion years. The photo, taken with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, showed never-before-seen detail in the glowing red gas cloud ejected by the dying star. The "Cat's Eye Nebula," or NGC 6543, is about 3,000 light-years from Earth in the constellation Draco, the dragon. (B Sun, Jan 12/95)
Anatoly Kiselyov, General Director of the Khrunichev State Space Research and Industrial Center, said that NASA's terms for financing the work to develop and build the cargo module for the Alpha Station were unrealistic and that Russian air and space firms could not agree to them. Kiselyov said the real costs of building the functional cargo module would be 40 to 50 percent higher than American estimates, or at least $220 million. The cargo module is to be the first component of a future space station and is scheduled for launch in November 1997. It will serve as the basis on which to build a future space complex. (FBIS-Sov, Jan 13/95)
The claim of a new discovery by three NASA astronomers was refuted by a galaxy expert who was invited to their press conference. At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Tucson, Arizona, the astronomers claimed to have discovered six dwarf spiral galaxies, which they also claimed astronomers long thought existed but had never found. The Canadian galaxy expert claimed that dwarf spirals had been discovered by astronomers in the 1950's. (AP, Jan 11/95; Reuter, Jan 10/95)
A robot alfalfa harvester is a joint project of Carnegie Mellon, NASA, and the New Holland farm equipment company. Although America lost the robot wars in the last few decades, many new applications are now seen. (NY Times, Oct 7/95; AvWk, Jun 26/95)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope to study quasars began to reassess their theories after studying a series of quasars during the past few months. The astronomers expected the quasars, thought to be super-massive "black holes," to be surrounded by galaxies that "feed" the quasar. Instead, none of the first eight quasars they studied was surrounded by a galaxy, raising questions about of how black holes form and sustain themselves. "I really don't understand this," said project astronomer John Bahcall in a report to the American Astronomical Society in Tucson, Arizona. (LA Times, Jan 13/95; W Post, Jan 13/95)
Atmospheric scientists presented some 40 papers or abstracts at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Tucson, Arizona, on the topic of newly-discovered discharges of lightning in Earth's upper atmosphere. The upper-atmospheric lightning materializes above thunderheads and shoots upward, not downward, in bolts and flickers that soar as high as 60 miles above the surface of the Earth. Satellites have detected gamma ray bursts emanating from thunderheads, whereas red flashes have been linked to powerful burst of radio waves. NASA planned to fly a jet loaded with cameras and instruments across the thunderstorm belt of South America in February to begin serious study of upper atmospheric lightning. (NY Times, Jan 17/95; H Chron, Jan 23/95)
NASA's Johnson Space Center denied Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Co. a large profit fee because of poor performance under a tougher procurement compliance policy implemented by the space agency in 1994. (H Chron, Jan 7/95)
Senior NASA managers have recommended that Ames Research Center be placed under the oversight of a private contractor. However, it also recommended that Ames aerospace facilities be transferred to Langley Research Center and that its space station centrifuge be transferred to Johnson Space Center. The Zero Based Review Team also endorsed sweeping changes in the organization of NASAs other research facilities, but it rejected a proposal to have a contractor run the Kennedy Space Center. (SF Exam, Feb 18/95; Science, Apr 21/95)
NASA and Russian space station officials were scheduled to begin a series of technical exchange meetings at the Johnson Space Center intended to give clear direction to joint cooperation in constructing the international space station. Twenty-five teams of Russian technicians and engineers were expected to arrive to discuss a number of issues, including docking procedures, power supply distribution; structural mechanics, depressurization; and place and use of antennae. Crew size was also to be discussed. The meetings were expected to last until February 10. NASA officials hoped to agree on as much common ground as possible so that Russia could be made an official partner in the station project before the year is out. (Phillips Business Information, Jan 19/95)
A testbed for a solar-powered regenerative fuel cell system was dedicated at Edwards Air Force Base. The Lewis Research Centers new government and industry multi-use regenerative fuel cell program mirrors the administrations policies of developing technologies that both foster U.S. competitiveness and support government programs. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory is an active member of the Lewis fuel cell team. Fuel cell applications include electric cars, buses, and locomotives in addition to less expensive means of power distribution for communities. (NASA Release 95-8)
The 1,700 lb., $1.7 million robot Dante II, built by Carnegie Mellon University scientists, took gas samples and video pictures of the Spurr volcano in Alaska. The research is aimed at proving that cheap robots can be used on dangerous missions on Mars. (Bus Wk, Jan 9/95)
NASA officials dedicated a new testbed at Edwards Air Force Base in California's Mojave Desert for development of a solar-powered regenerative fuel cell system that they hope will one day provide clean and efficient renewable electric power. The testbed is the heart of Cleveland-based Lewis Research Center's new government and industry multi-use regenerative fuel cell program and mirrors the government's policy of developing technologies that will both foster US competitiveness and, at the same time, support government programs. (NASA Release 95-8)
Astronomers detected a gigantic mass, equivalent to 40 million Suns, in a distant galaxy that they believe to be a black hole. The discovery, announced at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Tucson, Arizona, was made by a team of American and Japanese scientists using a computer-linked system of 10 radio telescope dishes stretching from the Virgin Islands to Hawaii known as the Very Long Baseline Array. Since black holes, by definition, emit no visible light or other radiation, astronomers infer their presence by their strong gravitational pull on surrounding stars.  The discovery was made by observing the rotation of a disk of gas and dust surrounding a galactic nucleus. (NY Times, Jan 12/95; W Times, Jan 12/95; W Post, Jan 12/95, AP, Jan 12/95; H Chron, Jan 12/95; CSM, Jan 13/95)
NASA is developing plans for the Science Institutes which are expected to help streamline the agencys management structure and improve the quality of its scientific research. Two institutes are being defined as pathfinders. One is affiliated with NASA Johnson Space Center that would conduct biomedical research. The other is affiliated with NASA Ames Research Center that would focus on research related to the origins and evolution of life, and planetary biology. (NASA Releases 95-110 & 132; Science, Nov 17/95)
Scientists at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California said that they had developed a $14 million wing panel that would help them devise cheaper and more efficient ways to operate supersonic aircraft. The experimental panel was to be used in laminar airflow tests to search for ways to reduce aerodynamic drag and fuel consumption under NASA's High Speed Research program. Tests were scheduled on modified versions of the US Air Force's F-16XL and Russia's TU-144 supersonic transport. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan/95; Bakersfield Californian, Jan 25/95; Antelope Valley Daily News, Jan 29/95)
After several attempts in 1994, Russian cosmonauts successfully tested the Mir space station's automatic docking equipment, clearing the way for the seven to ten scheduled dockings with American space shuttles through 1997. (AP, Jan 11/95; H Chron, Jan 12/95; Dayton Daily News, Jan 12/95; C Trib, Jan 12/95)
NASA expected to begin wind tunnel tests of its newest jet fighter, the X-32, in the summer of 1995.  A lightweight, compact aircraft capable of maneuvering like a helicopter, the plane will employ the latest in stealth technology and will not need runway space for landings and takeoffs. Tests were to be conducted at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 95-4; San Jose Mercury News, Jan 8/95)
A team of aerospace executives has recommended that NASA modify the Space Shuttle programs management structure. The team was headed by former Johnson Space Center Director Christopher Kraft. The report to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recommends separating developmental activities from flight operations. The Kraft report endorses the themes of reducing the role of civil service employees, increasing contractor accountability, and reducing the number of government-to-contractor interfaces. (NASA Release 95-27; NY Times, May 22/95 & Apr 14/95; W Post, Jun 7/95; Fla Today, Mar 2/95 & Apr 5/95; Reuters, Mar 13/95; AvWk, Mar 6/95, Mar 20/95, Apr 10/95 & Jun 12/95)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent ShuttleMir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission STS-79Press Kit, news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, Shuttle Arrives for Astronauts Long-Awaited Pickup, Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
In its annual contest, Popular Science magazine honored NASAs experimental flight-control system as one of the best technological developments of 1996. NASA had installed the system, developed for the use of NASA and the U.S. Air Force, in a remotely piloted aircraft called LoFLYTE (Low Observable Flight Test Experiment). On board the aircraft, the system used techniques involving neural networks to learn to fly, actually acquiring flight skills by mimicking the actions of the pilot controlling the plane from the ground. Neural networks are systems that learn skills by doing them. Scientists hoped the technology might eventually have an impact on commercial and military aviation.(NASA, Aircraft Flight-Control System Wins Best of Whats New, news release 96-233, 12 November 1996. 155 David Colker, Pilotless Test Plane Blown Up After It Veers Off Course, Los Angeles Times, 13 November 1996; Jim Skeen, Pilotless Aircraft Crashes at Edwards, Antelope Valley News (Palmdale, CA), 13 November 1996.)
At the High Energy Astrophysics Division of the American Astronomical Society, astronomers working with NASAs Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) spacecraft announced the discovery of the fastest vibrations ever recorded in a star system. The vibrations occur when massive neutron stars begin to die out, expelling the outer layers of their solid crusts and creating powerful x-rays. The astronomers working with the RXTE recorded x-rays flickering at up to 1,130 times per second. Scientists were unsure why this process occurred. According to NASA, the possibility that the RXTE has detected actual waves in neutron stars or a very fast rotation period of one such star is of great scientific interest.(NASA, NASA Spacecraft Discovers Fastest Stellar Vibrations Yet, news release 96-81, 30 April 1996; Associated Press, NASA Instrument Detects Fastest Vibrations Yet Seen in Universe, 30 April 1996.)
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASAs Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as the first day of a new space program in America. Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve very good safety ratings.(Associated Press, NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry, 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact, 30 September 1996; United Press International, NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact, 1 October 1996.)
NASA researchers at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) completed the testing of the F- 16XL at Edwards Air Force Base. The tests had taken more than one year to complete. Scientists were studying how the modified F-16 flew with US$14 million laminar-flow gloves on its wings. The data they collected demonstrated that the glove had reduced the turbulent layer of air that passes over an airplanes wing during flight. Project Manager Carol A. Reukauf called the tests successful. NASA hoped the results would provide manufacturers with a new technology that would improve aeronautical design, decreasing air drag on airplanes and, consequently, reducing the fuel required to fly.(Jay Levine, Laminar Flow Tests Successful, Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 10 October 1996. 143 NASA, The X-Planes: 50 Years of High Desert Right Stuff, news release 96-204, 10 October 1996. 144 Reuters, Russia Postpones Mir Supply Rocket Mission, 16 October 1996.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin informed employees that NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, would reduce its staff by more than 50 percent, citing increasing budget pressures. Under the reduction plan, staff at NASA Headquarters would decrease from 1,430 to between 650 and 700, in less than one years time. The Clinton administration had continued to push for government-wide budget cutbacks throughout the 1990s. Don Fuqua, President of the Aerospace Industries Association, described the staff reduction as a case of the federal government following the example of the private sector. According to Fuqua, before NASA decided to reorganize, most commercial aerospace business had already reorganized for greater efficiency.(NASA, Additional Personnel Reductions Planned for Agency Headquarters, news release 96-76, 17 April 1996; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Speeds Up Downsizing, Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Mike Causey, NASA To Lighten Pay Load, Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Warren Ferster and Jennifer Heronema, NASA Cuts Headquarters Jobs Deeper, Faster, Space News, 2228 April 1996, 45.)
Astronomers at California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of what they believed to be the most distant galaxy ever glimpsed from the Earth. The team of scientists, including Thomas A. Barlow, Limin Liu, Wallace L. W. Sargent, and Donna S. Womble, had stumbled across the unnamed galaxy while studying a quasar silhouetted by the galaxys light. The team used the W. M. Keck Observatory atop the Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii. In comparison to other documented galaxies, their find was a relatively young galaxyprobably formed less than 1 billion years after the Big Bang. The galaxy resides near the constellation Virgo. Ironically, since the galaxy lies 14 billion light-years away from Earth, the scientists had no way of knowing whether their discovery still actually existed. The scientists hoped that their discovery would offer new understanding of the period when stars began to congregate into galaxies.(California Institute of Technology, Astronomers Discover the Most Distant Galaxy, news release, 31 January 1996; Reuters, Scientists Discover Farthest Galaxy Yet, 1 February 1996; John Noble Wilford, New Galaxy May Shed Light on Universe, New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
Henry McDonald became Director of Ames Research Center (ARC) in Mountain View, California. NASA had selected McDonald for the position in January 1996 after the selection of former Director Ken K. Munechika as NASAs first Director of Moffett Federal Airfield. A former professor of mechanical engineering at Pennsylvania State University, McDonald brought to NASA both industrial and academic experience.(NASA, McDonald Named Director of Ames Research Center, news release 96-8, 19 January 1996. 37 Associated Press, Campus Takes Control of Shuttle Experiment, 5 March 1996.)
NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Grahams design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes, news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
NASA launched its Fast Auroral Snapshot (FAST) Explorer from a test range near Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Engineers had designed the FAST vehicle to travel about 1,500 miles (2,400 kilometers) above Earth, measuring energetic particles, and magnetic and electric fields, at high altitudes where auroras form, to explore the physical processes that produce aurora borealis and aurora australis. NASAs Small Explorer Project, tasked with providing frequent and low-cost research missions for astrophysics investigations, had carried out the FAST mission as the second in a series of five missions.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, FAST Status Report #1: Spacecraft Successfully Launched, news release, 21 August 1996; Bruce Smith, Fast Launched Successfully, Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 71.)
Reuters News Service published an internal NASA memorandum written by an independent safety commission, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, cautioning NASA against cutting the budget for the Shuttle program too quickly. According to the panels analysis, NASAs attempts to reduce costs by conducting fewer Shuttle safety inspections and by transferring responsibility for day-to-day operations of the Shuttle program to United Space Alliance had demoralized NASAs workforce at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The memo made clear the opinion of the safety inspectors: Overall, it was the clear consensus of the team that a cooling off period is absolutely necessary if KSC operations are to continue safely . . . without this hiatus the safety risk is likely unacceptable.(Reuters, Warning Light for NASAs Shuttle ProgramMemo, 4 July 1996.)
A team of astronomers announced at the American Astronomical Society convention that they had discovered ordinary vinegar in a stellar cloud 25,000 light-years away from Earth. The presence of an organic molecule, which may have played a role in the formation of life, excited scientists. Acetic acid could have been one of the first steps toward the chemicals of life, explained Lewis E. Snyder, a member of the research team that made the discovery. Scientists had discovered complex molecules in space before, but formic acid, discovered in 1975, was the only other basic molecule detected before the discovery of the vinegar.(John Noble Wilford, Whiff of Organic Stuff Found Between Stars, New York Times, 11 June 1996; Associated Press, Vinegar Found in Far Away Space, 11 June 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour tested new NASA spacesuits in extreme cold. In preparation for work on the ISS, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott stood nearly motionless in space for 35 minutes, in temperatures nearing 100 below 0F (-73.33C), to test the suits insulating capacity. In completing the exercise, Scott became the second African American man to walk in space. The newly improved suits, produced at a cost of US$10 million each, proved an effective barrier against the cold. The gloves and the boots of the suits contained heating elements. NASA made the thermal improvements to the spacesuits after the astronauts became cold during the February 1995 spacewalk, causing its early termination.(Michael Cabbage, Staying Warm in Cosmic Cold, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 January 1996; Jet Magazine, Navy Captain Winston Scott Becomes Second Black To Walk in Space, 5 February 1996, 24. 11 Kathy Sawyer, Two Planets Discovered that Might Sustain Life, Washington Post, 18 January 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars, video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, With One Record Down, Shes Still Up, 16 July 1996.)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force unveiled to the public an intelligent aircraft, using a computerized system to learn as it flies. Researchers had engineered the hypersonic aircraft to take inventory of flight maneuvers performed while operating under remote control, eventually using its acquired knowledge to develop the capability to fly itself. According to the flight researchers, the aircrafts control system would create a continually altering set of control laws, to optimize flight performance. After the aircraft had perfected its system, it could assist pilots in performing such tasks as landing partially damaged planes. The intelligent aircraft could also enable flight at speeds and altitudes that human pilots could hardly ever achieve, while still maintaining adequate control of an aircraft.(NASA, Intelligent Test Aircraft Unveiled in Wisconsin Today, news release 96-154, 2 August 1996.)
The Galileo spacecraft lost some of its collected data when a problem with one of its computer processors caused a shutdown of nonessential systems. Project Manager William J. ONeil said that much of the lost data was of little consequence to researchers, but that data from Galileos continuous study of Jupiters magnetic field had suffered a significant loss, creating an information gap of about one week. The episode, which occurred in the midst of NASAs string of impressive research achievements, highlighted the difficulty of directing a data-gathering probe thousands of miles from Earths surface.(Kathy Sawyer, Spacecraft in Orbit Around Jupiter Loses Data, Washington Post, 27 August 1996; Associated Press, Computer Error on Spacecraft Exploring Jupiter, 28 August 1996. See also Michael Meltzer, Mission to Jupiter: A History of the Galileo Project (Washington, DC: NASA, 2007).)
A malfunction in an unpiloted test plane forced NASA officials to detonate the plane high above Edwards Air Force Base in California. The lightweight plane, dubbed Theseus, veered out of control during a routine test flight. Aurora Flight Systems had developed the US$5 million plane for long-term flights to observe climatic conditions from altitudes as high as 60,000 feet (18,300 kilometers). A spokesperson for Aurora indicated that the company had insufficient data to determine the cause of the failure. NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Systems to develop the plane as part of its Mission to Planet Earth initiative. At the time of the forced detonation, NASA had not designated funds to develop any subsequent Theseus models.
Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission, 10 March 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers funds on NASAs research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy. The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame, news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
George W. S. Abbey became the seventh Director of JSC in Houston, Texas. Abbey had been Acting Director since Carolyn Hunter had stepped down from the post on 4 August 1995. According to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, Abbeys distinguished NASA career made him the right man for the job. Administrator Goldin announced, George Abbey is uniquely qualified to lead the Johnson team into the future. Over the course of his eminent career with NASA, he has distinguished himself as an innovator and pioneer at all levels of Agency management. Abbey had begun working at NASA in 1967 after serving as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force. He had worked on the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming Director of Flight Operations. NASA had recognized Abbeys superior service by awarding him its Exceptional Service Medal and two Distinguished Service Medals.(NASA, Abbey Named Director of Johnson Space Center, news release 96-11, 23 January 1996. 3)
DFRC test pilot Edward T. Schneider received the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Chanute Flight Test Award for his work testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle at extremely high angles of attack. The Institute honored Schneider at the World Aviation Congress and Exposition, held in Los Angeles, California. Schneider had participated in NASAs Attack Research Program, meant to improve the control and maneuverability of high- performance aircraft. He tested the thrust-vectoring control system installed in the F-18, which allowed pilots to make high-angle motions and still maintain control of their planes. Schneider spent nine years testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle during his distinguished 18-year career as a test pilot. Schneider had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal in 1996.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), Dryden Pilot Receives Flying Award, 25 October 1996, http://www.nasa.gov/lb/centers/dryden/news/Biographies/Pilots/bd-dfrc-p014.html (accessed 5 August 2007).)
Russia launched the Soyuz spacecraft carrying two cosmonauts. The Russian Space Agency intended the mission to Mir to bring Mir residents Yuri P. Gidzenko, Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Thomas Reiter back to Earth after their lengthy stay aboard the space station.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1996), p. 102.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space ShuttleMir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttles three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
NASA successfully launched its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, via an Orbital Sciences Pegasus XL launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A jet flying roughly 7 miles above the California coast released the rocket that was carrying the satellite, placing the TOMS-EP in a successful orbit. The McMurdo Sound Tracking Station in Antarctica acquired the satellite almost immediately and determined that the spacecraft was functioning properly. After it reached a circular orbit, the TOMS-EP was ready to conduct its scientific mission.(NASA, Pegasus/TOMS Launch Successful from Vandenberg AFB, news release, 2 July 1996; Associated Press, BRFSatellite Launch, 2 July 1996.)
Astronomer and Pulitzer Prize winner Carl Sagan died after a long fight against a bone marrow disease; he was 62 years old. Since 1971, Sagan had directed Cornell Universitys Laboratory for Planetary Atmospheres and Surfaces, where he forged his reputation as an expert in exobiology. Sagan helped plan the Mariner, Viking, and Voyager missions, receiving NASAs Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement in 1972. Sagan also helped popularize modern science with his widely viewed television series Cosmos. Sagan described the television series as an endeavor to show that science is a delight and to end peoples artificial alienation from it. Sagans The Dragons of Eden (1977) won the Pulitzer Prize. Throughout his work, Sagan had also argued for the possibility of extraterrestrial life.(Cornell University, Carl Sagan, Cornell Astronomer, Dies Today (Dec. 20) in Seattle, news release, 20 December 1996; United Press International, Astronomer Carl Sagan Has Died, 20 December 1996.)
NASA reported that a team of scientists from Johnson Space Center and Stanford University had found evidence that strongly suggested that primitive life existed on the planet Mars. During a two-year study, the researchers discovered what they believed to be organic molecules of Martian origin on a potato-sized meteorite, which members of the National Science Foundations Antarctica Meteorite Program had found in 1984. Scientists estimated that the meteorite was about 4.5 billion years old. According to the teams report, published in Science magazine, the remnants on the meteorite shared several mineral characteristics indicating biological activity, possibly even containing microscopic fossils of primitive, bacteria-like organisms. The minute scale of the evidence required the careful research of the team of specialists in the fields of microbiology, mineralogy, and chemistry. The largest of the possible fossils measured about 1/100th the diameter of a human hair. Only with recently developed technological instruments, including a dual-laser mass spectrometer, were the scientists able to make any substantial observations.112 The announcement generated immediate excitement in the scientific community and in the mass media, although some scientists responded with a multitude of critical questions. The researchers carefully qualified their report, stating, It is very difficult to prove life existed 3.6 billion years ago on Earth, let alone on Mars.113 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make samples of the meteorite available to scientists throughout the world, to encourage a full scientific investigation.(McKay et al., Search for Past Life on Mars, 924930; NASA, Meteorite Yields Evidence; Sawyer, NASA Releases Images.)
At a conference of the American Astronomical Society in San Antonio, Texas, a team of U.S. astronomers announced the discovery of two new stars with the characteristics to sustain life within their solar systems. The astronomers identified the bodies, both visible to the naked eye, as star 70 Virginis in the constellation Virgo and a star orbiting 47 Ursae Majoris in the Big Dipper. Geoffrey Marcy and Paul Butler, researchers affiliated with the University of California at Berkeley and San Francisco State University, spent nine years monitoring 120 Sun-like stars in order to discover the two stars.
Joseph B. Gurman of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHOs scientists were excited and surprised to find that movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun. The scientists observed that the Suns plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found, news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASAs Distinguished Service Medal, 2 May 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Forced to remain in space an additional day because of bad weather, Columbia and its crew had set an endurance record of nearly 18 days in space, only one day short of the previous record of 17 days. Heavy fog in Florida was the cause of the landing delay.(Associated Press, Space Shuttle Sets a Record for a Mission, 7 December 1996.)
NASA marked the 50-year anniversary of the Bell X-1 aircrafts first flight, which took place at the site of Edwards Air Force Base, home of NASAs DFRC. According to Jay Miller, the author of The X-Planes: X-1 to X-33, the X-1 had given flight researchers and engineers their first full- scale tool to study transonic aerodynamics. The Bell Aircraft Corporation, the U.S. Army Air Forces (predecessor of the U.S. Air Force), and NASAs predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, had collaborated to get the first test plane off the ground. The X-1 test not only provided aeronautical data, but also pioneered the test methods later adopted by DFRC flight researchers.
Furloughed NASA employees returned to work at the end of a federal government shutdown of 14 to 21 days. NASA had allowed some critical employees to return before others. The government shutdown, resulting from a budget stalemate between the Republican Congress and the Democratic White House, forced NASA to cease operations and to clear thousands of its employees from field centers across the country. Upon resuming its normal proceedings, NASA faced a backlog of work because of the disruption. Workers returning to Houstons Johnson Space Center (JSC) were especially anxious to catch up, because the Center had only three days to prepare for a scheduled Shuttle launch. A snowstorm delayed for a few more hours the return of workers to Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown, HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, Federal Employees Face Backlog Here, Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour made a smooth sunrise landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bringing to its close a fruitful 10-day research mission. The Shuttle crew celebrated their record achievement of 21 hours flying in close proximity to the satellites they had released. NASA planned to move Endeavour to Palmdale, California, for refurbishing.(Stefanie Asin, Welcome Back, Endeavour, Shuttle Lands at Kennedy Space Center After 10-Day Mission, Houston Chronicle, 30 May 1996.)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) scientists began the most comprehensive testing to date on how plants produce food and oxygen in space. The experiment, part of NASAs development of a Controlled Ecological Life Support System, called for the analysis of 128 potato plants and 6,500 wheat seeds. NASA scientists planned for the study to last from one to three years. NASA agricultural engineer John Sager, praising NASAs earlier success in producing crop species for space, explained the experiments significance: If we plan to live in space . . . we must determine if this system will be as successful over longer periods of time. Scientists were using KSCs Biomass Production Chamber to test the crops in a space-like environment. NASA had begun in 1987 to test strains of crops and plants for their ability to produce oxygen and food in space.(NASA, NASA Begins Study on Reliability of Space Life Support System, news release 96-120, 12 June 1996. 86 Rowan Scarborough, Engen To Head Air and Space, Washington Times, 13 June 1996.)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttles appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans, 21 October 1996.)
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldins efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldins mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers, HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston, 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, Goldins Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
An international team of researchers announced that, while tracking Comet Hyakutake in March 1996, they had discovered x-rays emitting from the comet. German scientists working at Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had collaborated on the project with NASA scientists based at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Konrad Dennryl, who had directed the use of Germanys ROSAT (Rontgensatellit) for the project, called the discovery of the x-rays a thrilling moment. The comet emitted far stronger radiation signals than the scientists had expected, about 100 times brighter than anticipated. The scientists could not explain why the comet gave off such intense x-rays, but offered two preliminary hypotheses: 1) the gaseous molecules surrounding the comet absorbed x-rays from the Sun before reemitting the same x-rays; or 2) violent collisions between the comet material and the supersonic wind and particles from the Sun produced the extraordinarily strong x-rays. The scientists vowed to ascertain conclusively why the comet x-rays behaved as they did.(NASA, First X-rays from a Comet Discovered, new release 96-66, 4 April 1996; John Noble Wilford, Scientists Seek Explanation for X-rays Seen from Comet, New York Times, 5 April 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station, news release, 21 May 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base in Californias Mojave Desert. The nine-day mission nearly came to an abrupt halt when Atlantiss crew had difficulty opening the Shuttles cargo bay doors during descent. After considering an emergency landing, NASA controllers directed Atlantiss crew to open the doors manually. The crew successfully performed this necessary maneuver only to confront dangerous weather that prevented their landing at Kennedy Space Center.(Associated Press, Shuttle Back Safely After Mir Mission, 1 April 1996. 13)
NASA announced its 1996 astronaut candidate class, which included the first set of identical twins ever selectedMark E. Kelly and Scott J. Kelly. The sibling U.S. Navy pilots joined 33 other astronauts in the class. NASA selected 10 pilots and 25 mission specialists from an applicant pool of more than 2,400 candidates, including members of the U.S. Army, Air Force, Coast Guard, Marine Corps, and Navy. Six members of the class held PhDs in their respective fields, and one was an MD. NASA selected the astronaut class, the largest in nearly 20 years, from 16 different states; in addition, one astronaut candidate had been born in Argentina and another in the United Kingdom.(NASA, NASA Selects Astronaut Class of 1996, news release 96-84, 1 May 1996; Marcia Dunn, In NASA First Identical Twins Selected for Astronaut Corps, Huntsville Times (AL), 2 May 1996.)
Scientists at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) received the first images from the United States Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), as the instrument orbited aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS). GSFC scientists noted the superior quality of the initial images. ADEOS continued a long line of satellites launched to aid scientists in observing total levels of ozone and volcanic sulfur dioxide. Because of data obtained from the TOMS instruments deployed by NASA, millions of Americans became aware of the ozone hole and began to use ozone as a household word. The latest TOMS instrument joined a series of instruments aboard ADEOS, including the Improved Limb Atmospheric Sounder, the Interferometric Monitor for Greenhouse Gases, and the Retroreflector in Space.
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASAs Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight, New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77, news release 96-83, May 1996.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying Frances first female astronaut, Claudie Andre-Deshays. Andre-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of Andre-Deshays at Mir, the head of Frances space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew, Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station, 19 August 1996; Associated Press, Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says, 19 August 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nations oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASAs Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASAs final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbias launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttles mission.(Reuters, Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly, 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites, New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, Space Shuttle Mission STS-80Press Kit, news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope, 20 November 1996.)
NASA scientist Benjamin F. Chao explained to the New York Times the results of his research on Earths orbit. A geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, Chao attributed the Earths slightly changed orbital pattern to the increased construction of dams. As the planets population has grown, people had attempted to maximize use of Earths limited water resources by building reservoirs. Using geophysics, international data, and theoretical calculations, Chao postulated that this increase in impounded water on the Earths surface had actually helped speed up the Earths orbit. Chao first made public his findings in the Geophysical Research Papers. Some members of the scientific community challenged his conclusions.(Malcolm W. Browne, Dams for Water Supply Are Altering Earths Orbit, Expert Says, New York Times, 3 March 1996.)
Continuing its efforts to cut costs by using private contractors, NASA awarded McDonnell Douglas Aerospace a US$500 million, eight-year contract to provide fixed-price medium-light (Med-Lite) class expendable launch vehicle services.31 NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program, and the Orbital Sciences Corporation served as the major subcontractor. At the time of the agreement, NASA had planned three Med-Lite missions launching from both the East Coast and the West Coast.
Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) at Edwards Air Force Base in California commemorated its 50th anniversary with a celebration called Discovery Through Flight Research. The Center got its start when five aeronautical engineers from Langley Research Center arrived to explore flight beyond the speed of sound, in preparation for the X-1 tests, featuring pilot Charles E. Chuck Yeager at the controls. Researchers at DFRC contributed to a wide variety of aeronautical achievements, including breaking the sound barrier and helping launch the Space Shuttle program. At the age of 50, DFRC employed 900 government and civilian contractor employees.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), Dryden Marks Half-Century of Achievements, 25 September 1996. 136 Associated Press, Ancient Spacecraft, 1 October 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavours launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavours flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay, Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs, 16 January 1996.)
NASAs Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panels findings against NASAs risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chretien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, Panels Give Astronaut a Go for Launch to Mir, news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission, news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off, USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir, 26 September 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery, carrying a crew of seven astronauts, launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a mission to service the HST. NASA planned the 10-day Shuttle Mission STS-82 to upgrade significantly the scientific capabilities of HST, as well as to perform standard maintenance on the US$2 billion instrument. The spaceflight was the second servicing mission for HST since its deployment in April 1990 aboard Shuttle Discoverys Mission STS-31. The astronauts planned to conduct at least four spacewalks to install new components, such as the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer. A NASA scientist described the improvements as replacing 1970s technology with 1990s technology. In addition to the work conducted on the HST, Discoverys crew planned to move the telescope a few miles farther into the atmosphere, improving its chances for a longer operating life. Astronomers hypothesized that the potential gains from refurbishing the HST outweighed the risks of tampering with its already spectacular abilities, justifying the US$800 million cost of the mission. The head of the HarvardSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics speculated that the refurbished HST could lead to a whole different kind of science.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission STS-82Press Kit, news release 97-18, February 1997; John Noble Wilford, Shuttle Starts Space Telescope Mission, New York Times, 12 February 1997; Associated Press, Improved Hubble Telescope To Give Astronomers New View of the Universe, 8 February 1997.)
NASA researchers, astronauts, and scholars gathered in Washington, DC, for a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, disclosing and discussing details of experiments conducted aboard the Shuttle during two 1996 missions. The event commemorated the one-year anniversaries of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory and the third U.S. Microgravity Payload. Scientists predicted that discoveries made aboard the Shuttle flights in 1996 would eventually lead to technological advances. Research on numerous topics, from the climate of the universe to human biology, could lead to production of cheaper metals and alloys or new synthetic drugs. Highlights from the research presentations included the announcement of the discovery that space-grown crystals are of much higher quality than those grown on Earth; the description of experiments intended to uncover the effect of space on the production of metal and alloys; and the presentation of evidence that the microgravity environment of space had enabled scientists to make more precise measurements of the physical properties of elemental gas.(NASA, Significant Discoveries from Space Shuttle Experiments To Be Presented at Conference, news release 97-23, 5 February 1997.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-Francois Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth ShuttleMir Mission, news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, Space Shuttle, 15 May 1997.)
U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, NASAs temporary resident aboard Russias Mir space station, became the second American to ride aboard the three-person Soyuz capsule that had delivered the cosmonauts to Mir. Cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri, Linengers Russian partners aboard Mir, took Linenger for a short ride around Mir, to free a docking station for the new Soyuz vehicle that Russia would soon launch. In allowing an American astronaut aboard the Russian craft, Russia took another step with the United States to foster a cooperative postcommunist relationship between the two countries.(Association Press, Astronaut Rides Soyuz, 8 February 1997.)
The Astronauts Memorial Foundation recognized Major Robert H. Lawrence Jr. as the first black astronaut in NASA history, exactly 30 years after his death during a U.S. Air Force training mission. A ceremony adding Lawrences name to the Astronauts Memorial Foundations Space Mirror at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) ended a long bureaucratic debate over whether Lawrence qualified as an astronaut. Lawrence had never met the Air Force requisite that an astronaut must have flown at an altitude of least 50 miles (80 kilometers) above Earth, because, although he had received his appointment to the U.S. Air Forces Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program, he had died before flying in space. Therefore, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation had repeatedly refused to include his name on the Space Mirror at KSC. However, in 1996 U.S. Representative Bobby L. Rush (D-IL) had persuaded the Air Force to verify Lawrences status as an astronaut. Thereafter, the Astronauts Memorial Foundations board of directors voted, immediately and unanimously, to include Lawrences name on the Space Mirror.(Associated Press, Crash Victim Recognized as 1st Black Astronaut, 8 December 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin addressed the Experimental Aircraft Association fly-in convention, outlining NASAs vision to revitalize general aviation. Goldin boldly predicted that the U.S. aviation industry would be able to deliver 10,000 aircraft annually within 10 years, and 20,000 annually within 20 years. The fly-in convention, featuring flyovers by NASAs SR- 71, had the theme, Boomers Turn 50, celebrating both the 50th anniversary of the U.S. Air Force and that of the first breaking of the sound barrier. The Association announced the winner of the National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), a competition encouraging university engineering students to focus on the aviation industry. The conference also featured the unveiling of the new FAA flight- training curricula, as well as a national aviation safety initiative.(NASA, NASA To Showcase New Activities at Upcoming Aircraft Fly-In Convention, news release N97-51, 25 July 1997.)
NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: It doesnt matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best. NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenkos participation.(Todd Halverson, American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in 99, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foales tenure in space was among the longest in NASAs history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucids 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earths gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station, Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 12-day mission devoted to environmental research. The crew hoped that the atmospheric data gathered during the mission would help scientists understand the ozone damage and climate change affecting Earth.(Mark Carreau, Were Very, Very Happy, Shuttle Crew Says of Flight, Houston Chronicle, 20 August 1997.)
For the first time, NASA turned over control of a satellite project to a group of non-NASA scientists, placing the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) under the control of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at Harvard University. Harvard scientists had designed and built the satellite, but in previous NASA-university collaborations, NASA had always maintained control over implementation projects that it had funded. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA hoped the move would embolden non-NASA scientists: What we wanted to do is get the scientists closer to their spacecraft and close to their sources of data. NASA intended the AXAF, which had cost US$1.4 billion to develop, to study black holes and collisions between stars and galaxies.(Jules Crittenden, X-ray Tour of the Universe To Begin in Cambridge Lab, Boston Herald, 13 September 1997; Peter J. Howe, Putting the Universe into Focus, Boston Globe, 13 September 1997.)
In celebration of the 50th anniversary of his most historic achievement, Charles E. Chuck Yeager broke the speed of sound once again, flying an F-15 fighter jet in Californias Mojave Desert. NASA aired the recreation on NASA TV as part of its celebration at Edwards Air Force Base. Some historians call Yeagers 1947 feat the greatest achievement since the first successful flight of the Wright Brothers. The U.S. Postal Service observed the anniversary by unveiling a commemorative stamp, the 50th Anniversary of Supersonic Flight. The ceremonial jaunt was the 74-year old Yeagers last official U.S. Air Force flight.(Jay Levine, Yeager Bids Farewell to 800,000-Plus, Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997; NASA, Breaking the Sound Barrier Reenactment on NASA TV, news release N97-72, 9 October 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. I dont think the increased risk is worth the benefit, Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mirs safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASAs ShuttleMir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenners comments, I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself. The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldnt Board Mir, 19 September 1997.)
As the 50th anniversary of the alleged alien sighting neared, the U. S. Air Force released a 231- page report entitled The Roswell Report: Case Closed. The report explained that the U.S. Air Force had recovered test dummies from the Roswell, New Mexico, crash site in 1947, rather than the bodies of aliens. The U.S. Air Force had issued a report on the Roswell matter in 1994, in which researchers argued that the presumed spacecraft that had crashed in 1947 was actually an Air Force balloon used in a top-secret program called Project Mogul. When officials discovered evidence that the tests had used parachute dummies, however, the U.S. Air Force compiled an additional report with the new information. Military officials hoped that the Air Forces explanation for the supposed UFO reported in 1994, as well as for the supposed bodies of aliens discovered in the crash, would temper the controversy surrounding the issue. U.S. Air Force Colonel John Haynes, presiding over the Pentagon news conference at the release of the report, showed reporters footage of a NASA test craft that, indeed, resembled a flying saucer. Colonel Haynes explained that during testing in the 1950s, Air Force balloons had transported dummies to altitudes of 98,000 feet (29,900 meters), releasing them to fall to the ground. Since the testing was secret, the sight of falling dummies easily could have been mistaken for something they were not.(U. S. Air Force Headquarters, The Roswell Report: Case Closed (Washington, DC, 1997); Associated Press, Air Force Says Dummies Used in Parachute Tests Were Mistaken for Aliens, 24 June 1997; Richard Leiby, Alien Autopsy, Washington Post, 25 June 1997.)
The Rasmussen Research Group reported that seven out of 10 Americans had seen at least one image of Mars obtained through the Mars Pathfinder Mission, denoting a remarkable level of public awareness of NASAs mission to the Red Planet. The researchers also reported that nearly half of all Americans believed that an American would land on Mars within 10 years. Despite the widespread interest and optimism regarding the project, only 41 percent of those polled saw merit in the mission.(Mark Carreau, Mars Trip a Monster Summer Hit, Houston Chronicle, 2 August 1997.)
President William J. Clinton used his newly bestowed line-item veto power to cut funding for a reusable space plane. The US$10 million appropriation was a priority of the U.S. Air Force Space Command and space officials. In total, Clintons line-item vetoes trimmed about US$144 million from the 1998 U.S. Department of Defense appropriations bill, less than one-tenth of 0.1 percent of the total bill.(John M. Broder, Clinton Gently Vetoes $144 Million in Military Budget Items, New York Times, 15 October 1997; David L. Chandler, Clinton Veto Delays Space Plane Plans, Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997.)
NASA reported receiving 265 million hits on its Web site during the four days following Mars Pathfinders landing. In response to what some observers called the biggest event in computer network history, NASA buttressed its own computers with donated equipment from corporate sponsors, so that the government site could handle the high volume of viewers. The Internet statistics validated the widespread popularity of the mission to Mars. The CNN network dedicated nearly half of its programming to the Pathfinder story on the day of the Mars landing, doubling its network ratings. Entrepreneurs sold a variety of Mars- and Pathfinder-themed products, and visitors jammed the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC. USA Today summed up the success of the Mars Pathfinder Mission: NASAs successful landing on the Red Planet has set off a Marsfest on the blue one.(NASA, Pathfinder Gets Hit Hard on the Internet, news release I97-8, 9 July 1997; Martha T. Moore, Mars Mania Invades Earth, USA Today, 9 July 1997; Associated Press, Mars Live Draws Millions to Web Site, 9 July 1997; United Press International, Mars Tops Internet Hit List, 8 July 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Roy D. Bridges Jr., retired U.S. Air Force Major General and Shuttle astronaut, as Director of KSC. Goldin called Bridges the right person to take KSC into the next century. As Director of KSC, Bridges assumed responsibility for the only site for launches of the Shuttle. At the time of Bridgess appointment, about 2,000 employees worked at KSC, along with 14,000 contractors. Bridgess appointment followed years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Air Force and NASA. Graduating with distinction from the U.S. Air Force Academy, he had served in several leadership positions in the Air Force and had received recognition as a distinguished graduate of the U.S. Air Force Pilot Training and Test Pilot Schools. Among other awards, he had received the Distinguished Service Medal, the Defense Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, the Legion of Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, the Meritorious Service Medal, the U.S. Air Force Commendation Medal, and NASAs Flight Space Medal.(NASA, Roy Bridges Selected as KSCs New Center Director, news release 97-17, 24 January 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a once-in-a-career opportunity for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94, news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission, Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April, New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission, 1 July 1997.)
Astronaut and lawmaker U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), on the 35th anniversary of his journey as the first American to orbit Earth, announced that he would retire from the U.S. Senate at the conclusion of his fourth term. On 20 February 1962, Glenn had orbited Earth three times, symbolizing a hard-fought achievement in the United States effort to catch up with the Soviet Union in the space race. Glenn, first elected to the Senate from Ohio in 1974, made the announcement at Muskingum College in New Concord, Ohio, joking that since there is still no cure for the common birthday, he intended to retire at age 75.(Paul Souhrada, Glenn, 75, Will Retire, Citing No Cure for Common Birthday, Washington Times, 21 February 1997; NASA, Glenn Orbits the Earth 35 Years Ago Today, video advisory V97-12, 20 February 1997. 207 NASA, Next Generation Internet a Million Times Faster than Home Computer Modems, news release 97-29, 21 February 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to serve as a bridge to Americas future in space. In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttles launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83, news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire, 5 April 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report on the threat of space debris to the planned International Space Station (ISS). According to the report, Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan, NASAs surveillance capabilities, relying on the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) network of radar and optical sensors for information about possible collisions, had not provided enough information to prevent collisions in space. GAO surmised that DOD had focused most of its attention on military objects, missing many of the smaller pieces of debris that could have caused significant damage to NASAs Shuttles or the ISS. GAO recommended that NASA, DOD, and the CIA collaborate to upgrade the space surveillance system. According to estimates, more than 110,000 pieces of debris, most measuring about 0.5 inches (1.3 centimeters) in diameter, were floating in space. With a closing velocity of 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour, even such a small object would do significant damage to the ISS, when the station was in a prograde orbit. GAOs report noted that the fully completed ISS would be 10 times larger than any Shuttle flying in space, and that it would be in orbit for at least 10 years, increasing the chance of a collision occurring. Although they acknowledged the possibility of a collision, NASA scientists argued that the odds favored the ISSs avoiding such an occurrence. As NASAs expert, Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris, Nicholas L. Johnson, explained, The odds are certainly in your favor that nothing will happen at all in those 10 years [of planned space station operation].(U.S. General Accounting Office, Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan (report no. NSIAD 98-42, Washington, DC, 1 December 1997); Sean Holton, Worries Rise over Junk in Space, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 December 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the crafts hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the stations safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenners suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel, New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station, Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past, 25; David Hoffman, U.S. Questions on Mirs Safety Anger Russia, Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky, USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
NASA announced that Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space Company had won the contract to develop and deliver solar-imaging instruments for U.S. weather satellites. The US$54 million contract provided funding for the creation of a model instrument and two flight instruments. Scientists believed that the solar x-ray images captured by the instrument would improve the ability of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Air Force to forecast special weather events. The proposed imager also had applications for civilian companies dependent upon predicting weather patterns.(NASA, Lockheed Martin Selected To Build Solar X-ray Imaging, news release C97-g, 18 June 1997; Grant Jerding, NASA Brings Its X-ray Vision to the Universe, USA Today, 17 June 1997.)
The international scientific community observed the 40th anniversary of Sputniks successful launch. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union had sent into orbit Sputnik I, a small sphere-shaped satellite, setting off a space race that continued throughout the Cold War. Although the United States had initially responded to the Soviet Unions achievement with fear and apprehension, NASA commemorated the event 40 years later with a celebratory symposium. The United States had launched NASA itself less than one year after the USSRs Sputnik success, partly because of the American publics distress over the Soviets beating the United States into space. The son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, Sergei N. Khrushchev, a prominent professor of International Studies at Brown University in Rhode Island, spoke at NASAs Sputnik symposium. With the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had unveiled to the worlds scientists many of the developmental plans of the Sputnik program. However, the end of communism had also precipitated enormous budget shortfalls for the Russian Space Agency. Kazakhstans President Nursultan Nazarbayev took the opportunity of Sputniks widely celebrated anniversary to complain publicly that Russia owed more than US$400 million in rent for Baikonur Cosmodromethe site of Sputniks launch and of ongoing Russian space activity. When the Soviet confederation broke up, Russia had agreed to pay US$100 million annually for the right to continue using the launch facilities in Kazakhstan.(NASA, Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite, news release N97-64, 5 September 1997; Associated Press, Plea for Rent Marks Sputnik Anniversary, 5 October 1997.)
The Pentagon announced that it had successfully tested its Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser (MIRACL), at White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The laser, constructed under President Ronald Reagans Strategic Defense Initiative, generated a beam that traveled more than 260 miles (418 kilometers) from Earth, hitting an orbiting satellite. According to Pentagon representative U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Robert Potter, if turned to its highest setting, MIRACL would have destroyed the satellite target. The test, which took place two years after the expiration of a 1985 congressional ban on tests of this type, was the first time the United States had tested a laser aimed at an orbiting satellite. Representatives of defense-related industries and scientists around the world debated the acceptability of such a test and the ethics of deploying the instrument. However, whether or not the test was justifiable, the successful hit had demonstrated the vulnerability of satellites to Earth-based weapons.(Associated Press, Laser Test-Fired into Space Strikes Orbiting U.S. Satellite, 21 October 1997.)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) awarded BRSP Inc. a US$128 million, five-year contract to provide base-operation support services, including plant maintenance and operations, logistics support, and security services for JSCs Houston, Texas, facility. BRSP, a joint venture of Brown and Root Services and Pioneer Contract Services, had formed to bid for the JSC contract.(NASA, BRSP Chosen for JSC Base Operation Contract, news release C97-b, 16 January 1997.)
The Los Angeles Times reported that the students of Glassell Park Elementary School had sold an astonishing 32,000 candy bars, to pay the way for all 115 of its fifth graders to attend the U.S. Space Camp at NASAs Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. Most of the schools 951 students participated in selling candy to send their older classmates to the educational camp. Principal Beatrice LaPisto said proudly of her students, This is a poor neighborhood. Most children here, for example, are on the free lunch program. But these are the brightest, best, most motivated students youll find anywhere. This year was the first in which the nonprofit U.S. Space Camp Foundation had expanded its operations to the California site.(Bob Pool, Space Race, Los Angeles Times, 4 June 1997.)
Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station, New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. met with Russias Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin to discuss, among other topics, the United States concern that the Russian Space Agencys lack of funding might derail plans for the ISS. U.S. officials declared that funding was the primary issue in the construction of the ISS. We have no doubts about their science and engineering proficiency. Where we have concerns relates to adequate funding on the Russian side, said one American space leader. Although the ISS had received contributions from the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada, Russian construction stoppages on a crucial ISS component already had delayed the project. Before the Gore-Chernomyrdin meeting, NASA received assurances from the Russian Space Agency that, despite financial difficulties, Russia would maintain its commitment to the project. During the meeting, the leaders agreed upon a joint statement committing the Russians to a new deadline. Gore stated that he believed the summits reaffirmation of previous commitments would satisfy members of Congress who were critical of Russias trustworthiness.(Associated Press, US-Russia, 6 February 1997; Reuters, Gore-Chernomyrdin Talks on NATO, Space, Summit, 5 February 1997; Cragg Hines, Russia Pledges To Pay Its Share of Space Station, Houston Chronicle, 9 February 1997.)
Representatives of NASA and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services signed an agreement to enlist NASA technologies in the fight against breast cancer and other womens illnesses, creating a cooperative framework for the exchange of research information between the two agencies. According to Carolyn A. Krebs of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center, the technology allowing HST to map distant galaxies also had the potential to scan human tissue for malignant masses.(NASA, NASA/Heath and Human Services To Join Forces To Fight Womens Illnesses, news release N97-74, 20 October 1997.)
NASA announced that planned major modifications of Space Shuttle Atlantis, as well as routine inspections, would take place at the Boeing Companys facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. United Space Alliance, the company contracted for the maintenance and operation of the Shuttle program, had recommended the changes. According to estimates of the U.S. General Accounting Office, completing the renovations in California, rather than in Florida, would cost NASA an additional US$20 million because of higher labor costs. NASA explained that if the engineers had done the work in Florida, the launch schedule at KSC, along with the need for Atlantis to make a prolonged stay for extensive modifications, would have threatened future Shuttle flights. The changes planned, including rerouting the Shuttles fuel lines, involved more than routine maintenance. NASA also pointed out that its most experienced engineers worked at the Palmdale facility, and that workers at the facility had already made similar modifications to Shuttles Discovery and Endeavour. Moreover, NASA maintained that permitting KSC to focus on Shuttle launches and missions would be the most efficient use of its resources. Nevertheless, immediately after the announcement, some observers criticized NASAs continued use of Boeings private facility in preference to that of the government-owned KSC. NASAs previous intimation that the Palmdale facility would be mothballed for Shuttle repair and maintenance intensified critics reaction to the announcement.(Seth Borenstein, Despite Boost in Cost, Atlantis To Get Tuneup in California, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 January 1997; NASA, Space Shuttle Atlantis Modification Work To Be Performed at Palmdale Facility, news release 97-11, 16 January 1997; Todd Halvorson, Atlantis Overhaul To Be Done Out West, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 January 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, we dont need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. Its called the International Space Station. GAOs report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, Space Station, 11 June 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a shiny star as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantiss approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, All bags are packed. Ready for transfer. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other, Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap, 15 January 1997; Associated Press, Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station, 14 January 1997.)
The New York Times reported a soon-to-be released study by Research Policy, providing strong evidence that publicly funded scientific research often fueled industrial advancements in the United States. According to the study, prepared for the National Science Foundation, 73 percent of all American industrial patents filed during the two-year study cited scientific advancements made possible by government funding. The report had particular relevance because the Clinton administration and its congressional allies, both Democratic and Republican, had considered paring down the nations science outlays to balance the federal budget. The Council of Scientific Society Presidents called the report a wake-up call for [f]ederal investment policies. The study joined an ongoing debate over exactly what contribution general scientific research made to the national economy. The National Science Foundation and NASA were two of the agencies most cited in industrial patent requests.(William J. Broad, Study Finds Public Science Is Pillar of Industry, New York Times, 13 May 1997. 249 NASA, NASA Earth Science Research Aircraft Soars to New Heights, 13 May 1997.)
At a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, scientists unveiled evidence of another cause, besides the Sun, of killer electrons, which travel at high velocity. When electrons travel from Jupiters massive magnetic field, their speed approaches the speed of light. Showers of high- velocity electrons cause many problems, including blackouts on Earth and damage to orbiting satellites and global positioning systems. Scientists had previously been unable to determine the source of the electrons causing the damage. Presenting the new information on the phenomenon of high-velocity electrons, the researchers declared that the ability to forecast space weather, including the patterns of high-velocity electrons, would become increasingly important during the coming age of the ISS.(Tim Friend, Mystery Solved: Jupiter Is Source of Killer Electrons, USA Today, 9 December 1997.)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force Space Command announced an agreement to collaborate on several projects of mutual interest. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained that the agreement was part of NASAs ongoing mission to become a more efficient and cost-effective agency, and that sharing information would lead to greater efficiencies in our respective missions. Goldin and U.S. Air Force Space Commander General Howell M. Estes III signed the pact, establishing seven teams to explore areas of potential cooperation. The areas of research included the feasibility of launching defense satellites from the Shuttle; the use of the Shuttle for U.S. Air Force technology payloads; and development of a plan to meet the dual space needs of NASA and the U.S. Air Force. The two agencies also planned to examine ways they might share their common infrastructure and facilities.(NASA, NASA and Air Force Space Command Announce Cooperative Efforts, news release 97-68, 16 April 1997.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200F (93C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150F (-101C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mirs jagged edges. NASA had approved Foales participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir, New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk, New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, U.S. Astronaut Gets NASAs Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir, 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test, USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle, 10 September 1997.)
Astrophysicists William P. Blair, Robert A. Fesen, and Eric M. Schlegel presented to the American Astronomical Society the first images ever recorded of two supernovas colliding. The team used the Hubble Space Telescope to capture the images of the supernovas, more than 17 million light-years from Earth. Astronomers had suspected that collisions occurred between exploding stars, but had been unable to capture an image of the process, because it was so short- lived. Although the scientific community would continue to debate the implications of the image, Blair offered this assessment of its significance: It indicates that not only is there a lot of star formation going on, but a lot of those stars are massive. They are evolving quickly, and they are exploding as supernovas.
Edward M. Purcell, 1952 Nobel Prize winner in physics and long-time researcher at Harvard University, died. Purcell discovered a means to detect the extremely weak magnetism of the atomic nucleus, making it possible to listen to the whisperings of hydrogen through the universe. Purcell had served as President of the American Physical Society. In 1967 Purcell had won the Oersted Medal of the American Association of Physics Teachers, and in 1979 he had won the National Medal of Science. At Harvard, Purcell held the position of Gerhard Gade University Professor, retiring from the university in 1977. Of his Nobel Prizewinning research Purcell commented, We are dealing not merely with a new tool but with a new subject, a subject I have called simply nuclear magnetism.
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mirs crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mirs crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mirs path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call, New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare, USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
NASA researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, announced a plan to collaborate with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley, California, to explore the potential of the substance Aerogel, which has tremendous insulating capabilities. Scientists said that they were optimistic that they could manipulate the material, rendering it transparent and, therefore, especially useful in constructing energy-efficient windows for homes and automobiles. During the 1930s, a researcher at Stanford University had discovered Aerogel, often called frozen smoke because of its hazy appearance. NASA engineers had used Aerogel as an insulating agent aboard Mars Pathfinder in 1996. Although the substance is the lightest solid knownonly three times the density of air, a block of Aerogel weighing less than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) can support 0.5 tons (450 kilograms or 0.45 tonnes). Aerogels large internal surface area, which disperses heat throughout its structure, causes the materials extreme insulating capabilitya 1-inch-thick (2.5-centimeter-thick) Aerogel window would offer the same insulation value as 15 panes of glass. John M. Horack, Assistant Laboratory Director for Space and Science Communications at MSFC, called the development of Aerogel a great example of how NASA space research generates scientific knowledge that can be used to improve the quality of life on Earth.(NASA, NASA Research in Space May Redesign Household Windows, news release 97-34, 6 March 1997. 215 Warren E. Leary, Microbe Peril from Mars Is Possibility, Panel Warns, New York Times, 7 March 1997; Associated Press, Scientists Warn on Mars Bugs, 7 March 1997; Mark Carreau, Fear of Martians, Houston Chronicle, 7 March 1997.)
An international team of astronomers announced the discovery of three black holes in three nondescript galaxies, suggesting that nearly all galaxies may in fact have massive black holes. Using NASAs Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the researchers took a census of 27 galaxies to find a series of black holes massive enough to consume millions of Sun-like stars. The findings, which the scientists presented in full at the 189th meeting of the American Astronomical Society, provided insight into the origin and evolution of galaxies, as well as clarifying the role of quasars in the galaxy. Douglas O. Richstone of the University of Michigan, who led the research team, stated that two of the black holes had weighed in at 50 million and 100 million solar masses, respectively. Scientists remained divided on why black holes exist so abundantly in space. One theory suggested was that, at the center of most or all galaxies, supermassive black holes exist, where gases ignite to the hottest temperatures known, sending nearby stars spiraling in new directions. Ralph Narayan of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics called the black holes the ultimate victory of gravity.(Paul Recer, Astronomers Find Stronger Evidence of Massive Black Holes, Huntsville Times (AL), 14 January 1997; NASA, Massive Black Holes Dwell in Most Galaxies, According to Hubble Census, news release 97-9, 12 January 1997.)
NASA announced that John C. Mather, a senior astrophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, had been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, often considered the highest recognition possible for scientists and engineers. Mathers work at NASA had begun in 1974, specifically, on the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) spacecraft. He had served as a project scientist when NASA launched the spacecraft in 1989, and in 1992 he had participated in the COBE project, which effectively mapped primordial hot and cold spots in the cosmic microwave background radiation. The map demonstrated that radiation from the Big Bang conformed to theoretical predictions, providing new evidence for the long-standing Big Bang theory. Mather received his PhD in physics from the University of California at Berkeley in 1974.(NASA, Goddard Scientist Selected for National Academy of Sciences, news release 97-88, 2 May 1997. 245 NASA, Heat-Resistant Material Licensed for High-Performance Pistons, news release 97-91, 6 May 1997. 246 Associated Press, Hubble-Look Back, 9 May 1997.)
NASA announced that the construction schedule for the International Space Station (ISS) remained on target to begin delivery launches in December 1998. All 15 nations participating in the building of the ISS had traveled to Johnson Space Center (JSC) to finalize the stations construction sequence and compare progress updates. The international consortium agreed on a 45-flight sequence for delivering the already-assembled portions of the station from Earth to their orbiting home. To assemble the colossal station completely, NASA and its partners planned five years of steady launch-and-construct missions, expecting to send the U.S.-constructed Node 1 into space sometime during June 1998.(NASA, Control Board Reports International Space Station Launch on Target, Finalizes Assembly Sequence, news release 97-222, 1 October 1997.)
Reaffirming their commitment to the international consortiums expensive and increasingly complicated task of constructing Mirs replacement, NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced appointments to the first four crews that would live and work aboard the ISS. NASA chose astronaut William M. Shepherd as the first expedition commander. Russia selected cosmonauts Yuri P. Gidzenko and Sergei K. Krikalev to accompany Shepherd on the first increment crew. The second crew would have a Russian commander, Yury V. Usachev, accompanied by a crew of American astronauts, James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms. Each member of the first two crews possessed significant space experience. Moreover, the selection of the crews represented careful diplomatic choices meant to support the strong, but still strained, space partnership of the United States and Russia.(NASA, U.S., Russia Name International Space Station Crews, news release 97-269, 17 November 1997. 351 George Lardner Jr. and Walter Pincus, Military Had Plan To Blame Cuba if Glenns Space Mission Failed, Washington Post, 19 November 1997.)
NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linengers first spacewalk and Tsibliyevs third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk, news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, American, Russian Take a Spacewalk, 30 April 1997; Associated Press, Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk, 29 April 1997.)
After widespread speculation concerning the possibility of an indefinite delay of the Cassini Mission to Saturn, NASA announced that it would be able to repair a fuel leak in the spacecraft in time to meet an October 1997 launch date. NASA had enlisted U.S. Air Force engineers to make the repairs. The spacecrafts need for repairs increased the tension surrounding the ambitious and expensive mission. Lieutenant Ken Hoffman of the U.S. Air Force, who supervised the repairs, attempted to reassure the public that the problem was a correctable condition. Nevertheless, opponents of the missionparticularly those opposed to the spacecrafts use of radioactive plutoniumworried that the rockets launch might release hazardous materials. Michio Kaku, a City University of New York physics professor, said that, despite NASAs announcement that it could quickly correct the problem, the leak was just one more indication that NASA does not have things under control.(Robyn Suriano, Cassini Wont Be Delayed, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 August 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his cardiovascular system. The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt irregularities while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyevs test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyevs place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mirs exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mirs challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, Latest Mir Trouble: Commanders Heart, USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task, New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities, 14 July 1997; Reuters, Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem, 14 July 1997; Associated Press, Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut, 15 July 1997; Reuters, NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale, 17 July 1997; New York Times, A Rescue Assignment for NASA, editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs, 19 July 1997.)
Fred C. Adams and Gregory P. Laughlin, astrophysicists at the University of Michigan, presented their theory of a Dying Universe, at the American Astronomic Society conference. Adams and Laughlin had projected the future of the universe based upon quantitative theory, concluding that the Earth would die out with a whimper. According to their theory, the Sun will eventually die out, and the light of all stars will vanish. The projection was so far off in the distance (10,000 trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion years from now) that it drew a mixture of criticism, amusement, and intrigue from the scientific community. Adams and Laughlin insisted that recently acquired insights into cosmic evolution had allowed them to draw conclusions about the end of the universe, albeit in broad terms. Previously, scientists had lacked even the basic data and theoretical framework necessary to undertake the task. The two researchers emphasized that they made no claim to foresee when the universe would end, but rather offered the first long-term, science-based deduction on how the universe would evolve through four periods of expansionthe star-filled era (the present), the degenerate era, the black- hole era, and the dark era. The ultimate result of such a progression was too difficult to estimate, according to the scholars.(John Noble Wilford, At Other End of Big Bang, Finale May Be Big Whimper, New York Times, 16 January 1997; Tim Friend, Weve Got 100 Trillion Years Until Lights Out in Universe, USA Today, 16 January 1997; Associated Press, End of It All, 16 January 1996.)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston, astrophysicists Alexander G. Kosovichev of Stanford University and Valentina V. Zharkova of the University of Glasgow in Scotland presented evidence confirming their solar-bomb theory. Using sequential images that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft had captured, the two scientists explained that, 20 minutes following the rupture of a solar flare from the surface of the Sun, a seismic wave front surges across the [S]uns face like ripples from a stone thrown into a pond. The SOHO images proved that solar flares not only release energy into the Suns atmosphere, but also trigger huge waves of seismic energy that ripple through the [S]un like earthquakes.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, Solar Flares Trigger Sunquakes, 27 May 1998; A. G. Kosovichev and V. V. Zharkova, X-ray Flare Sparks Quake Inside Sun, Nature 383, no. 6683 (28 May 1998): 317.)
The Boeing Company announced the creation of a new subsidiary called Boeing Space Operations, based in Houston, Texas, at the Johnson Space Center, which would provide various services for government and commercial space operations. Rick Stephens, the president of the new subsidiary, stated that the goal of Boeing Space Operations was to make Boeing the global provider of low-cost, reliable, commercially based space operations services.(James Wallace, Boeing Forms a New Unit To Boost Its Space Business, Seattle Post-Intelligencer (WA), 3 June 1998.)
Shuttle operator United Space Alliance (USA) cut 363 jobs at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), one of the largest cutbacks in decades. Combining the layoffs with 194 voluntary resignations, USA eliminated 557 jobs at KSC. In implementing the cutbacks, the company hoped to trim $100 million from the current [S]huttle budget, thereby reducing costs, improving efficiency, and attracting new payload customers without compromising safety.(Richard Burnett and Seth Borenstein, 363 Lose Jobs at Space Center, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1998.)
NASA announced that an intense wave of gamma rays, emanating from a magnetar 20,000 light- years away from Earth, had struck Earths atmosphere on 27 August. Stanford University professor Umran Inan remarked that the occurrence, which had a measurable effect on Earth, was extremely rare, since the event occurred outside the solar system. The radiation wave was so powerful that it blasted sensitive detectors to maximum or off scale on at least seven scientific spacecraft in Earth-orbit and around the solar system.(NASA, Tremendous Gamma-Ray Flare Blasts Earth, news release 98-172, 29 September 1998.)
Russias first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russias largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a revolution, because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, Delta Lifts Russian Satellite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia, 23 November 1998.)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discoverys drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery, Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, NASA Mission Archives: STS-95, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
Shuttle Endeavour docked with Mir at an altitude of 214 nautical miles (2,467 miles or 3,970 kilometers), bringing the seventh American astronaut to work on board Mir since the program began in 1995. Andrew S. W. Thomas, a mechanical engineer, replaced David A. Wolf, a physician, who had been on board Mir since September. The hatches opened at 5:25 p.m. (EST), and Thomas's transfer occurred at 6:35 p.m. (EST).(New York Times, Shuttle Docks at Space Station with Astronaut and Supplies, 25 January 1998; NASA, STS- 89.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States. With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone. The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket, 9 May 1998.)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, BRFSatellite Launch, 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, Orbitals Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecrafts First Signals Indicate Early Success, 2 April 1998.)
Two scientific teams, independently studying HR 4796, a star in the southern constellation Centaurus, announced they had captured the strongest evidence yet of a new group of planets forming around the star. The teams used the 10-meter (33-foot) W. M. Keck II Telescope on top of the extinct Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii, and the National Science Foundations 4-meter (13-foot) Blanco Telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile. Using both of these sensitive new instruments, the research teams believed they could see clearly, through the glare of the star, a planet-forming disc of gas and dust. A third international team of British and American astronomers released the first images of the huge discs, which appeared to be forming around two other stars, Fomalhaut and Vega, the star made famous in the novel and movie Contact. The third team used the 15-meter (49-foot) James Clerk Maxwell Telescope, also atop Mauna Kea. Scientists considered the discoveries of the discs around the stars a missing link in the study of planetary system formation, offering them clues about the formation of rocky planets like Earth.(Kathy Sawyer, Oh, Baby! Telescopes Show the Birth of a Solar System; New Imaging Sharpens Delivery Room View, Washington Post, 22 April 1998.)
James K. Yungel, a NASA scientist studying Earth remote sensing, discussed a joint project underway at Monterey Peninsula Airport, involving NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The researchers had parked at the airport a Twin Otter airplane, with a scanning laser system and a global-positioning-satellite receiver, to make precise measurements of the West Coast, mapping the changes El Nino had caused along the coastline. The goal of the survey was to create the most highly detailed map yet of the West Coast, increasing scientists ability to predict erosion over the next decade.(Michael McCabe, NASA Mapping West Coast in Wake of El Nino: Most Rigorous Survey Ever Should Help Predict Erosion, San Francisco Chronicle, 17 April 1998.)
NASA dedicated as a U.S. Air Force conference center the newly renovated, historic control center, Complex 14 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, the site of the Mercury program launches. The domed blockhouse with 10-foot-thick (3-meter-thick), reinforced concrete walls had protected launch controllers from possible explosions of Atlas rockets launched only 1,000 feet (305 meters) away. The renovation preserved the periscopes that controllers had used to safely view launches. The control center was at the launch site of the first piloted orbital flight of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.(USA Today, Cape Canaveral Restores Piece of Space Age History, 11 May 1998.)
Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planets polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyors data; the Arizona researchers believed that a concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes. The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, Mars Discovery, 28 May 1998; Washington Times, Minerals Suggest Life in Mars Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers, 28 May 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of continuous human presence in Earth orbit aboard Russias Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucids stay. Nine months separated Thagards mission and Lucids. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASAs cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.(Mark Carreau, NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir, Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASAs US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight, 9 January 1998; NASA, Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director, news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
American astronaut David A. Wolf made his first spacewalk, accompanied by veteran spacewalker Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Commander of the Mir space station. Solovyev, making his 18th spacewalk, set the worlds record for the highest number of spacewalks by one individual.382 The spacewalk began 20 minutes later than scheduled, because of problems opening locks on the malfunctioning outer hatch. The scheduled task had been to assess wear and tear on the exterior of the station using a photoreflectometer designed in the United States. David A. Wolf worked for 2 hours trying to verify whether the device was working properly, but only succeeded in taking readings on the shell of the nine-year-old Kvant-2 module, one of the stations oldest compartments. Engineers planned to use the data to help make selections for materials and protective coatings for the new ISS. Flight Director Vladimir A. Solovyov explained in a news conference at Mission Control outside Moscow, the device proved to be far from mature, so it was decided to skip the examination of the core module. Instead, the two men studied the holes in the Spektr module, which had suffered punctures during a collision with a cargo craft on 25 June 1997.(USA Today, American Looks at Mir from Outside, 15 January 1998; Oleg Shchedrov for Reuters, Hitches Marred Mir Crew Space Walk, Says Official, 15 January 1998; Houston Chronicle, Astronaut, Cosmonaut Take Short Spacewalk: Excursion Marked by a Few Small Difficulties, 15 January 1998.)
NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the crafts fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, Solar Probe Back Under Control, 17 September 1998.)
Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon. A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepards spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard, news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74, news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard, government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, Shepards Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age, USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: Pioneers Pioneer also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon, Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced the hiring of Space Gateway Support of Herndon, Virginia, to run base operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Patrick Air Force Base, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Johnson Controls and EG&G Florida at KSC had previously held base-operations contracts at the military bases. The new joint base-operations- support contract was worth US$1 billion for five years, with the option to renew for another five years. In consolidating the contracts, the agencies intended to cut costs. According to officials, continuing separate base-operations contracts would have cost 30 percent more. Other primary customers under the contract included government contractors for NASA and U.S. Air Force spaceflight operations, payload ground operations, life sciences, expendable vehicles, and launch operations and support.(NASA, SGS Awarded NASA and Air Force Joint Base Contract, contract announcement C98-m, 21 August 1998; Joni James, Base Operations Under 1 Contract, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 August 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space, New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth, 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, Russias Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth, 25 August 1998.)
SPACEHAB Inc., a Virginia-based, commercial space company with a staff of 85, purchased the Johnson Engineering Corporation, a 400-person firm contracted to support NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. SPACEHABs chairperson said the company would expand the use of Johnson Engineerings larger technical staff to support its plans for expansion into the commercial space arena. Investors had incorporated SPACEHAB in 1984, to develop a commercial research module that could accommodate small, private, as well as government- financed science experiments and engineering tests during [S]pace [S]huttle mission[s]. However, when the anticipated commercial market had failed to develop, SPACEHAB changed its strategy, winning NASA contracts. NASA used SPACEHAB modules, stored in the Shuttles payload bays, as cargo containers for storing tons of food, clothing, and other gear that was ferried to Russias Mir space station aboard a series of recently concluded U.S. [S]huttle flights.(Mark Carreau, Spacehab of Virginia Acquires NASA Contractor, Houston Chronicle, 5 July 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander, news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN, 4 March 1998.)
NASA announced the arrest of the suspected leader of a group of computer hackers who broke into the network of a NASA laboratory. Law enforcement agents accused twenty-year-old Calldan Levi Coffman of Carson, Washington, suspected leader of a group called ViRii, of infiltrating the networks of various corporations, universities, and other government agencies, in addition to breaching the security of computer systems at NASAs JPL last June. NASAs Computer Crimes Division had worked with other government agencies, including the U.S. Naval Intelligence Service, the U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations, and the FBI, to uncover a link between Coffmans group and Israeli hacker Ehud Tenenbaum, known as The Analyzer. Law enforcement officials suspected Tenenbaum of organizing a confederation of hacker groups, including his own group and Coffmans group.(Associated Press, NASA Hacker, 18 March 1998; Billington for United Press International, Hacker Confederacy, 20 March 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttles mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The days temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the hottest launch day anyone could remember. The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the ShuttleMir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2, news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final ShuttleMir Docking, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, Cosmonauts Fix Mirs Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed, 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Discovery Soars on NASAs Last Voyage to Mir, 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission, 1 June 1998.)
NASA awarded its combined space operations contract to Lockheed Martin, covering operations at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida; Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama; and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The contract, worth US$1.9 billion for the first five years, with a five-year renewal worth an additional US$1.5 billion, covered the cost of directing, monitoring, and downloading data from spacecraft. NASA estimated that the contract, consolidating work previously done under 17 separate contracts, would save US$1.4 billion over 10 years.(NASA, Lockheed Martin Space Operations Co. Awarded Contract To Manage NASAs Space Operations, contract announcement c98-p, 25 September 1998; Peter Behr, Lockheed Team Wins NASA Contract; $3.4 Billion Big Beats Out Boeing, Washington Post, 26 September 1998; Anna Wilde Mathews, Lockheed Group Wins NASA Pact for $3.44 Billion, Wall Street Journal, 28 September 1998.)
A fire that started in a shed containing an air compressor spread to another building of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), causing extensive damage. No one was injured, and firefighters were able to stop the blaze before it reached laboratories containing hazardous and flammable materials. Fire investigators had not determined the cause of the fire. NASA did not permit the investigators to survey the damage immediately, because of sensitive material housed in the affected building.(Associated Press, NASA Fire, 20 August 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
A US$35,000 study commissioned by the Florida Space Business Roundtable revealed that commercial satellite companies did not favor Cape Canaveral as a launch site. The Florida Space Business Roundtable presented its findings at the Florida Space Launch Symposium in Melbourne, Florida. In the survey, executives from satellite manufacturing companies rated spaceports, evaluating them in 11 categories, such as their launch base facilities, flight scheduling, governmental red tape, and on-site technical services. The executives favorite launch site was Vandenberg Air Force Base in central California, and they selected Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China as the worst place to launch. Floridas spaceports did well in two categories, but business executives considered red tape at those facilities a problem.(Todd Halvorson, Survey: Brevard Launch Sites Fail To Measure UpSpace Coast Falls Short for Commercial Liftoffs, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 February 1998.)
NASA announced the arrival of international astronaut candidates at Johnson Space Center, where they began training as members of the 1998 astronaut class. The international candidates, from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, and Italy, were Leopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, Hans W. Schlegel, and Roberto Vittori of the European Space Agency; Bjarni V. Tryggvason of the Canadian Space Agency; and Marco C. Pontes of the Brazilian Space Agency.
NASA announced that it had restructured and renamed its Office of Aeronautics and Space Transportation Technology, known as Code R, appointing retired U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Spence M. Armstrong to head the newly reorganized Office of Aero-Space Technology. NASAs spokesperson said that NASAs management had created three new divisions within the OfficeGoals, Programs, and Institutionsto help NASA achieve its goals. Major goals included accessing space more cheaply, with reusable launch vehicle programs; creating greater synergy between aeronautics and space transportation technology; decreasing aircraft accident rates, while tripling the nations aviation-system capacity; diminishing aircraft noise and emissions; and reducing the cost of air travel and the cost of placing payloads in orbit. The role of the Goals Division would be to implement the challenging development of new technologies; that of the Programs Division would be to manage the various programs within the Office, and the Institutions Division would oversee institutional problems at the field centers.(NASA, Aeronautics Enterprise Reorganizes and Changes Name, news release 98-187, 14 October; Aerospace Daily, NASA Renames, Reorganizes Code R under Armstrong, 15 October 1998.)
NASA announced that JSC had modified its contract with United Space Alliance, awarding the contractor more Shuttle work. Three other NASA contractors had previously performed the more than US$900 million of work on the Space Shuttles solid rocket booster and other elements. USBI Company at Kennedy Space Center had worked on the boosters; Lockheed Martin Corporation in Houston, Texas, had designed and produced the primary Shuttle avionics software; and Boeing Aerospace Operations in Houston had processed flight equipment.(NASA, NASA Awards More Shuttle Work to USA, news release c98-h, 7 July 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life, 31 January 1998.)
A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs, 22 January 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martinbuilt Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASAs Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Rocket Explosion, 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite, Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
Controllers at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun. Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHOs mission was to track major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space. The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Suns atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted, news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears Its Lost, USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
At a NASA news conference, astronomers discussed the discovery of the largest explosion ever sighted in space. The journal Nature published three papers about the event, detected on 14 December 1997. The explosion, a gamma-ray burst (GRB) designated GRB971214, had occurred 12 billion years ago and had apparently outshone all the rest of the universe for about 40 seconds. The Italian-Dutch orbiting gamma-ray observatory BeppoSAX had measured the sharp pulse of gamma rays and pinpointed the position of the rays source. The United States Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had also detected the gamma-ray pulse, and scientific institutions around the world had monitored the after-effects of the explosion. Twelve hours afterward, John R. Thorstensen of Dartmouth College had used a 94-inch-diameter (49- centimeter-diameter) telescope at Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona to detect a visible afterglow, which lasted for about two weeks. After the glow had faded, the scientists had discovered a faint galaxy in the same location. A team of American, Italian, and Indian astronomers, led by two California Institute of Technology scientists, used the Keck II Telescope in Hawaii to measure the distance from Earth to the source of the burst. No theorists were able to explain the explosion, and no existing models explaining GRBs could explain the amount of energy emitted from GRB971214. The scientists suggested the possibility that a superdense neutron star had ripped apart as it disappeared into a neighboring black hole, or that a violent merger of two black holes had caused the burst.(Malcolm W. Browne, Astronomers Detect Immense Explosion 2d Only to Big Bang, New York Times, 7 May 1998; NASA, Most Powerful Explosion since the Big Bang Challenges Gamma Ray Burst Theories, news release 98-75, 6 May 1998.)
Minnie, the last living astro-chimp, died of old age at forty-one-years-old. Minnie had lived out her retirement at Holloman Air Force Base under the care of the Coulston Foundation. Minnie, an understudy for chimps Ham and Enos, was the only female chimpanzee to train for the Mercury Project in the early 1960s, but she had never flown in space. Ham had become the first chimpanzee in space when he had made a 15-minute suborbital flight in 1961, before Alan B. Shepard Jr.s flight that May. Enoss orbital flight had been a precursor to John H. Glenn Jr.s flight in February 1962.(Los Angeles Times, Minnie, Last of the Early U.S. Space Program Astro-Chimps, Dies at 41, 28 March 1998. 439 Mike Billington for United Press International, Hacker Confederacy Hits Pentagon, 20 March 1998; Michael J. Sniffen for Associated Press, US-Israel-Analyzer, 20 March 1998; Washington Post, Five Teens Suspected of Hacking into Pentagon Computers, 20 March 1998.)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discoverys Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenns spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discoverys planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.(NASA, Sen. Glenn Gets a Go for Space Shuttle Mission, news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, Russia-Space Station, 18 January 1998.)
NASA released results from the Hubble Deep Field South (HDF-S) to the worldwide astronomy community for research, as well as to the public. HDF-S was a 10-day observation that had taken place in October 1998. With all of its new cameras and other instruments trained simultaneously down the same 12 billionlight-yearlong corridor, the team of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute and NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center had captured a core sample of the universe, doubling the number of far-flung galaxies available for astronomers to study. The astronomers had studied a region in the constellation Tucana, near the south celestial pole, complementing a previous deep-field study carried out in late 1995, when scientists aimed the HST at a small patch of space near the Big Dipper.(NASA, The Universe Down Under Is the Target of Hubbles Latest Deep-View, news release 98-206, 23 November 1998.)
NASA announced the selection of veteran cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev for the crew of Mission STS-88, the first American ISS assembly mission. In December 1998, Krikalev would join aboard Endeavour Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. Rick Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, and James H. Newman. NASA had assigned Mission STS-88 the task of attaching the U.S.-built Unity module to the Russian-built Zarya control module, scheduled to launch in November 1998. Krikalev had been a member of two Mir space station crews and had flown aboard the Space Shuttle as a member of the Mission STS-60 crew in February 1994. During Mission STS-60, Krikalev had operated the robotic arm and supported a variety of experiments in materials science.(NASA, Future Space Station Resident Joins Assembly Crew, news release 98-137, 30 July 1998.)
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. Rick Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 412 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Space Station, 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday, 3 December 1998; NASA, Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Just hours before Endeavour touched down in Florida, a new crew from Russia docked at Mir to begin a three-week transition from Mir 24 to Mir 25. Mir 25 Commander Talgat A. Musabayev replaced Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Flight Engineer Nikolai M. Budarin replaced Pavel V. Vinogradov, and Researcher Leopold Eyharts, a 40-year old French air force pilot on his first spaceflight, joined the crew.(NASA, STS-89; Washington Post, 2 Russians, Frenchman Blast Off for Mir, 30 January 1998.)
At an American Geophysical Union meeting, a team of research scientists led by David E. Smith of GSFC discussed new research findings based on data collected in the spring and summer by the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA). The data indicated that the ice cap on Marss north pole, although definitely water ice, is much smaller than previously thought. The scientists concluded that the amount of water in the ice cap is not voluminous enough to have created the deep gullies that scar the surface of the planet, nor could it have filled an ancient ocean. MOLA images showed the ice cap resting in a deep basin, possibly created by an asteroid impact. Scientists described this formation as unique in the solar system. The team of researchers remarked that their findings raised more questions about Marss formation and conditions than they answered.(NASA, Laser Provides First 3-D View of Mars North Pole, news release 98-219, 7 December 1998; Joseph B. Verrenga for Associated Press, Icecap Seen on Mars North Pole, 6 December 1998; Maria T. Zuber et al., Observations of the North Polar Region of Mars from the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter, Science 282, no. 5396 (11 December 1998): 2053.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula, the site of a gas cloud generating enough water to fill the Earths oceans 60 times a day. The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula. The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time the vital role that water plays in star formation, may provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem. Michael Werner of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, that water is prevalent in space and plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth, 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns, Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
The Iridium World Communications system global, digital wireless communications network completed a series of deployment missions, with the launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California of five Iridium satellites aboard a Boeing Delta II launch vehicle. The successful launch had completed the entire Iridium constellation in just twelve months. The worlds first global, wireless telephone company scheduled its commercial service to begin four months following this last launch, once it had completed integrating and testing the Iridium system.(PR Newswire, Boeing Delta II Rocket Places Iridium Satellites into Orbit, 17 May 1998.)
An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagons National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 112 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center. NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac, the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test, news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight, Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena IIs first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, Late Flagstaff Astronomers Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute, Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers, 7 January 1998.)
Dr. William K. Douglas, the physician who had overseen the care of the seven Mercury astronauts, died of a viral infection at the age of 76. As part of his assignment to NASAs Manned Spacecraft Center at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, Dr. Douglas had been personally responsible for the medical care and flight preparation of the seven Mercury astronauts. He had cared for Alan B. Shepard Jr., Virgil I. Gus Grissom, John H. Glenn Jr., and M. Scott Carpenter when they undertook the nations first four human spaceflights. After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 1977, Dr. Douglas had joined the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, where he had helped design an orbiting space station before retiring in 1988. In 1992 Douglas was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico.(Wolfgang Saxon, William Douglas, 76, the Doctor for the Seven Early Astronauts, New York Times, 24 November 1998.)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) launched into orbit, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, a new weather satellite, the NOAA-K, aboard a 34- year old converted Titan II nuclear missile. The satellite was an Advanced Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS-N) weather satellite, able to see inside clouds, a feature that scientists expected would greatly increase our knowledge of how hurricanes develop and move. The TIROS-N was the latest model of TIROS satellite in four generations. Lockheed Martin had last built a TIROS satellite for NASA and NOAA in 1960. After the launch of the TIROS-N, the satellite would undergo a series of tests by NASA, followed by a round of tests by NOAA, before becoming fully available in time for next years hurricane season.(Justin Ray, New NOAA Weather Satellite Will Keep a Better Eye on Hurricanes, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 1998; Business Wire, Nations Newest Advanced Weather Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully, 14 May 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-95 launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr.; Pilot Steven W. Lindsey; Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Stephen K. Robinson, and Pedro Duque; and Payload Specialists Chiaki Mukai and John H. Glenn Jr. The primary objectives of STS-95 included conveying a variety of science experiments inside the SPACEHAB module; deploying and retrieving the Spartan free-flyer payload; performing operations with the HST Orbiting Systems Test; and transporting the International Extreme Ultraviolet Hitchhiker payloads. The historic mission also returned veteran astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. to space. Thirty-six years after Glenn had first orbited Earth, the seventy-seven-year-old astronaut became the oldest person to fly in orbit. As a veteran of NASAs early Mercury program, Glenn had been the first American to orbit Earth. On 20 February 1962, in a flight lasting 5 hours, Glenn had orbited Earth three times in a tiny capsule. After he had passed a battery of medical tests and participated in astronaut training, NASA had selected U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. as a crew member of STS-95, so that scientists could study how space travel affects an aging astronauts body.(Bill Sammon, Senator Upholds Status as Hero with His Return to Orbit, Washington Times, 30 October 1998; John Noble Wilford, Pioneer Returns as Crewman in the Shuttle, New York Times, 29 October 1998; NASA, Mission Archives: STS-95, John Glenns Flight; SPACEHAB, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-95.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches, while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur. Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project, Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
Scientists studying images taken by NASAs Galileo spacecraft announced, in a joint teleconference with Cornell University and NASAs JPL, that Jupiters rings appeared to consist of dust, created in the course of millions of years, as asteroids and comets crashed into the four small moons nearest the planets surfaceMetis, Adrastea, Amalthea, and Thebe. The images, captured during several hours in November 1996, when Galileo was able to observe the rings lit up by the Sun, had provided unprecedented details of the tiny dust particles. Furthermore, scientists observed that, in the images, the three rings stopped abruptly at different moons. Images from a second flyby in September 1997 had confirmed that the depths of the three rings matched the depths of the moons orbits, and that material in the rings matched the dark red dust on the moons surface. The scientists said that more moons than rings exist, because some of the moons supply dust to more than one ring.(NASA, Galileo Finds Jupiters Rings Formed by Dust Blasted Off Small Moons, news release 98-167, 15 September 1998; New York Times, New Images Clear Up a Jupiter Mystery: Its Rings Are Just Dust, 16 September 1998; Dennis Cauchon, Scientists Solve Mystery of Jupiters Rings: Pictures Suggest Asteroid Impacts Stirred Moon Dust, USA Today, 16 September 1998.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as chief of American rocketry efforts, died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimers disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germanys defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects. In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agencys Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89, New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
Eighteen members of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton, urging him to abandon plans to reach an agreement in China on expanding space cooperation because of Beijings weapons transfers and human rights abuses. The letter was the Houses response to a 29 April report in the Washington Times, disclosing a plan to conclude a space cooperation agreement at the Beijing summit. The article discussed a draft agreement calling for the free and unrestricted exchange of scientific data between NASA and the State Science and Technology Commission of China, a key developer of weapons-related technology. The lawmakers, warning that the pact would increase the likelihood of Chinas sharing technology with rogue states, referred to a CIA report stating that China had aimed 13 of its 18 long-range strategic missiles at the United States. These comments emphasized the concern of members of Congress that China constituted a direct threat to the United States. Many opponents of the agreement insisted that the United States should not share with China technologies or applications that enemies of the United States might use against the American people or U.S. interests.(Bill Gertz, House Science Panelists Oppose Space Pact with China, Washington Times, 24 June 1998.)
The Organization of American Historians presented the 1998 Richard W. Leopold Prize to Andrew J. Butrica for his book, To See the Unseen: A History of Planetary Radar Astronomy. The organization awarded the biennial Richard W. Leopold Prize for the best book written by an historian connected with federal, state, or municipal government in the areas of foreign policy, military affairs, the historical activities of the federal government, or biography in one of these areas. Butricas book, a comprehensive history of planetary radar astronomy, was a publication of the NASA History Series produced by the NASA Headquarters History Divisions Office of Policy and Plans.(NASA, NASA History Wins Prestigious Prize, news release 98-53, 3 April 1998.)
The crew closed the hatches used to transfer equipment between Endeavour and Mir at 5:34 p.m. (EST) in preparation for Endeavours return flight to Earth. The closure of the hatches concluded five days of Endeavours continuous link-up with Mir, during which time the astronauts and cosmonauts had transferred 9,600 pounds (4,350 kilograms) of materials. In addition to equipment exchanges, the crew exchanged American astronaut David A. Wolf for Andrew S. W. Thomas, a U.S. astronaut born in Australia, who was to remain aboard Mir for a planned four- and-one-half-month mission.
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronauts error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawlas efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttles robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawlas crewmates could have helped her verify the command but did not do so because such vigilance was not part of the plan. The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the boards findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
Pursuant to H. Res. 572, the U.S. House of Representatives agreed to an amended version of H.R. 1702, the Commercial Space Act of 1998.595 The legislation gave the Federal Aviation Administration the authority to issue licenses to private companies for the launch of reusable space vehicles like NASAs Shuttle. Supporters of the measure stressed that enactment of the law would better enable American companies to compete in an increasingly competitive international marketplace, warning that, without this law, the United States would risk losing the space industry to overseas markets. The legislation also required NASA to submit a report and an independently conducted market study to Congress, identifying commercial opportunities and evaluating commercial interest in the development of the ISS.(Jim Abrams for Associated Press, House Bills Help Federal Workers, 5 October 1998; Associated Press, House Sends Senate Bill To Allow Private Space Launches, 5 October 1998.)
Vladimir Petrovsky, a member of the Russian Academy of Military Sciences, condemned the United States 2 October testing of its proposed missile defense system, noting that testing could aggravate relations not only between the United States and the Asian-Pacific region, but also between Japana U.S. ally in the development of the systemand other countries. Russia had refused to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which would have permitted the United States to develop a full-fledged missile defense system. Preventing either country from developing missile defense systems, the Cold Warera treaty acted as a deterrent by keeping both the Soviet Union and the United States vulnerable to attack. Officials in Washington, DC, stated that DOD was testing a missile defense system intended to destroy lone missiles launched by rogue states or terrorists, not a system meant to protect against a multi-missile attack from a major nuclear power.(Associated Press, Missile Test.)
The salvage team lifted astronaut Virgil I. Gus Grissoms Mercury capsule to the surface of the Atlantic Ocean just one day before the 38th anniversary of the astronauts historic suborbital flight. The second American in space, Grissom had flown in his Liberty Bell 7 Mercury capsule on 21 July 1961. After its ocean landing, the capsules hatch had blown open prematurely, nearly drowning him. Both the location of the capsule and the cause of the accident had remained a mystery until 1 May 1999, when a salvage team led by Curt Newport and funded by the Discovery Channel had discovered the spacecraft 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the ocean. Even after the team had retrieved the capsule, the cause of the accident remained a mystery. The salvage team had yet to locate the capsules hatch, which Newport believed had the greatest potential for determining what had caused the malfunction at the end of Grissoms flight.(Los Angeles Times, Grissoms Mercury Capsule Recovered, 21 July 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Expedition Begins To Recover Mercury Capsule from Ocean, 2 July 1999.)
Soyuz TM-29 launched on a mission to Mir with Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Ivan Bella. Jean-Pierre Haignere of the European Space Agency was also on board Soyuz.(NASA, U.S. and Russian Human Space Flight 1961September 30, 2000, in Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2000 Activities (Washington, DC, 2001).)
U.S. Air Force officials announced that, despite initial media reports of a successful launch, the previous days launch of the USA 142 aboard a Titan IVB rocket had failed. The USA 142, also called the DSP 19, an American geosynchronous military satellite, had launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The failed launch had placed the Defense Support Program satellite in a useless orbit after an attached rocket engine failed. This was the first launch attempt since the explosion of a Titan IVA in August 1998. Engineers had designed the Titan IVB, an improved version of the Titan IV, to survive the electrical malfunction that had led to its predecessors demise. Because of a policy of secrecy concerning military spy satellites, the U.S. Air Force had delayed informing its public affairs office about the launch failure. Although senior Air Force officials knew of the loss of the satellite, they were unable to make the event public until they were certain that the failure had not entailed the release of classified information. The Air Force had designed the satellite, a highly sensitive, 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne), infrared telescope, to detect missile launches and nuclear detonations.(Robyn Suriano, Air Force Says Security Questions Delayed Announcement, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 April 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
The Federal Laboratory Consortium appointed Donald J. Campbell, Director of Glenn Research Center (GRC), as the 1998 Laboratory Director of the Year for Technology Transfer. The Consortium honored Campbell, NASAs first African American center director, for his exemplary contributions to the overall enhancement of technology transfer for economic development. Industries had created at least 20 new products from GRC-developed technologies in the previous five years. Campbell had also led the Center in establishing the Lewis Incubator for Technology, to help entrepreneurs and start-up companies commercialize NASA-developed technologies, as well as the Garrett Morgan Commercialization Initiative, to help small businesses in Ohio and the Great Lakes region use NASA technologies to become more competitive.(NASA, Campbell Named Laboratory Director of the Year, news release 99-32, 4 March 1999.)
At the American Geophysical Unions fall meeting in San Francisco, NASA presented images from the Galileo spacecrafts close flyby of Jupiters moon Io on 25 November, showing a curtain of lava erupting within a giant volcanic crater. Because of the intense heat and height of the lava fountains, NASAs Infrared Telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was also able to observe them. NASA scientists hoped to determine the temperature of the extremely hot lava on Io, by combining data from the telescope and from Galileo observations. Galileo scientist Alfred McEwen of the University of Arizona in Tucson remarked that capturing images of the fountains was a 1-in-500-chance observation. NASA announced that engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratorys (JPLs) Measurement Technology Center had been able to repair images damaged by radiation during Galileos 10 October flyby using LabVIEW software from National Instruments. JPLs Torrence V. Johnson compared the work to unscrambling a television cable signal: JPL engineers had to break the code that was inadvertently introduced by the radiation near Io.(NASA, Galileo Sees Dazzling Lava Fountain on Io, news release 99-148, 17 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-148.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
The U.S. Air Force announced that Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton would not replace Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing at Patrick Air Force Base, but would lead the 9th Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base near Sacramento, California. Starbuck was to remain in command of the 45th Space Wing indefinitely until the Air Force had chosen another successor. The change followed the U.S. launch industrys worst string of accidents in more than a decade, including three consecutive failures of Air Force Titan rockets launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Air Force also reported that, earlier in May, a military navigation spacecraft had sustained US$51 million in damage during a thunderstorm. The Air Force announced that it had opened a formal investigation into that incident, in addition to the investigation President William J. Clinton had ordered into the string of launch failures. The President had appointed the CIA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and NASA to carry out that investigation.(Robyn Suriano, Chilton Not Coming to Cape; Starbuck To Remain Indefinitely, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 May 1999.)
Lockheed Martin announced a sweeping reorganization of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panels recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martins VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marshs supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit, Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASAs first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agricultures Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASAs new space-grant program, Rasmussens primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension workusing the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information systemas precision agriculture, because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work, Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the companys spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade. Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the crafts enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earths surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earths surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit, San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmospheres density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, covered with 878 small, circular mirrors that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had popped from its canister in the Shuttles cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discoverys crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash, 14 July 1999.)
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the spacecraft ground and flight control at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland]. In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) published a report critical of the X-33 program jointly sponsored by NASA and Lockheed Martin, concluding that the program was unlikely to meet its original cost, schedule, and performance goals because of increased costs, delayed testing, and revised objectives. However, NASA and Lockheed Martin responded that they expected the program to achieve technical requirements, such as demonstrating the feasibility of building large liquid hydrogen fuel tanks made of graphite composite material. The purpose of the X-33 Program was to develop and demonstrate advanced technologies for use on future reusable launch vehicles, such as the companys VentureStarTM.(U. S. General Accounting Office, Space Transportation: Status of the X-33 Reusable Launch Vehicle Program (report no. NIASD-99-176, Washington, DC, 11 August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99176.pdf (accessed 4 March 2008).)
At a scheduled 13 December ribbon-cutting ceremony, NASA announced the opening of FutureFlight Central (FFC) at Ames Research Centers Moffett Field in Mountain View, California. NASA had designed the two-story facilitythe worlds first full-scale, virtual, airport control towerto test methods of solving, under realistic conditions and configurations, potential air and ground traffic problems at commercial airports. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration had jointly funded the US$10 million project. The design of FFC permitted integration of tomorrows technologies in a risk-free simulation of any airport, airfield, and tower-cab environment.(NASA, NASA Opens New, Virtual Airport Control Tower at Ames, news release 99-143, 10 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-143.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASAs four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a long-overdue tune-up. The orbiters overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbias fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, Shuttle Tuneup, 25 September 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force announced that it had postponed indefinitely Brigadier General F. Randall Starbucks departure from his command of the 45th Space Wing, with responsibility for all military and commercial launches from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Air Force spokesperson did not state the reasons for the change. Starbuck was to report on 3 June as Director of the Expeditionary Forces Management Team at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia. His replacement, Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton, a former Space Shuttle Commander, was to report on 3 June to Patrick Air Force Base, to replace Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing.(Robyn Suriano, Starbuck Staying Put at Helm of 45th Space Wing, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 May 1999. 711 NASA, Nobel Prize Winner To Lead NASA Astrobiology Institute, news release 99-61, 18 May 1999; Warren E. Leary, Search for Life Beyond Earth Gets a Leader, New York Times, 19 May 1999.)
Analyzing data from NASAs Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) spacecraft, researchers proved for the first time that smoke from forest fires inhibits rainfall. TRMM, a mission of the United States and Japan and part of NASAs Earth Science Enterprise, had been producing continuous data since December 1997. Daniel Rosenfeld of the Institute of Earth Sciences at Hebrew University in Jerusalem had studied the data, finding that clouds polluted with heavy smoke significantly inhibit warm rain processes. When smoke pollutes them, cloud tops must grow considerably above the freezing level to produce rain through a different process. Rosenfeld remarked that the results of his research had validated earlier studies, which showed that urban air pollution inhibits rainfall. Christian D. Kummerow, a TRMM scientist at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) commented that such findings were making the first inroads into the difficult problem of understanding humanitys impacts on global precipitation.(NASA, Spacecraft Provides First Direct Evidence: Smoke in the Atmosphere Inhibits Rainfall, news release 99-110, 5 October 1999.)
A team of astrophysicists at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center announced that they had found the first direct evidence of a black hole pulling in matter. Using the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics, an x-ray satellite belonging to Japan and the United States and launched in 1993, the team observed superheated gas in the accretion disc of the black hole. Previously, scientists had only seen the phenomenon by observing these accretion discs, or the swirling matter circling around as it is being pulled into the black hole. However, this time, the Goddard team had observed a strange feature buried in the x-rays that the gas emitted. Energy had been redshifted, an occurrence described as an astronomical Doppler effect, because, just as the compression of sound waves, for example, causes the sound of a siren to rise and fall as it passes an observer, light stretches as it speeds away from Earth. The team observed light that was being stretchedredshiftedmoving at about 6.5 million miles (10.5 million kilometers) per hour, toward a black hole in galaxy NGC 3516.(Reuters, Evidence of Super Gravity Reported: Backs Black Hole Astronomy Theory, Washington Times, 17 August 1999.)
Space.com, an Internet site devoted to covering the news and science of space, appointed Sally K. Ride as its President. Lou Dobbs had begun Space.com in July 1999, after resigning as president of CNNs Financial News. Ride, the first American woman in space, had worked closely with Dobbs as he launched the site. The position was her first foray into the cyberspace after a long career in space research, policy, and education.(Andrea Orr for Reuters, Space.com Names Space Woman as Company President, 21 September 1999.)
A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstars launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
NASA announced that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin would present Simon Ramo and Bernard A. Schriever with NASAs Distinguished Public Service Medal on 5 November at the start of a daylong conference. NASA, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, the National Air and Space Museum, the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, and the National Space Society were cosponsoring the conference, Developing U.S. Launch Capability: The Role of Civil-Military Cooperation. The award recognized the leadership of Ramo and Schriever during the early years of the U.S. space program. Ramo had been the chief scientist and leading civilian in the Air Force program to build the first U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile system. His work had fostered cooperation between the U.S. Air Force and aeronautics industry, the necessary foundation of the space program. Schriever had pioneered the development of the first ballistic missile for the United States; the resulting rocket technology had led to NASAs successes in its early human spaceflight programs.(NASA, NASA Honors Missile Pioneers at Launch Vehicle Conference, news release N99-56, 2 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/1999/n99-056.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, Delta Rocket Soars into Space, Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force officially declared dead its US$800 million Milstar communications satellite. Launched atop a Titan IV rocket on 30 April and placed in the wrong orbit, the Milstar would never reach its intended 22,300-mile-high [35,900-kilometer-high] orbit. U.S. Air Force representative Aaron Renenger stated that the useless satellite could remain in orbit for hundreds of years, but posed no threat to other spacecraft.(Associated Press, Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead, 12 May 1999.)
Astronaut Charles P. Pete Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet. As an example of Conrads wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but thats a long one for me. Conrad had been a member of NASAs second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident, news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, as Director of NASAs Astrobiology Institute, effective immediately. NASA had created the Astrobiology Institute in July 1998, a virtual organization comprising NASAs centers, universities, and other scientific entities for the study of the origin, evolution, distribution, and destiny of life in the universe. The Institute, with a multidisciplinary focus, sought to bring together astronomers, biologists, chemists, exobiologists, geologists, and physicists, to search for the origins of life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the announcement of Blumbergs appointment at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, the site of the Institutes headquarters. Goldin stated that NASA had tasked the Astrobiology Institute with providing the intellectual underpinnings for building new types of instruments and space probes for finding life in the solar system and beyond.
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) successfully conducted the first of a series of tests of a proposed missile defense system. An unarmed Minuteman missile, carrying a dummy warhead and decoy balloon, launched over the Pacific Ocean from Vandenberg Air Force Base; 20 minutes later an Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle, a 55-inch-long (1.4-meter-long), 120-pound (54.4-kilogram) device built by Raytheon Corporation, launched aboard a booster rocket from the Marshall Islands. The two missiles collided 10 minutes later, 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers) from California and 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the ocean. According to the CIA, when DOD conducted the test, North Korea, Iran, and Syria were developing long-range missiles that could hit the United States.(Associated Press, Missile Test Sparks Russian Gripes, 4 October 1999.)
U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) announced the findings of a U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) investigation into NASAs computer security. Thompson had requested the study, which found that government specialists were able to penetrate several mission-critical systems and could have stolen, modified, or destroyed system software and data. GAO had found that 135 of the 155 mission-critical systems reviewed did not meet all of NASAs requirements for risk assessment. Specifically, NASA had not conducted an Agency-wide review of information-technology security since 1991; 60 percent of reviewed systems had not been independently audited for security or weaknesses; NASA had no security training program; and NASA field centers did not report security incidents to a central location. GAO had also found that NASA had no policy for determining what type of information its staff could post on public Web sites, rendering it vulnerable to Internet attacks. NASA also had no policy for protecting mission-critical systems from well-known Internet threats.(Federal Document Clearing House, Thompson Says NASA Must Tighten Computer Security, government news release, 20 May 1999; U.S. General Accounting Office, Information Security: Many NASA Mission-Critical Systems Face Serious Risks (report no. GAO/AIMD-99-47, Washington, DC, May 1999), http://www.gao.gov /archive/1999/ai99047.pdf (accessed 7 February 2008).)
NASAs Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected Ball Aerospace of Boulder, Colorado, and Aerojet General Corporation of Azusa, California, to study the next-generation, spaceborne, microwave, atmospheric instrument for weather-forecasting and climate-change research, awarding each company a one-year, US$4 million, fixed-price contract through Goddard Space Flight Center. The new instrument, the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), was one-third the size and weight of existing microwave-sounding instruments on board the Polar- Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and the Earth Observing System-PM spacecraft. The application of new technologies, particularly in microwave electronics, had made the significantly smaller size of the ATMS possible. NASA intended to fly the first ATMS unit on the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environment Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) mission, a joint effort between NASA and the NPOESS Program Office. NPOESS, a tri-agency program consisting of parts of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, merged civilian and military polar-orbiting weather satellite systems into a single system.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Ball and AerojetGeneral Picked To Study New Weather Sensor, news release 99-117, 12 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-117.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross released a report estimating that NASA had spent [US]$3 million in excessive costs on its Houston-to-Moscow air-charter program. The investigators criticized the program, saying it was more expensive than commercial travel. An investigation had revealed that the flights, which typically used Boeing 727s seating 143 travelers, sometimes carried as few as nine people. The charter flights originated in Houston and usually stopped in Huntsville, Alabama, and Washington, DC, before continuing on to Moscow. A few weeks before the release of the report, NASAs Office of Space Flight had rejected a recommendation from the Inspector General to terminate the service, arguing that the program provided tangible and intangible benefits to workers on the International Space Station [ISS]. NASA had developed the program as a cost-saving measure and as an alternative to contracting with the U.S. Department of Defense to transport employees involved with the multibillion- dollar space station program. The Inspector General found that the chartered flights averaged around 50 people; NASA had estimated a 90-passenger threshold for the program to realize savings. In response to the demand of U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) that NASA halt this waste immediately, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would terminate the program as soon as practical.
Astronomers captured for the first time optical images of a gamma-ray burst (GRB) as it was occurring. Detectors of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on NASAs orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory detected the GRB as it began and radioed its position to the Gamma Ray Burst Coordinates Network (GCN) at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). GSFC immediately forwarded the position to astronomers around the world. In response to this signal, the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) team in Los Alamos, New Mexico, photographed the patch of sky where the GRB was occurring. Using precise information from instruments aboard the Italian-Dutch BeppoSAX satellite, the ROTSE team was able to locate the GRB within the images they had captured. Astronomer Scott D. Barthelmy of GSFC remarked that capturing a burst as it unfolded was the holy grail of GCN, and that, previously, optical telescopes had only seen the afterglow of a burst, never the burst itself.(NASA, Gamma Ray Burst Imaged for the First Time, news release 99-8, 27 January 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month launch drought. NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttles external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASAs history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discoverys crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Space Shuttle, 27 May 1999.)
The NASA WIRE team declared a spacecraft emergency, as ground controllers worked to recover the spacecraft. The satellite continued to spin, instead of maintaining a stable position in orbit, and had a higher temperature than expected. NASA formed a spacecraft-recovery team headed by David F. Everett of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), as well as an anomaly-investigation board.(NASA, NASA Working To Correct Spin Rate of Wire Spacecraft, news release 99-34, 5 March 1999. 188)
Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch, 29 April 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the missions duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite, news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
The U.S. Air Force officially declared the US$1.2 billion launch of a communications satellite on 30 April a mission failure. A malfunction in the upper stage booster of the Titan IVB rocket had stranded the Milstar satellite in the wrong orbit. The Air Force established an investigation into the failure, which was its third costly space failure in nine months.(Reuters, U.S. Air Force Investigates Costly Satellite Loss, 4 May 1999.)
After two delays, Space Shuttle Columbia launched on Mission STS-93 from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, under the command of Eileen M. Collins, NASAs first female Shuttle commander in 38 years of human spaceflight. Commander Collinss crew comprised Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby and Mission Specialists Steven A. Hawley, Catherine G. Coleman, and Michel Tognini. Columbia carried on board the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, previously known as the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as well as secondary payloads and experimentsthe Southwest Ultraviolet Imaging System to capture ultraviolet imagery of the Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter; plant growth experiments; biological cell-culture studies; and the Treadmill Vibration Information System and High Definition Television System, which the crew planned to test. NASA had scrubbed both of the Shuttles earlier launch attempts late in the countdown, halting the 20 July launch 6 seconds before blastoff because of a technical malfunction and the 22 July launch because of stormy weather. The U.S. Air Force and the Boeing Company postponed a commercial launch to permit NASA a third chance to deliver Chandra into orbit. However, the Shuttle continued to have problems. During the 8-minute climb into outer space, a 0.5-second-long short circuit shut down computers controlling two of the Shuttles three main engines. Furthermore, Columbia was 4,000 pounds (1,800 kilograms) short of liquid oxygen fuel in its external fuel tank, leaving the craft in orbit 7 miles (11 kilometers) lower than planned. Fuel carried aboard the orbiter made up the shortfall. Seven hours into the flight, the crew deployed Chandra into orbit, accomplishing its primary mission.(USA Today, Shuttle Lifts Off with Woman in Command, 23 July 1999; Brad Liston for Reuters, Shuttle Roars into History After Launch Problems, 23 July 1999; Beth Dickey, After Hiccup at Liftoff, Shuttle Puts Telescope into Space, New York Times, 25 July 1999; NASA, Mission Archives STS-93, Chandra X-ray Observatory, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-93.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
Space Imaging Inc., a private company owned by Lockheed Martin and based in Thornton, Colorado, released a photograph taken from space of the intersection of 14th Street, NW, and Constitution Avenue in Washington, DC. President William J. Clinton had approved the development of private space cameras in 1994, but Space Imaging had been the first company to successfully build and launch a spacecraft with such a camera, launching its Eastman Kodak built camera on 24 September and testing it on 30 September. The commercial image rivaled the products of military spy technology, showing objects as small as 3 feet (0.9 meter) wide. Space Imagings test image showed the Washington Monument, part of the Ellipse, and the buildings of the U.S. Department of Commerce and the Museum of American History.(William J. Broad, Giant Leap for Private Industry: Spies in Space, New York Times, 13 October 1999. 228)
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. Pete Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligences Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failuresan explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers at least [US]$3 billion. Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake got through, despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his companys workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
SPACEHAB Inc., the first company to commercially develop, own, and operate habitable modules that provide laboratory facilities and logistics re-supply aboard NASAs Space Shuttles, and leading global provider of commercial payload-processing services, participated in a Brazilian industry conference. Brazsat, a Brazilian commercial space company, hosted the Third Commercial Space Workshop, in Rio de Janeiro on 23 and 24 August. North American, South American, and European industry and government leaders attended the workshop, where SPACEHABs Chief Executive Officer Shelley A. Harrison delivered one of two keynote addresses. Participants at the workshop, which had the theme Commercial Space Technologies and its Benefits in the New Millenium, presented state-of-the-art space technologies, research spin-offs and applications in areas of microgravity research, remote sensing, telecommunications satellites, distance learning, telemedicine and other disciplines of human spaceflight.(SPACEHAB Inc., SPACEHAB Participates in Key Brazilian Industry Conference: SPACEHAB CEO Addresses Industry Officials on Essential Space Initiatives, news release, 31 August 1999, http://www.spacehab. com/news/1999/99_08_31.htm (accessed 3 March 2008).)
NASA announced the discovery of a mysterious class of middleweight black holes. Two teams of astronomers studying x-ray light at NASA and Carnegie Mellon University had independently found evidence of this new class of black hole. Astronomers did not know what process had formed the newly discovered black holes, 100 to 10,000 times as massive as the Sun and located in spiral-shaped galaxies throughout the universe. Before this discovery, astronomers had known of only two types of black holes: 1) stellar black holes, formed from the remains of dead stars several times heavier than the Sun and compressed to a diameter of a few miles or less; and 2) supermassive black holes, which have masses equal to 1 million to 1 billion Suns and likely formed in the early universe from giant gas clouds or from the collapse of clusters of immense numbers of stars. Edward H. Colbert and Richard F. Mushotzky of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had observed hints of the black holes while studying x-rays from 39 nearby galaxies. Andrew Ptak and Richard Griffiths of Carnegie Mellon University had studied x-ray light in galaxy M82, which was not one of the set of galaxies that the Goddard team had studied. Both teams had identified unique x-ray light indicative of a class of black holes that was neither stellar nor supermassive.(NASA, Astronomers Discover Middleweight Black Holes, news release 99-51, 13 April 1999.)
NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earths landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earths Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earths radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission, 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
An international team of astronomers, led by Wendy L. Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories, held a news conference to announce their findings regarding the age of the universe. Freedmans team had concluded that the universe was between 12 billion and 13.4 billion years old, at least 1 billion years younger than predicted. Freedmans international team had studied eight years of calculations, made observations using NASAs Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and used a range of celestial measurements to recalculate the age of the universe. Among those measurements was the Hubble constant, used in mathematical equations to gauge the speed at which galaxies are accelerating away from each other. Named for Edwin Hubble, who had discovered 70 years ago that the universe is expanding, the Hubble constant is an essential piece of the equation determining the age and size of the universe. The teams findings drew criticism from other astronomers. Although the Australian physicist Charles H. Lineweaver had conducted separate research with the same result as that of Freedmans team, some astronomers associated with the Carnegie Observatories and Harvard University did not agree with the Freedman teams conclusions. Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Observatories stated that he believed that the teams methodology contained systematic errors and that the final number was not correct. Harvard University astronomer Robert P. Kirshner had led a third team, using the Hubble constant to study the age of the universe, but although he calculated a different age than the other teams, Kirshner downplayed the differences in their results, remarking that what was once a very big disagreement is now narrowing down.(NASA Johnson Space Center, Hubble Completes Eight-Year Effort To Measure Expanding Universe, news release H99-65, 25 May 1999, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/1999/H99-65.html (accessed 2 January 2008); Robert Lee Hotz, Scientists Calculate Most Precise Age Yet for Universe; Astronomy: New Data, Hubble Telescope Help Two Separate Teams Put Range at 12 Billion to 13.4 Billion Years, Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1999.)
An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Floridas Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agencys Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstans Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and Chinas Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the groups findings: companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer. Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Floridas expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights, 7 January 1999.)
A Taurus rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying satellites for NASA and the Korean Aerospace Institute, as well as 36 capsules holding 7 ounces of cremated remains for Celestis Inc., a Houston-based company that arranged to send human remains to space. NASAs 253-pound (114.8-kilogram) Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (EOS ACRIM III), expected to return data for a minimum of five years, was deployed to measure sunlight reaching Earths atmosphere, oceans, and land, data needed for scientists to study whether slight changes in solar output affected global warming and cooling. ACRIM III was the third in a series of long- term, solar-monitoring tolls that NASAs JPL had built. ACRIM IIIs data would expand the database begun with the ACRIM I mission in 1980, aboard the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft, and continued with the ACRIM II mission in 1991, aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. ACRIM I was the first instrument to demonstrate clearly that the total radiant energy from the Sun is not a constant. The Korean satellite, built by TRW Inc. for a three-year mission, carried three instruments for creating digital elevation maps of Korea, studying the biology of the ocean, and performing physics experiments on the effects of radiation on electronics. The Celestis mission carried 36 capsules of human remains, which would orbit for 45 years before burning up in Earths atmosphere.(NASA, Item 1ACRIMSAT LaunchHQ, NASA Daily News Summary, 21 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/media/1999/m99-262.txt (accessed 13 March 2008); Associated Press, NASA Satellite, Korea Probe Rocket into Space, 21 December 1999.)
GAO reported that NASA had inadvertently exported radiation-hardened, microcircuit, optical coupler parts to Russia, relying on the manufacturers statement that the so-called rad-hard parts were not on the U.S. Department of States Munitions List and that, therefore, NASA was not required to obtain an export license. GAO also reported that NASA was preparing to export sensitive encryption technology to Japan and Europe, technology transfers related to building the International Space Station (ISS). Under international agreements related to the space station, NASA was obligated to deliver, disclose, or transfer certain technology, data, and commodities to other nations involved in building the ISS. GAO had investigated NASAs export-control procedures after members of Congress expressed concern about safeguards to protect technology and information exported to support the ISS. GAO evaluators conclusions were similar to those of NASAs Inspector General, who had reported earlier that NASAs export-control procedures were likely inadequate for the technology exchanges necessary under the ISS program.(U. S. General Accounting Office, Export Controls: International Space Station Technology Transfers (report no. NSIAD-00-14, Washington, DC, 3 November 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ns00014.pdf (accessed 21 March 2008); Aerospace Daily, NASA Illegally Exported Technology for Space Station, GAO reports, 22 November 1999.)
Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from Californias Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Forces Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, collecting data on the Earths global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs, as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmarks Orsted and South Africas SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earths magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit, 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
NASA released its newest and most accurate map of the continent of Antarctica, created from data that the Canadian Space Agencys (CSAs) RADARSAT-1 satellite had collected over an 18-day period during the spring of 1997. Vexel Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had developed software to generate a mosaic of the continent from many small images made from different angles and orientations of the satellite. Project officials and scientists remarked that the most important discoveries resulting from the radar images concerned the network of ice streams; the new satellite data revealed that the streams traveled enormous distances at speeds up to 3,000 feet (914 meters) per year100 times faster than the flow of surrounding ice. The CSA had begun planning RADARSAT in 1980, because of Canadas interest in using a high- resolution radar satellite to monitor shipping channels in the Arctic. NASAs negotiations with the CSA had resulted in an agreement: NASA would launch the satellite and provide software and data analysis in exchange for access to some of the data the satellite produced. Additionally, the CSA would make at least two imaging scans of Antarctica. RADARSAT had launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on 4 November 1995, but, until 1997, Canadian controllers had not completed a difficult rotation of the satellite, necessary to place Antarctica in full view. Once correctly oriented, RADARSAT had been able to complete the imaging in 18 days because it could collect data anytime of the day or night and in any weather. The last satellite map of Antarctica had used images from five different satellites, spanning the years 1980 to 1994.(NASA, NASA Unveils New, Most Accurate Map of Antarctic Continent, news release 99-122, 18 October 1999; Malcolm W. Browne, Under Antarctica, Clues to an Icecaps Fate: Radar Uncovers a Network of Ice Streams Larger and Faster than Expected, and More Ominous, New York Times, 26 October 1999.)
After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discoverys crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-Francois Clervoy.
GAO published a report, Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems, reiterating its previous recommendation to NASA to plan for a scenario in which Russia was unable to fulfill its commitments to the ISS. Although the report recognized that NASA was in the process of drafting such a plan, GAOs sole recommendation to NASA was to ensure the contingency plans completion before the launch of the Russian-built Service Module.(Jonathan Lipman, GAO Warns NASA About the Russians, Space.com, 30 August 1999, http://www.space. com/news/spacestation/gao_30.html (accessed 9 April 2008); U. S. General Accounting Office, Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems (report no. GAO/NSIAD-99-175, Washington, DC, August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99175.pdf (accessed 25 February 2008).)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of ShuttleMir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector, news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
Following a series of recent launch failures, Boeing Company announced the convening of an independent panel of experts to examine its rocket programs, specifically Boeings Delta, Sea Launch, and Inertial Upper Stage programs. To head the panel, Boeing had selected Sheila E. Widnall, former Secretary of the U.S. Air Force and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The panel was tasked with examining organizational roles and responsibilities within Boeing; recent launch failure investigation findings; processes used for government, civil, and commercial launches; acceptance processes for major subsystems and complex assemblies from suppliers; and manufacturing, assembly, transportation, and storage activities of Boeing launch programs.(Associated Press, Boeing Forms Independent Panel To Review Space Failures, 9 June 1999.)
In its third consecutive failure, the second loss within one month, the U.S. Air Force launch of a Titan IV rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, placed a geosynchronous military communications satellite, the USA 143, also known as Milstar 2, in a useless low-Earth orbit. (Associated Press, Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead, 12 May 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
NASA announced that spacecraft engineers who had worked on NASAs new Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) had won an American Electronics Association Technical Achievement Award for the development of a spacecraft at a record-setting pace of one year. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had built the satellite for NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), assembling the QuikSCAT faster than any construction of a spacecraft since the 1958 Explorer I satellite. To accomplish this fast pace, NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center had developed a new procurement system called the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, to accelerate NASAs purchase procedure. The new acquisition process had enabled NASA to take advantage of low-cost commercial technology from the burgeoning spacecraft industry, to develop satellite systems such as the QuikSCAT. NASA had been able to reduce the time needed to select a contractor and to initiate spacecraft development, from one year to 30 days. Chip Barnes, a QuikSCAT spacecraft system engineer at Ball Aerospace commented that the production had involved a remarkable effort to get the spacecraft built, integrated, and tested in an 11-month time frame.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Quikscat Team Wins American Electronics Achievement Award, news release 99-045, 3 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/aeaaward.html (accessed 12 February 2008). 720 Associated Press, Shuttle Astronauts Release Satellite, Head for Home, Washington Post, 6 June 1999.)
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earths atmosphere. Director of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event a bittersweet day for NASA. The spacecraft, NASAs gamma-ray equivalent of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellites control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earths atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASAs efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earths atmosphere.(NASA, Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns, news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth, news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, A Satellites Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project, Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiters solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASAs Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiters moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileos magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelsons team had measured the moons magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings best explained by a thick layer of waterabout as salty as Earths oceanshidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath the moons surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileos Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface. Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiters intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Solar Systems Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean, news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiters Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life, Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundationnow a part of Illinois Institute of Technologyhad directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being military high ground. The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project, Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 1314; Associated Press, Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon, 18 May 2000.)
As Russias Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States Apollo with Russias Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold Warera mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed, news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons, 11 July 2000.)
Arianespace, the France-based European satellite launch company, announced that it had won a contract to launch three more satellites for INTELSAT, the international satellite corporation based in Washington, DC. Arianespace already held a contract to launch three other satellites in the INTELSAT IX series. INTELSAT had scheduled six of the series seven spacecraft for launch from mid-2001 through the end of 2002, on Ariane 4 or Ariane 5 launch vehicles, from Europes spaceport in French Guiana. California-based Space Systems/Loral was building the 4.7-tonne (4,700-kilogram or 5.2-ton) satellites. In 1965 INTELSAT had launched the worlds first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird.(Reuters, France: Arianespace in Deal To Launch 3 INTELSAT Satellites, 27 September 2000.)
NASAs Office of Earth Sciences selected Gencorp Aerojet to build the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), a spaceborne instrument for measuring microwave energy emitted and scattered by the atmosphere. NASA intended the ATMS to replace instruments currently used on polar-orbiting weather satellites. NASA planned for the ATMS, working alongside an infrared sounder instrument, to produce daily global atmospheric temperature, humidity, and pressure profiles, essential for accurate weather forecasting and long-term climate research. Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that the advanced technology would improve the accuracy of weather forecasting, from the current three-to-five day forecast span to seven-to-ten day predictions. NASA planned to fly the first unit as part of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project Bridge mission, intended to ensure continuity of research-quality data through the bridging of sounding data between NASAs Earth Observing System research missions and future NPOESS operational missions. Goddard Space Flight Center would provide oversight of the contract, worth US$206.6 million.(NASA, NASA Selects Firm To Build Next Generation Weather Instrument, news release C00-q, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-q.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented awards to three minority contractors at NASAs annual Minority Business and Advocates Awards Ceremony. RS Information Services (RSIS), based in McLean, Virginia, won Minority Contractor of the Year; Rigging and Welding Specialists Inc., a Native Americanowned business, won Minority Subcontractor of the Year; and Pace and Waite Inc. won Women-Owned Business of the Year. In addition, NASA recognized advocates for innovative approaches to using minority- and women-owned businesses, awarding NASAs Exceptional Achievement Medal to Kenneth Martindale and Rodney J. Etchberger of Johnson Space Center and to Shantaram S. Pai of Glenn Research Center. Furthermore, NASA recognized five individuals for outstanding achievements and three NASA field centers for meeting or exceeding all socioeconomic business goals for FY 1999.(NASA, NASA To Honor Minority Businesses, news release 00-148, 25 September 2000, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-148.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The missions crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission, 8 September 2000; NASA, Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. Gus Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASAs second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatchs failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissoms claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, Grissoms Capsule Back at Space Center, 14 June 2000.)
Jason Allen Diekman of Mission Viejo, California, pled guilty to federal charges of computer crimes after negotiating a deal with prosecutors. Prosecutors had charged Diekman in September with illegal hacking and with using stolen credit card numbers to purchase US$6,000 worth of computer equipment and other items. He had confessed to investigators that he had hacked into hundreds, maybe thousands of computers over two years, including systems at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, Cornell University, the University of California at San Diego, and California State University at Fullerton. Diekmans most serious confessed invasions had occurred at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where he had gained root-level access to two computer systems, and at Stanford University, where he had gained control over 24 systems, two of them owned by NASA and containing flight-control software for NASAs satellites. The U.S. District Judge set sentencing for 5 February 2001.(David Rosenzweig, Hacker Pleads Guilty to Invading JPL, Stanford Computers Crime: Mission Viego Man, 20, Accepts Federal Plea Bargain. He Had Gained Control of NASA Computers at Both Sites, Los Angeles Times, 7 November 2000.)
Princeton University graduate student Xiaohui Fan discovered a distant quasar that scientists believed to be the oldest object ever observed by a human being. Fan had worked as part of a team using the 32-foot (10-meter) W. M. Keck Telescope. Estimating that the quasar was (Associated Press, Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks, 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal, news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americoms fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four othersthe GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site, news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
New NASA research published in the 1 October issue of the American Meteorological Societys Journal of Climate warned that clouds might not help counteract climate-warming trends. Anthony D. Del Genio, of NASAs Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York City, had analyzed observations of low clouds over land, collected between 1994 and 1997 as part of the U.S. Department of Energys Atmospheric Radiation Measurement program. Del Genio had found that clouds are thinner when temperatures were higher, a phenomenon occurring in any weather condition or season and at any time of day. Some climate theories had predicted that high temperatures would cause thicker clouds because of an increase in water vapor, but Del Genio explained that during warmer temperatures, the bottoms of clouds rise and become thinner. This occurs because clouds that form over a warm, dry air mass must rise higher before becoming sufficiently saturated with water to form a cloud base. Thinner clouds are less capable of reflecting sunlight back into space and are, therefore, unable to act as a natural sun shield. Del Genios findings corroborated long-term, worldwide satellite observations, published using the NASA-funded International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) database. The ISCCP, a global composite of cloud observations from international weather satellites, began showing a link between cloud thinning and temperature in 1992.(NASA, RevisedNASA Scientist Predicts Less Climate Cooling from Clouds, news release 00-151, 3 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-151.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
At the American Astronomical Society convention, scientists Karl Gebhardt and Douglas O. Richstone announced that an extensive survey of more than 30 galaxies had revealed that black holes reach their large size through gradual growth. Previously, some research had suggested the oppositethat black holes were simply born big. Using the HST, Gebhardt and Richstone had led a team of astronomers in determining the size of black holes in different galaxies. They found that, although small galaxies tend to have smaller black holes, the largest known galaxies have mammoth black holes. The astronomers suspected that the black holes had grown up along with the galaxies where they resided, feeding on gas and stars to acquire increasing mass. Although further research must determine the precise correlation between black hole and galaxy size, the scientific community greeted news of the discovery with great interest. The HST had not only made the discovery possible but had provided the opportunity for scientists to continue black hole hunting, to tabulate more exact answers.(NASA, Black Holes Shed Light on Galaxy Formation, news release 00-88, 5 June 2000. 267)
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARCs chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASAs astrobiology program and to establish NASAs Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffens two loves, and that the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.(NASA, NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies, news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official, 27 November 2000.)
The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASAs special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Vosss mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the classs trip to NASA to watch Endeavours launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.(Billy Cox, Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
The National Aviation Hall of Fame inducted four new members at a black-tie dinner and formal enshrinement ceremony at the Dayton Convention Center in Dayton, Ohio. Apollo astronaut Edwin E. Buzz Aldrin Jr. joined fellow Apollo 11 astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in the Hall of Fame. Aviators previously inducted to the Hall of Fame included Eugene A. Cernan, the last Apollo astronaut to walk on the Moon; Laurence C. Bill Craigie, the first U.S. military aviator to fly a jet aircraft; and Thomas B. McGuire Jr., the second-leading fighter ace in U.S. Air Force history. The National Aviation Hall of Fames Class of 2000 joined 166 award-winning aviators already chosen for the honor.(Dayton Daily News (OH), Astronaut Meets a Fan; Aviation Hall of Fame Enshrines 4 More, 16 July 2000.)
Astronomers using images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered what they believed to be the first examples of isolated stellar-mass black holes adrift among the stars of our galaxy. They announced their discovery at a convention of the American Astronomical Society. The findings supported a long-standing theory that black holes could form with the collapse of just one massive star, although an opposing theory had concluded that multiple stars must collapse in tandem. Moreover, the researchers contribution was the latest in a string of recent findings illuminating the relatively commonplace nature of black holes.(NASA, Lone Black Holes Discovered Adrift in the Galaxy, news release 00-4, 13 January 2000.)
Scientists at the American Astronomical Society convention also unveiled the first detailed map of the region of the universe inhabited by Earth. Using an Australian robotic telescope, which measured distances between more than 100,000 galaxies, researchers had charted the locations of galaxies, dark regions, and cosmic clusters. Perhaps most significantly, the new map supported a long-standing theory regarding the size limits of cosmic structures. Because of the relatively small scope of previous mapping surveys, scientists had questioned whether the known standards of cosmic size were representative. The newest map, however, did not reveal any cosmic structure outside of previous standards. Therefore, scientists could support with greater conviction the idea that size limits existed as the universe evolved. The researchers termed the limits the end of greatness.(James Glanz, Robotic Telescope Affirms Assumption on Universes Birth, New York Times, 7 June 2000. 933 Mark Carreau, Rocket Gives Space Station a Life, Houston Chronicle, 7 June 2000.)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) selected Space Systems and Applications Inc. of Lanham, Maryland, to provide engineering, science, and technology support for NASAs Space and Earth Science Directorates. The value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract was US$204.5 million over a period of five years. Under the contract, NASA required Space Systems and Applications to provide research and information technology services including scientific data analysis, modeling and simulation of physical processes, development of flight-project data systems and large-scale data management, archival and delivery systems, and systems analysis and programming. These services would support a broad range of scientific disciplinesastronomy and astrophysics, climatology and atmospheric science, geodynamics, land processes, oceanography, planetary studies, solar and space plasma physics, and solid earth geographics.(NASA, Contract for Goddard Space Center Support Awarded, news release C00-j, 6 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-j.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA released the research results of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.s historic 1998 voyage aboard Shuttle Discovery. The report detailed the 88 experiments conducted on Mission STS-95, the most of any Shuttle mission. NASA responded to some critics, who called the mission a publicity-driven flight with little scientific value, disclosing that Glenn himself had participated in 10 experiments during the mission. After becoming the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962, Glenn had returned to space 36 years later to achieve another recordthe oldest man to fly in space.(Associated Press, Scientific Results of Glenns Mission Released by NASA, 28 January 2000.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft set an astronomical record by facilitating the discovery of 102 comets. The spacecraft featured a Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument that allowed astronomers to observe comets that previously would have been invisible. Douglas A. Biesecker, an astronomer at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center, was responsible for making 45 discoveries on his own. According to the researchers working on the project, SOHO had revealed far more suicidal comets (those plunging into the Suns atmosphere) and sungrazers (those that pass by the Sun) than scientists had previously expected to find. The findings had practical implications as well. By observing the patterns of comets as they circled, collided, and split, scientists hoped that they might be better prepared to predict the behavior of a comet headed for Earth.(NASA, SOHO Spacecraft Bags 102 Comets, news release 00-23, 8 February 2000.)
President William J. Clintons proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administrations previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASAs plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor, Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 1112.)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institutions National Air and Space Museum for its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built. NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASAs predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonians National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners, news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
Two Earth-monitoring satellites launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Boeing Delta II rocket, successfully reaching orbit. NASA launched its Earth Observing I (EO-I) satellite, part of its New Millenium Program, to test several advanced technologies for possible use in future missions. NASA planned to fly the US$193 million craft within 2 miles (3 kilometers) of the Landsat 7 satellite to collect the same images, with the Landsat 7 images serving as the benchmark for the new imager aboard the EO-I. The second satellitethe multinational SAC-C satellite, a joint venture of NASA, Argentina, Brazil, Denmark, France, and Italycarried 11 instruments for studying the Earths surface, atmosphere, and magnetic field, including an instrument to observe the migration of the Franca whale.(Associated Press, Two Earth-Monitoring Satellites, 21 November 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discoverys crewCommander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthurwas transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
Engineers completed a weeklong series of tests on the U.S.-built Destiny laboratory, planned to launch to the ISS in 2001, ensuring that the module had no leaks and would provide a safe, vacuum-sealed environment in which the ISS astronauts could conduct research. NASA and the Boeing Company had worked together to test the 32,000-pound (14,500-kilogram) research laboratory. Placing Destiny in a pressurized chamber, engineers had monitored gas levels inside the module over the course of the week. Tip Talone, Director of the ISS Payload Process at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), characterized the results as a large step in meeting the labs Destiny, stating that the laboratory had exceeded expectations.(Dow Jones Newswire, Space State Laboratory Exceeds Expectations in Vacuum Chamber Test, 7 July 2000.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report discussing workforce and safety issues of NASAs Space Shuttle Program. The report assessed the impact of workforce reductions on the Shuttle program; the challenges that NASA would face as it addressed its workforce issues; and the status of planned safety and supportability upgrades to the Space Shuttle. GAO identified 26 technical skills needed at JSC in Houston, Texas, as well as at other facilities in Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi. In addition, GAO found that the decrease from 3,000 to 1,800 federal employees in the Shuttle program workforce since 1995 had placed NASA at a critical juncture. The Shuttle launch rate had dropped from eight launches in 1997 to three in 1999, a trend on the cusp of reversing itself in the aftermath of the July 1999 launch of Russias Zvezda module. Moreover, GAO reported signs of overwork and stress among NASA staff. Worker demographicstwice as many workers over age 60 as under age 30had compounded the problem of a declining workforce. NASA officials welcomed the report, although the results reflected a much harsher assessment of [S]huttle safety issues [than the assessment] prepared by NASA itself in response to an electrical short that accompanied the July 1999 launching of the [S]huttle Columbia. GAO also reported that NASA had terminated downsizing plans in December 1999 and had initiated efforts to begin hiring new staff. Although it was developing safety and supportability upgrades, which it would implement over the next five years, NASA still faced programmatic and technical challenges, such as a demanding schedule and undefined design and workforce requirements.(U. S. General Accounting Office, Space Shuttle: Human Capital and Safety Upgrade Challenges Require Continued Attention (report no. GAO/NSIAD/GGD-00-186, Washington, DC, August 2000), http://www.gao.gov/ archive/2000/n200186.pdf (accessed 9 May 2008); Mark Carreau, Undersized Work Force Puts NASA at Critical Juncture, Houston Chronicle, 31 August 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-97, carrying to the ISS Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Joseph R. Tanner, Marc Garneau, and Carlos I. Noriega. The purpose of STS-97, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 4A, was to connect solar arrays, to prepare a docking port for the U.S.-made Destiny module, to install Floating Potential Probes, to install camera cable outside the Unity module, and to transfer supplies, refuse, and equipment between the ISS and the Shuttle.(NASA, NASA Mission Archives: STS-97, International Space Station Assembly Flight 4A, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-97.html (accessed 30 October 2008). 1054 Chicago Tribune, 20-Year-Old Pleads Guilty to Hacking into NASA Computers, 3 December 2000.)
Robert R. Gilruth, an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronauticss Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.(NASA, Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies, news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
The U.S. Department of Justice filed a lawsuit against Rockwell International Inc., Boeing North American Inc., and United Space Alliance for concealing millions of dollars in fraud committed by a subcontractor. According to the suit, the subcontractor had used funds from the Shuttle program to purchase homes, jewelry, and vacations. The subcontractor accused of the fraud had pled guilty to all charges five years earlier, and the culpability of the major aerospace companies in concealing the theft was the last significant legal matter to come to trial. The three companies claimed that they had cooperated with government investigations into the 180 felony fraud violations and were not liable for the actions of the rogue subcontractor.(Associated Press, Government Sues Three Companies, Including Boeing North American, over Space Shuttle Program Fraud, 12 January 2000.)
In the wake of the failure of the Mars Polar Lander Mission, an independent assessment team appointed by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin assembled for the first time to begin a review of NASAs approach to the exploration of Mars. The 16-member team included aeronautics experts from NASA, aerospace industries, the U.S. Air Force, and academia. Although NASA officials held out hope that Lander would eventually respond to signals from Earth, Goldin tasked the team with evaluating NASAs successful and unsuccessful missions to Mars. The independent investigation continued NASAs pattern of scrutinizing all failures to improve its proficiency in the exploration of space.
The Love Bug computer virus infected the computer system of NASA, along with those of the Pentagon, the CIA, Microsoft Corporation, Ford Motor Company, and other major business and government offices. Considered one of the most damaging and costly computer viruses in history, Love Bug spread primarily through e-mail messages, corrupting files on millions of computers. Four of NASAs 10 space centers suffered from the attack, causing both Johnson Space Center (JSC) and Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to shut down e-mail and other communication between computers.(Los Angeles Times, Fast Moving Virus Hits Computers Worldwide, 5 May 2000.)
Responding to a 25 January 2000 article in the New York Times, alleging that grants in the mid- 1990s had benefited the Russian civilian agency Biopreparat, NASAs Office of Inspector General published a report stating that NASA had not followed the U.S. Department of States guidelines for administering biotechnology grants to Russia, thereby inadvertently funding germ- warfare laboratories. The Russian government owned 51 percent of Biopreparat, the organization that had conducted most of the Soviet Unions biological warfare research since the 1970s. At the time of the articles publication, Biopreparat was continuing to research pathogens that had been included in the Soviet biological warfare program. The Inspector General found that almost three-fourths of US$1.68 million in NASA grants intended for space biotechnology work found its way to institutions that had been affiliated with Russias biological warfare program. Therefore, the Inspector General asserted that NASA had not followed the Department of States guidelines requiring NASA to regularly visit and participate in the research it was funding at Russian institutes that had been part of the Soviet biological warfare program. NASA agreed with the Inspector Generals sole recommendation: to practice invasive collaboration in the future, when funding biotechnology research in countries with known or suspected biological weapons programs.(NASA Office of Inspector General, NASA Oversight of Russian Biotechnology Research 19941997 (NASA report no. G-00-07, Washington, DC, 13 October 2000), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-00- 007.pdf (accessed 8 April 2008); Frank Morring Jr., NASA Seen Funding Russian Germ-Warfare Labs Through Lax Oversight, Aerospace Daily, 18 October 2000.)
At a ceremony at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs, Colorado, U.S. Air Force General Ralph E. Eberhart succeeded General Richard B. Myers as the nations top military space official, overseeing the U.S. Space Command, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, and the North American Aerospace Defense Command, in addition to thousands of troops and more than 100 satellites. Eberhart took over the U.S. space operations post after having led the Air Forces Air Combat Command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.(Tom Breen, U.S. Gets New Military Space Chief, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 February 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending the 100th mission of the Shuttle program. Poor weather conditions had prevented the Shuttles scheduled landing in Florida on 22 October. Edwards had opened as a backup site on 23 October, but wind and rainy weather had prevented a landing at either site until 24 October. The landing was the first Shuttle landing at Edwards since poor weather had prevented a Shuttle landing in Florida in March 1996. In the early years of the program, Shuttles had typically landed at Edwards Air Force Base, but later, both launches and landings became the functions of KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida.(Washington Times, Shuttle Lands at Edwards for First Time since 1996: Marks 100th Mission of U.S. Program, 25 October 2000; Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, Discovery Lands in California, 25 October 2000.)
NASA released a comprehensive new study, which found that the levels of ozone in the Arctic stratosphere were declining rapidly. In some parts of the stratosphere, the atmosphere had lost 60 percent of its ozone over the course of one year. The report, compiled by hundreds of European and American scientists, also demonstrated that changes in the global climate (primarily global warming) threatened to delay the recovery of the ozone layer. The scientists were optimistic that the ozone layer would recover eventually, but perhaps not until the mid-21st century. The study had cost NASA more than US$20 million, and the European scientists contributed US$10 million. The researchers had gathered data using satellites, airplanes, and hundreds of weather balloons.(Knight-Ridder News Service, Thinning Ozone over Arctic Raises Concerns, 6 April 2000; William K. Stevens, New Survey Shows Growing Loss of Arctic Atmospheres Ozone, New York Times, 6 April 2000.)
billion years old, astronomers expressed their excitement that the benchmark discovery would enable them to observe the universe in its formative stages.(Associated Press, Quasar Discovered by Student May Be Most Distant Ever Seen, 15 April 2000; Kevin Coughlin, Young Princeton Expert Finds Piece of a Fledgling Universe, Star-Ledger (Newark, NJ), 14 April 2000; Washington Post, Most Distant Object Observed, 17 April 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle programs history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crewincluding toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipmentand installing the stations toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully, 20 September 2000.)
The American Museum of Natural Historys new Hayden Planetarium, which had used information gathered from NASA and the European Space Agency to compile a database containing billions of stars, opened to the public. From 1935 to 1997, the New York City museum had hosted thousands of visitors annually with a less elaborate planetarium. The new planetarium was only one part of the sparkling US$210 million Rose Center for Earth and Space, which museum curator Michael M. Shara hoped would inspire future scientists. The facility, resembling a spacecraft on the outside, featured informative programming hosted by celebrities, such as actors Tom Hanks and Jodie Foster. As they walked through the new facility, visitors could observe displays demonstrating how scientists believed the universe had evolved over a period of 13 billion years.(Associated Press, Museum Unveils Planetarium for the 21 Century, 2 February 2000.)
NASA dedicated a new aerospace laboratory at Anne Beers Elementary School in Washington, DC, featuring a simulated Shuttle cockpit and Mission Control Center. NASA had named the facility, designed to encourage student interest in space exploration, for U.S. Representative Louis Stokes (D-OH), who had proposed legislation to fund the endeavor in 1998. NASAs GRC and Goddard Space Flight Center had worked with the Orchard Glenn School of Cleveland, Ohio, and the University of the District of Columbia to construct the innovative facility.(NASA, Aerospace Laboratory Encourages Students To Reach for the Stars with NASA Help, news release m00-051, 15 March 2000.)
As a part of its Celebrate the Century program, the U.S. Postal Service unveiled a stamp commemorating the Space Shuttle Program. The stamp with the Shuttles image joined 12 other stamps with images recalling significant American memories of the past century, such as video games, the fall of the Berlin Wall, personal computers, and Cabbage Patch Dolls. The Space Shuttle stamp was part of the celebration of the 1980s portion of the millennium. Kennedy Space Center Director Roy D. Bridges Jr. issued a statement thanking the Postal Service for the honor.(NASA, Space Shuttle Program Joins American Icons in Commemorative Stamp Collection, news release 00- 12, 12 January 2000.)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the worlds most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station, Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezdas living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crews radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares, Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
NASAs Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler announced that NASA had decided to send two large scientific rovers to Mars in 2003, rather than a single craft. The new plan called for the two craft to launch within weeks of each other, reaching Mars in January 2004 after their respective seven and one-half-month-long journeys. The two 300-pound (136- kilogram) rovers, exact duplicates of each other and similar to the highly successful Sojourner rover of 1997, would head to different locations on Mars. Mars Program Director G. Scott Hubbard explained that NASA had undertaken an extensive study of the two-rover option, weighing the excellent launch opportunity in 2003 against resource requirements and schedule constraints. The study teams concluded that it would be possible to successfully develop and launch identical packages, and that the new plan would not only double NASAs scientific return but also add resiliency and robustness to the Mars exploration program. Although NASA had yet to select the two landing sites, Mars Program Scientist James B. Garvin suggested that possible locations included those with evidence of the existence of water in the past. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Principal Investigator for the rovers Athena science package, explained that the goal of each rover would be to learn about ancient water and climate conditions on Mars. Each craft would operate as a robotic field geologist, reading the geological record at its landing site to discover what conditions had formed the local rocks and soils.(NASA, NASA Plans To Send Rover Twins to Mars in 2003, news release 00-124, 10 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-124.txt (accessed 7 May 2008).)
Following a 24-hour delay caused by a computer anomaly, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) successfully launched the Lockheed Martinbuilt, NOAAL spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base, aboard a Titan II rocket. Ground controllers confirmed that the craft had deployed its solar array and verified a power-positive condition. NASA and NOAA had designed the satellite, the second in a series of five polar-orbiting spacecraft, to collect meteorological data and to transmit the information to users worldwide. NOAAs National Weather Service planned to use the crafts data for long-range weather and climate forecasts. Although NASA had managed the project of building and launching the satellite, it intended to transfer operational control to NOAA 10 days following the launch.(NOAA, NOAA-L Weather Satellite Successfully Launched, news release 2000-069, 21 September 2000, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2000/sep00/noaa00069.html (accessed 29 April 2008); Associated Press, Weather Satellite Launched After Delay, 21 September 2000.)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASAs JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Centers goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSCs Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director, news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richardslaunched from NASAs KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helmswould replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttles 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a moving van for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew, news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station, New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew, 8 March 2001; Reuters, USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission, 8 March 2001.)
NASA launched the Genesis solar research spacecraft from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Genesis would collect samples of solar wind to assist scientists in studies of the formation of Earths solar system. Scientists believed that the plasma in solar wind might contain material similar to or identical with the material that formed the solar system. The 633-kilogram (1,400-pound) spacecraft was equipped with four instruments: a wide-angle ion collector, a concentrated ion collector, an ion spectrometer, and an electron spectrometer. Donald S. Burnett of California Institute of Technology was Principal Investigator and Project Scientist for Genesis.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574, 1 September 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx574.html (accessed 7 November 2008); NASA JPL, Genesis, Search for Origins: Why Study the Sun? http://genesismission.jpl.nasa.gov/gm2/science/solarwind.htm (accessed 7 November 2008).)
Wallace D. Hayes, an aeronautical engineer and longtime Princeton University professor, died at age 82 after a long battle with Parkinsons disease. His colleagues referred to Hayes as a giant in his field, Hayes had helped design the first planes that could safely break the sound barrier. Hayess 1959 book Hypersonic Flow Theory had outlined the scientific principles behind hypersonic flight, as well as the necessary technology to accomplish it. Although decades passed before his theories produced functional aircraft, many consider Hayes the father of high-speed flight. According to Robert Probstein, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Every supersonic aircraft, in my opinion, owes to him their design. Hayes had worked with NASA and a handful of elite American universities during his stellar career. In his association with NASA, he had worked to limit sonic booms from supersonic jets, an achievement that enabled supersonic jets to travel freely over populated areas.(Mark Mueller, Aerospace Pioneer Wallace Hayes DiesObituary, Star-Ledger (Newark, NJ), 11 March 2001. 29 Vladimir Isachenkov, Russia to Insure Mir Descent Negotiating $200 Million Spacecraft Policy, Chicago Sun- Times, 7 March 2001.)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, NASA scientists Patricia T. Boyd and Alan P. Smale, both working at NASAs GSFC, announced that they had uncovered a predictable mathematical pattern governing the release of x-ray light from binary star systems. Boyd and Smale had tracked the emission of x-rays from three binary star systems over a period of several years, determining that the number of days between the low points of emission in each binary system was always based on multiples of a single constant number. The discovery countered the common perception among scientists that flares and bursts happen completely at random, suggesting that a repeatable process occurs when swirling matter pours into a black hole, thereby creating an emission. According to Smale, the ongoing challenge would be to combine this knowledge of a pattern, while still considering the many random factors. The interplay between periodic and random components in these systems is a puzzle, Smale concluded.(NASA, Method Uncovered in Madness of Black Hole and Neutron Star Eruptions, news release 01-111, 5 June 2001.)
Presiding over the launch of a Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite, Major Nina M. Armagno became the first female launch director at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Armagno assumed responsibility for a 400-person crew and for making the final decision about whether to proceed with launch plans.(Kelly Young, First Woman Directs Launch, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
Arthur F. Davidsen, an astrophysicist who had helped found the Space Telescope Science Institute at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, died at age 57. Davidsen had served for many years as a professor of physics and astronomy at Johns Hopkins, focusing much of his research on the missing mass or dark matter of the universe. His findings had led to the development of the theory that, because of the reflecting light of other bodies, we are able to observe only about 1 percent of the universes matter. Davidsens work indicated that, although the remaining matter exists, it remains hidden from us. Not only had Davidsen led his colleagues in establishing the Space Telescope Science Institute, but he had also encouraged the Institute to participate in operating the HST. In his later years, Davidsen had even begun planning for the instrument that would eventually supplant the HST as the worlds foremost astronomical tool. Davidsen had trained at Princeton University and at the University of California at Berkeley. In 1979 he had won the American Astronomical Societys Helen B. Warner Prize for his work using a rocket to obtain the first ultraviolet spectrum of a quasar.(Martin Weil, Hopkins Astrophysicist Arthur Davidsen Dies, Washington Post, 22 July 2001; Los Angeles Times, Obituaries: Arthur Davidsen; Astrophysicist Led Work To Build Knowledge of Universe, 23 July 2001. 88 NASA, NASA Celebrates 25th Anniversary of Mars Landing, news release 01-143, 17 July 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, to honor the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks, NASA would carry American flags into space and give the flags to survivors of the attacks and families of the victims. NASA called the memorial to the people who had lost their lives in the events of 11 September Flags for Heroes and Families. Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to launch on 29 November 2001, would carry nearly 6,000 flags. NASA would later have the flags mounted on specially designed memorial certificates and would distribute them to survivors and to victims families.(NASA, NASA Administrator Launches Flags for Heroes and Families Campaign, news release 01-195, 11 October 2001.)
A rocket carrying a NASA satellite and other payloads failed to reach orbit. The 91-foot (27.7- meter) Taurus rocket launched at 11:49 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, and within minutes, NASA observed indications of problems with the rocket, including a skewed trajectory near the time of the first-stage separation. The rockets manufacturer Orbital Sciences Corporation was uncertain about the exact details of the launch problem but presumed that the rocket had not reached orbit. The rocket was carrying NASAs ozone-analyzing Quick Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (QuikTOMS) satellite, a private imaging satellite called OrbView-4, and a private payload with the cremated remains of individuals who had paid to have their remains launched into orbit.(Associated Press, Rocket Launch with NASA, Orbital Sciences Payload Goes Awry, Satellites Probably Lost, 21 September 2001.)
Terrorists hijacked four U.S. planes, subsequently crashing them in New York City, Pennsylvania, and Washington, DC. The incidents led to the deaths of nearly 3,000 people. The federal government immediately responded by grounding all commercial air traffic, and NASA closed its major facilities throughout the country.(Mark Carreau, Cautious NASA Shuts Down Johnson Space Center, Other Major Facilities, Houston Chronicle, 12 September 2001; U.S. Department of Transportation, Statement of Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta, news release 93-01, 11 September 2001.)
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics to former NASA scientist Wolfgang Ketterle and two other scientists, Eric A. Cornell and Carl E. Wieman. Ketterle was a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Principal Investigator for NASAs Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) in Washington, DC. The three scientists received the Nobel Prize for their work in discovering a new state of matter called Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC), named after the two physicists who had made the initial theoretical calculations of such matter. BEC consists of atomic particles that all have the same energy and that researchers can oscillate in a controlled manner. Cornell and Wieman had created a pure condensate of rubidium atoms, and Ketterle had independently produced BEC with sodium atoms. However, Ketterles condensates had also enabled further investigation of the new type of matter, because his condensates contained more atoms than those of Cornell and Wieman. In addition, Ketterle had produced other research that further advanced understanding of the phenomenon.(Nobel Foundation, The Nobel Prize in Physics 2001, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/ laureates/2001/press.html (accessed 23 November 2008).)
U.S. Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta allowed privately owned and operated aircraft to use the nations airspace as part of a phased restoration of the national airspace system. However, the Department of Transportation would allow this category of aircraftoften referred to as general aviationto resume flights only if they complied with certain restrictions. For example, general aviation flights would have to operate according to the Instrument Flight Rules, which required certified pilots to operate under direction from air traffic controllers subsequent to filing specific flight plans with the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). In addition, the Department of Transportation would not permit general aviation flights to fly within 25 nautical miles of New York City or Washington, DC.(FAA, Secretary Mineta Re-opens Skies to General Aviation, news release DOT 97-01, 14 September 2001, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsid=5432 (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Lockheed Martin confirmed that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) had decided not to fund the companys development of the X-33 space plane, a possible replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Since 1996, Lockheed Martin had been developing a pilotless prototype of the X- 33, a reusable spacecraft that would be able to launch without shedding fuel tanks or boosters and to land like an airplane. However, the development of lightweight fuel tanks had taken the project off schedule and over budget, and NASA had decided in March 2001 to forego continued funding for the X-33, although it was, reportedly, 75 percent complete. When Lockheed Martin had subsequently attempted to secure another government sponsor for the project, the U.S. Air Force had expressed interest in the project and submitted to the Pentagon a proposal to fund the space plane. However, the DOD had since determined that the project was too costly to undertake.(Michael Cabbage, Air Force Decides Not To Revive Lockheeds X-33 Space Plane, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
For the first time, NASA and the Canadian Space Agency made available the data gathered by the Terra spacecraft, carrying the technologically advanced Measurements of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT) experiment. The data, released at the American Geophysical Union meeting, revealed more clearly than any previous readings the presence of immense clouds of carbon monoxide over Africa and South America. The readings also charted dense air-pollution plumes over Southeast Asia. The MOPITT data pointed to natural factors such as forest fires, as well as human contributors such as industrial pollution, as causes of the increased carbon- monoxide readings. The scientific community greeted the release of the new data, and the promise of more to come, with excitement, because the MOPITT data would be vital in the quest to understand Earths changing climate. According to one researcher who was already mining the MOPITT data for an extensive study, the new data had the potential to improve our understanding of the linkages between air pollution and global environment change.(NASA, NCAR NASA/CSA Monitor Provides Global Air Pollution View from Space, news release 01-102, 30 May 2001.)
A team of European and American astronomers announced that they had obtained the first observations of energy leaving a black hole. The scientists, who had used ESAs XMM-Newton satellite to observe a supermassive black hole in the center of galaxy MCG-63015, had detected an x-ray glow emanating from iron gas that was moving at half the speed of the light that was close to the black hole. The scientists believed that the x-ray glow resulted from friction produced by matter rotating around a black hole before falling into it. Because the black holes gravity is sufficiently intense to wrap magnetic field lines around it, the entwined magnetic fields tighten around the black hole, slowing its rotation, and, as a result, increasing the temperature of the region surrounding the black hole. Observed gravity-stretching particles of light in the iron gas, the scientists had discovered unexpectedly that the total energy output of the gas was too high for only gravity and the descent of matter into the black hole to be providing the power source. The scientists had concluded that an additional power source must be increasing the energy output of the gas to the observed intensity.(NASA, New Energy Source Wrings Power from Black Hole Spin, news release 01-200, 22 October 2001; Jorn Wilms et al., XMM-EPIC Observation of MCG-6-30-15: Direct Evidence for the Extraction of Energy from a Spinning Black Hole, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 328, no. 3 (11 December 2001): L27L31.)
A group of scientists from Stanford University and NASAs GSFC published research providing the first clear evidence of the causes of sunspots. Sunspots are large dark areas on the surface of the Sun that can last for weeks or longer. The scientists had used the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO)a project of NASA and ESAto conduct an acoustic tomography of a large sunspot on 18 June 1998. This technique, much like medical ultrasound diagnostics, had enabled the scientists to conduct subsurface observations of the sunspot, whereas previous research had relied only on surface observations. Researchers had already known that material flows out of sunspots and that the magnetic field below sunspots obstructs the upward flow of energy from the solar interior, thus making the sunspot cooler than its surroundings. However, the SOHO data revealed that material also flows into sunspots, because the cooler material at the sunspots top condenses and flows downward, pulling the surrounding plasma and magnetic field inward with it. This concentration of material leads to further cooling of plasma, which, in turn, flows downward and draws in more plasma in a self-perpetuating cycle. These findings also clarified the previously unexplained attraction of magnetic fields with like polarities in sunspots. This characteristic had puzzled scientists because such magnetic fields generally repel rather than draw towards each other.(Junwei Zhao, Alexander G. Kosovichev, and Thomas L. Duvall Jr., Investigation of Mass Inflows Beneath a Sunspot by Time-Distance Helioseismology, Astrophysical Journal 557, no. 1 (10 August 2001): 384388; NASA, The Suns Dark Secret: How Sunspots Pull Themselves Together, news release 01-216, 6 November 2001.)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASAs global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASAs JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deeres NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASAs Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm, news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
The American geosynchronous relay satellite XM 1, often referred to as Roll, launched into space aboard a Russian Zenit rocket, from a floating launchpad in the Pacific Ocean. The launch of Roll followed on the heels of the March 2001 delivery to space of XM 2, known as Rock. With both Rock and Roll in orbit, XM Satellite Radio became available to subscribing listeners in the United States. The president of the company XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, DC, called Rock and Roll the newest power couple in Washington, DC, declaring that his firm was ready to compete with Sirius Radio for subscribers. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed and built the satellites.(The Boeing Company, Sea Launch on a Mission To Launch XMs Roll Satellite, 1 May 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010501s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571, 1 June 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx571.html (accessed 28 July 2008); Jim Banke, Sea Launch Sends Roll Spacecraft into Orbit for XM Satellite Radio, Space.com, 8 May 2001, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/launches/zenit_launch_010508.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of Viking 1 Landers safe descent to the surface of Mars. The successful mission, marking the first time that humankind had sent a spacecraft to the Red Planet and the first landing of an American probe on another planet, inaugurated a series of research-oriented missions to Mars. In celebrating this banner day in its history, NASA looked forward to new challenges and opportunities for the study of Mars. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin delivered a keynote address, Continuing the QuestCelebrating Viking and Looking to the Future of Mars Exploration, at the National Geographic Societys Grosvenor Auditorium in Washington, DC. Viking 1 Lander had remained on Mars for six years, gathering images and data invaluable for scientists. Following up on the success of the first probe, Viking 2 Lander had arrived on Marss Plain of Utopia in September 1976. The two probes had taken more than 4,500 pictures while slowly crawling over Marss surface. Perhaps as significant as the finds of Viking 1 and 2 on Mars was the fact that the probes did not find any evidence of life on the Red Planet. NASAs Langley Research Center (LaRC) had equipped both probes with biological sensors, setting a precedent for future probes to other planets to continue the search for signs of life outside of Earth. As NASA celebrated the pathbreaking Viking missions, the 2001 Mars Odyssey traveled toward the Red Planet to continue the tradition of exploring Marss hostile but fascinating landscape.
At the American Astronomical Society convention, astronomers Victoria M. Kaspi and Mallory S. E. Roberts of McGill University presented evidence dating a known pulsar to 386 AD. Because scientists consider it quite difficult to determine the age of particular pulsars or of any astronomical body, the scientific community regarded the find as especially significant. The researchers had used NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory to locate the pulsar exactly at the center of a supernova remnant known as G11.2-0.3, which astronomers had already definitively dated. Scientists believed that both the pulsar and the supernova had formed during an explosion in 386 ADan event that early Chinese astronomers had recorded. Astronomers have experienced difficulty tracking and interpreting the patterns of pulsars, because the formations spin and move rapidly. In light of the successful dating, many scientists hoped that the discovery might help them understand how pulsars develop.(NASA, Chandra Links Pulsar to Historic Supernova, news release 01-02, 10 January 2001.)
The New York Times revealed that, in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 11 September, the U.S. government had changed the rules of engagement regarding the circumstances in which the U.S. military could shoot down civilian aircraft. The newspaper had interviewed U.S. Air Force General Ralph E. Eberhart, who had provided some cursory details of the militarys rules of engagement for civilian aircraft. Before 11 September, the DOD had no formal rules concerning military engagement of a hijacked airplane when the flight had originated within the United States. However, on an unnamed date after 11 September, White House officials and the Joint Chiefs of Staff had approved new rules, stipulating that the U.S. military could down an aircraft that presented a security threat, but that the President of the United States or one of four specified U.S. Air Force generals must authorize such an action. The new rules also detailed measures taken by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) and the FAA for better joint surveillance of the nations airspace. Those measures included NORADs positioning of mobile ground radars around the country and a direct telephone line between the two agencies.(Eric Schmitt, Generals Given Power To Order Downing of Jets, New York Times, 27 September 2001.)
1993and to overcome its major management challenges, which GAO and NASAs Office of Inspector General (OIG) had previously identified. The GPRA required each government agency to develop an annual plan, which must include its performance goals, the resources required to achieve them, and the measures it would use to assess its performance. In its examination of NASAs FY 2002 performance plan, GAO had determined that NASA had successfully met its stated goals. NASAs goals for the fiscal year had included expanding commercial development of space and deploying and operating the ISS safely and cost-effectively. However, GAOs report also stated that NASAs performance plan had not explained the reasons that NASA had changed its previous performance goals to those stated in the FY 2002 performance plan. In addition, GAO questioned NASAs measurements of its performance in meeting the stated goals and gave mixed assessments of NASAs performance in the areas of human-capital management and information security. In its response to the report, NASA concurred with GAOs findings but it also defended the explanations and measurements of its performance goals, as outlined in its FY 2002 performance plan.(U.S. General Accounting Office, NASA: Status of Plans for Achieving Key Outcomes and Addressing Major Management Challenges (report no. GAO-02-184, Washington, DC, November 2001), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d02184.pdf (accessed 8 December 2008).)
NASA commemorated the 75th anniversary of the first successful launch of a liquid-fueled rocket. On 26 March 1926, Robert H. Goddard had launched a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long) rocket fueled by gasoline and liquid oxygen. The rocket flew just over 40 feet (12 meters) high using the same technology that would one day launch massive rockets carrying Space Shuttles and other research craft into space. NASA had named Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) after Robert H. Goddard. At the anniversary celebration, NASAs Chief Historian Roger D. Launius called Goddard the forefather of American space exploration: Dr. Goddard was a true visionary, having already visualized flight in outer space by the time he was 21. Goddard had turned 21 in 1903, some 50 years before space exploration began in earnest. Even 75 years after Goddards successful test, NASA continued to use liquid-propulsion systems to launch most of its spacecraft and satellites.(NASA, March 16 Marks 75th Anniversary of First Liquid-Fueled Rocket Launch, news release 01-35, 12 March 2001.)
NASA launched the Jason-1 oceanography satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite launched on the same rocket as the TIMED spacecraft, but the two spacecraft were part of separate missions. Jason-1 belonged to a joint U.S.-French mission to monitor global climate interactions between Earths atmosphere and seas, continuing the mission that the TOPEX/Poseidon spacecraft had begun in 1992. The 500-kilogram (1,100-pound) Jason- 1 weighed about 1/5th of the TOPEX/Poseidon and carried its predecessors main instrumentthe Poseidon 2 altimeteras well as other, more advanced instruments that would provide Jason-1 with improved operational utility.(NASA, NASA/French Ocean-Observing Satellite Set To Soar, news release 01-225, 19 November 2001; NASA JPL, Ocean Surface Topography from Space: MissionsJason-1 Launch,29 July 2008, http://topex- www.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/jason-1-launch.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA launched the Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED) spacecraft on a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The purpose of the mission was to study a region called the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere/Ionosphere (MLTI), located 40 to 110 miles (60 to 180 kilometers) above Earth. The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory had designed the spacecraft to produce the first set of comprehensive, global measurements of the MLTI, a region that scientists had not yet thoroughly analyzed, in which electrical currents surge and auroras create a glow over the northern and southern hemispheres of Earth. TIMED, which launched on the same rocket as the Jason-1 oceanography satellite, was the first in a series of six spacecraft that NASA intended to send to observe the MLTI from a 388-mile (625-kilometer) orbit of Earth. NASAs GSFC would manage the TIMED spacecraft for the Office of Space Science in Washington, DC; the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory would operate the spacecraft for NASA during the mission.
NASA announced that its X-40A aircraft, built by the Boeing Company and on loan from the U.S. Air Force, had successfully passed a test flight, giving the X-37 program a major boost. NASA had designed the X-37, a reusable craft that could launch into space and return safely, for use in testing NASA technologies. To test the flight-control system planned for the X-37, an Army Chinook helicopter lifted the X-40A aircraft to 15,000 feet (4,570 meters) and then released it to a safe landing. NASAs director of the X-37 program called the successful test, a cause for celebration, saying that incremental tests on prototype airplanes would ultimately make the X-37 program both cost-efficient and successful. Scientists hailed the safe landing of the X-40A as a triumph of cooperation among the U.S. military, NASA, and the Boeing Company, with each of the three playing a vital role in the development of the successful craft.(NASA, Successful X-40A Test Flight Gives Major Boost to NASAs X-37 Program, news release 01-51, 21 March 2001; M2 Presswire, X-40A Flight Test Successful; Major Milestone in X037 Space Plane Project, 15 March 2001.)
The ISS Partnership agreed to allow space tourist Dennis A. Tito to travel to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TM-32, scheduled to launch at the end of April. The agreement among the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States followed months of disagreement regarding the safety and propriety of allowing the wealthy American businessman to purchase passage into space for US$20 million. Without conferring with NASA or with other members of the ISS Partnership, the Russian Space Agency had made an agreement with Tito permitting him to take a place on Russias Soyuz spacecraft. NASA had protested against including an individual who was not a trained astronaut on the spaceflight at such an early point in the ISSs development. After Russia had reached the agreement with Tito, he had undergone months of training. The ISS Partnership required Tito to sign a waiver absolving NASA of any liability for his safety and required him to promise that he would pay for anything he damaged. The ISS Partnership also announced plans to formalize the criteria for future visits to the station.(Warren E. Leary, Deal Reported in Long-Running Dispute on Putting Tourist on Space Station, New York Times, 21 April 2000; NASA, International Space Station Partnership Grants Flight Exemption for Dennis Tito, news release 01-83, 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASA Continues To Resist Visit by First Tourist, 15 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, Financiers Spaceflight Gets Final Clearance, Washington Post, 25 April 2001.)
Crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour and the ISS held a brief ceremony to mark the three-month anniversary of the 11 September terrorist attacks. The tribute included playing both the Russian and U.S. national anthems in the Space Shuttle and at ISS Mission Control Centers at NASAs JSC in Houston. Moreover, Endeavour carried U.S. flags and Marine Corps flags that had flown at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the Pennsylvania State Capitol; shields and patches worn by New York City police officers; a New York Fire Department flag; and a poster with pictures of the firefighters who had died in the attacks. Also aboard the Shuttle were 6,000 American flags, which Endeavour would return to Earth, and NASA would distribute to the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks and their families.(NASA, Shuttle, Station Crewmembers To Honor September 11 Victims, news release N01-74, 10 December 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98/ISS-5A lifted off from NASAs Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the most expensive and crucial component of the ISSthe United Statesbuilt Destiny science laboratory. Mark Stephenson of the Boeing Company, which had built the US$1.4 billion research module, called the vessel the crown jewel of the ISS. NASA had set high stakes on the Destiny laboratory, which was so expensive and complicated to build, that NASA could not afford to assemble a backup module. Therefore, any problem in the transport and connection of the Destiny module would set back the ISS several years. NASA had delayed Atlantiss mission for three weeks when engineers discovered evidence that faulty wiring might compromise the Shuttles safety. The vital mission brought the ISS closer to becoming the permanent and highly functional research station that NASA and the international space community had long awaited. The Destiny laboratory measured 28 feet (9 meters) long, weighed more than 30,000 pounds (13,600 kilograms), and held 13 computers. NASA expected to control the ISS using the computers and communications equipment built into Destiny. Because of the Space Shuttles cargo, some officials speculated that Atlantiss mission was the most important for NASAs research agenda ever undertaken. One NASA spokesperson called the Destiny module the cornerstone for space-based research aboard the orbiting platform. The STS-98 crew consisted of Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell; Pilot Mark L. Polansky; and Mission Specialists Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Thomas D. Jones, and Marsha S. Ivins.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-98, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-98.html (accessed 2 February 2009); William Harwood, Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Shuttle Flight No. 102 Will Transport $1.4 Billion Lab Module, Washington Post, 8 February 2001; Kelly Young, Atlantis To Deliver Destiny, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 2001; Associated Press, Shuttle Totes Space Stations Crown Jewel, 8 February 2001; Associated Press, Countdown Begins for Launch of NASA Lab, 5 February 2001; NASA, Atlantis Set To Deliver International Space Stations Destiny, news release 01-16, 5 February 2001.)
At the American Physical Society Spring Meeting, a team of cosmologists announced that they had discovered the music of creation, using an extremely sensitive microwave telescope. The researchers presented their discovery of the sound waves that had rippled through the universe some 14 billion years ago. The team of the Balloon Observation of Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics (BOOMERANG) project had gathered the data from a telescope aboard a balloon, which circumnavigated Antarctica at an altitude of 23 miles (37 kilometers). According to Team Leader Paolo deBernardis, the beginning of the universe left behind a residue of light and sound, providing scientists with hints about the details of the Big Bang: The early universe is full of sound waves compressing and rarefying matter and light, much like sound waves compress and rarefy air inside a flute or trumpet. The BOOMERANG teams findings provided a new means of examining the early universe and new evidence to use in calculating how it changed. Scientists praised the discoveries as stunning and humbling evidence that cosmologists were using the correct model to describe the early universe.(NASA, New Boomerang Findings Reveal Music of the Early Universe, news release 01-87, 29 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, Astronomy Peers into Face of Infant Universe, Washington Post, 30 April 2001.)
Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 572, 1 July 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx572.html (accessed 4 August 2008). The mission called for the astronauts to attach the new American-made Joint Airlock to the ISS and to conduct important repairs to the station during three separate spacewalks. The design of the new airlock permitted the ISS crew access to and from space, wearing either Russian or American spacesuits. During the days leading up to the launch, Mission Specialist Michael L. Gernhardt explained: The term Joint Airlock means that its applicable to both the U.S. [space]suit, the EMU [Extravehicular Mobility Unit], and to the Russian suit, the Orlan suit. The main objectives of our flight are to install four High Pressure Gas Tanksthat would be two oxygen, two nitrogento activate and check out the airlock and then to make the first spacewalk from the Joint Airlock and demonstrate the viability of the whole process and sort of usher in the space station era of EVA.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573, 1 August 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx573.html (accessed 11 August 2008); William Harwood, Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Crew To Install Airlock, Expanding Capabilities, Washington Post, 13 July 2001; NASA, NASA Prepares To Open a New Doorway to Space, news release 01-138, 9 July 2001.)
Russian cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS, the first time ISS crew had walked in space without a Shuttle present. Two tethers attached each cosmonaut to the ISS as the pair departed and reentered the station through the 16- foot (4.9-meter) Russian module Pirs, added to the ISS in September 2001. During the 5-hour spacewalk, the two cosmonauts hooked up a 40-foot (12.2-meter) crane, a ladder, handrails, and other equipment to the exterior of the ISS. American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. monitored the two cosmonauts work from inside the station, and Mission Control Center in Moscow supervised the spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn, Cosmonauts Work Outside on Station; Spacewalk from New Module Is First Without Shuttle Present, Washington Post, 9 October 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California after three days of bad weather had prevented its planned landing at NASAs KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew received a congratulatory call from President George W. Bush, praising their successful 13- day mission. By the time that Atlantis and its crew departed the ISS, the Shuttle had significantly boosted the space stations orbit, leaving the ISS orbiting at about 237 miles (381 kilometers) above Earth. While attached to the space station, Atlantis had used a series of engine bursts to push the ISS approximately 16 miles (26 kilometers) higher than its previous position. Shuttle crew had also unloaded food and supplies, including an enormous Russian carbon-dioxide removal unit, for the use of the three-person ISS crew during their visit.(Associated Press, Shuttle Back on Earth After Dismal Three Days, 21 February 2001; Associated Press, Atlantis Leaves Space Station in a Higher Orbit, 16 February 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, when wind and rain caused the diversion of the Shuttle and its seven-person crew from its planned landing at NASAs KSC in Florida. The completed mission had been unique, with NASA deliberately paring down its research goals because of the anticipated arrival during Endeavours stay at the ISS of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft carrying space tourist Dennis A. Tito. Shuttle Commander Kent V. Rominger greeted the press upon landing, commenting on the crews installation of the ISSs robotic arm and the computer problems that had plagued the space station during the visit. Rominger explained that he and the other astronauts had worked with 500 computer experts on the ground to achieve partial restoration of the ISSs hard drives and software applications.(Warren E. Leary, As Shuttle Returns to Earth, Tourist Adjusts to Space Station, New York Times, 2 May 2001; Associated Press, Space Shuttle Diverted to California Due to Bad Weather, 1 May 2001; Mark Carreau, Endeavour Lands in Clear California/Cloud Hangs Over Russia Relations, Houston Chronicle, 2 May 2001.)
Two members of the ISS crew performed a spacewalk to complete installation of the Russian Pirs docking compartment. During the 5-hour spacewalk, American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir N. Dezhurov connected communications cables between the Pirs module and the adjoining crew-habitation and command module. The pair also tested an external construction crane and photographed an askew solar array attached to the crew-habitation module, so that ground-based experts in Russia could determine whether the array would require repair in the future.
Russian cosmonauts training at NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, staged a one-day walkout to protest NASAs rejection of millionaire Dennis A. Tito as a member of the Russian crew that would travel aboard the Soyuz to the ISS on 30 April. Space enthusiast Dennis Tito had paid the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency a reported US$20 million to make the trip. Russias agreement with the untrained Tito had sparked debate over the proper use of the ISS and over so-called space tourism. Talgat A. Musabayev, the Kazakh cosmonaut who was to command Titos crew, removed his men from the training program in Houston after learning that NASA would not allow Tito to participate in the exercises. NASA argued that allowing a person who had not trained as an astronaut to travel to space would pose safety risks, especially since the ISS remained a work-in-progress. Russian officials contended that they had the right to transport aboard their spacecraft any person they deemed fit for the mission. Both sides pledged to find a resolution to the disagreement.(Kathy Sawyer, Space Tourism Sparks U.S.-Russian Standoff, Washington Post, 20 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, NASA Opposing Russian Plan for Tourist on Space Station, New York Times, 21 March 2001; Marcia Dunn, Cosmonauts to NASA: Millionaire Comrade Trains with Us or Nobody Trains, 20 March 2001.)
The United States, Russia, and other partners and sponsoring agencies of the ISS released a nine- page document, Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers, defining the partners agreed-upon procedures for staffing the ISS. Among the acceptable categories of ISS crew members, the international partners included nonprofessional spaceflight participants, such as American space tourist Dennis A. Tito, who had reportedly paid the Russian Space Agency US$12 to US$20 million to visit the ISS. Titos visit had created tension among ISS partners, who hoped that the new agreement would clarify the selection criteria for individuals traveling to the ISS, while continuing to enable space programs to raise funds from nonprofessional space travelers.(ESA, Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers; William Harwood, NASA Approves Space Visitor Rules, Washington Post, 1 February 2002; Mark Carreau, New NASA Policy Opens the Way for More People To Go into Space, Houston Chronicle, 1 February 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle, news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post, 16 May 2002.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Frederick D. Gregory as NASAs Deputy Administrator, making Gregory the first African American to serve as NASAs second-in-command. Before becoming Deputy Administrator, Gregory had served as NASAs Associate Administrator for Space Flight from December 2001 to August 2002 and as Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance from June 1992 to December 2001. In addition, Gregory had been an astronaut on three Shuttle missions and had served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years.(Kelly Young, Senate Names New NASA Official, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 August 2002; NASA, NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory, http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/gregory_bio.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
Two astronauts from Space Shuttle Endeavour undertook an extravehicular activity (EVA) to repair the ISSs robotic arm, Canadarm2. American astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz and French astronaut Philippe Perrin replaced one of seven joints on the US$600 million, Canadian- built robotic arm, which was critical to the continued construction of the ISS. To repair Canadarm2, the astronauts first removed its 450-pound (205-kilogram), hand-like, latching-end effector (LEE); loosened six bolts connecting the problematic wrist roll joint to the arm; and disconnected power, data, and video lines. They then installed the replacement joint, tightened the bolts to secure the new joint to the arm, restored the power and other lines, and reaffixed the LEE. Subsequent tests of the Canadarm2 confirmed the success of the repairs. The EVA, lasting 7 hours and 17 minutes, was the third for Mission STS-111.(William Harwood, Spacewalkers Continue Space Station Repairs; Joint on Robotic Arm Is Replaced, Washington Post, 14 June 2002; NASA JSC, STS-111, Mission Control Center Status Report no. 18, 13 June 2002, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts111/STS-111-18.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:58 p.m. (EDT), ending a mission of 13 days, 20 hours, and 35 minutes. During STS-111, the crew had used the ISSs robotic arm, Canadarm2, to move the MBS from Endeavour to the Mobile Transporter (MT) on the ISSs Destiny laboratory module. In addition, crew members Franklin R. Chang- Diaz and Philippe Perrin had performed three EVAs lasting a total of 19 hours and 31 minutes. During the first EVA, the astronauts had installed a Power and Data Grapple Fixture to the ISSs P6 Truss, the sixth truss segment on the port side of the ISSs Integrated Truss Structure, and moved six micrometeoroid debris shields from the Shuttle to a portion of the ISS called the PMA-1 (Pressurized Mating Adapter-One) for eventual installation on the Russian-made Zvezda service module. During the second spacewalk, the crew had connected data, power, and video cables between the MT rail car and the MBS; positioned the Payload Orbital Replacement Unit Accommodation (POA) on the MBS; and completed the installation of the MBS platform. In the final EVA, Chang-Diaz and Perrin had performed repairs on the ISSs Canadarm2, restoring the instrument to full operational status. In addition, STS-111 had returned the members of Expedition 4Daniel E. Bursch, Yuri I. Onufrienko, and Carl W. Walzto Earth.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-111, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-111.html (accessed 18 August 2008); NASA, Continuing the Human Presence in Space: STS-111, press kit, 16 May 2001, 2429, http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/history/shuttle_pk/ pk/Flight_110_STS- 111_Press_Kit.pdf (accessed 2 January 2009).)
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, NASAs Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS), http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
The GAO submitted a report to Congress examining the reasons for the increasing costs of the ISS and the potential effects of those costs on the stations ability to conduct scientific research. The report stated that changes in the program, scheduling delays, and other issues had substantially increased the programs costs, and that NASAs management had not taken steps to address cost growth. Consequently, the ISSs scientific research capabilities had diminished, raising concerns among the stations international partners. Although GAO made no formal recommendations, it cited NASAs own newly established management and cost-estimation reforms, noted challenges NASA faced in implementing those reforms, and suggested that NASA develop a credible budget to complete the ISS. NASA formally responded that the report reasonably portrayed the problems with the ISS, as well as NASAs efforts to address them.(U.S. General Accounting Office, Space Station: Actions Under Way To Manage Cost, But Significant Challenges Remain (report no. GAO-02-735, Washington, DC, 17 July 2002), www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO- 02-735 (accessed 26 September 2008).)
The Earth observation satellite Aqua launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite Aqua was a component of the Earth Observing System (EOS), which also included the Terra satellite launched in December 1999. Aquas primary purpose was to acquire information about the effects of climate change on the water cycle. The satellite would also collect data to help scientists examine biological systems dependent upon water and improve long-term forecasts of weather and climate. Brazil, Japan, and the United States planned for their joint project Aqua to continue for six years.(NASA JPL, Aqua Launched To Study Earths Water Cycle, news release, 4 May 2002; Warren E. Leary, NASA To View Interaction of Earths Water and Climate, New York Times, 30 April 2002.)
The GAO submitted a report to the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics on NASAs progress toward developing a reusable launch vehicle (RLV), under the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) program, to replace the Space Shuttle. According to GAO, NASA needed to complete ongoing reassessment of its overall space transportation plans and of the future of the ISS. NASA also needed to determine whether it would develop the SLI program in cooperation with the DOD. To address these concerns, GAO recommended that NASA reassess the schedule for defining the SLIs requirements and reach a consensus with the DOD on the programs priorities and objectives. The report also recommended that NASA finalize the SLIs basic requirements before implementing management controls on the programs costs and risks. In its response, NASA concurred with GAOs recommendations and outlined plans to implement them.(U.S. General Accounting Office, Space Transportation: Challenges Facing NASAs Space Launch Initiative (report no. GAO-02-1020, Washington, DC, 17 September 2002), http://www.gao.gov/ new.items/d021020.pdf (accessed 10 October 2008).)
The American Association for the Advancement of Science named Senior Research Scientist David Halpern of NASAs JPL a fellow, in recognition of his work on air-sea interactions in tropical oceans and on satellite measurements of ocean-surface quantities.(NASA JPL, JPL Researcher Honored by Largest Scientific Discovery, news release, 28 February 2002.)
The Office of Space Flight at NASA Headquarters decided that Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California would no longer perform major modifications to Space Shuttle orbiters. Instead, NASAs KSC, already responsible for preparing the Shuttles for launching, would also provide the modifications. The Palmdale facility had served as the manufacturing site for all orbiters since the Space Shuttle programs inception, as well as providing periodic maintenance and safety upgrades. Based on cost and risk assessments, the Office of Space Flight had determined that maintaining two modification facilities for four Shuttle orbiters was no longer financially feasible, and that performing such work at KSC would minimize associated costs and risks. The change was part of NASAs effort to absorb President George W. Bushs proposed budget cuts. Because it overhauled one of the four Shuttle orbiters every two to three years, NASA estimated that transferring this work to KSC would save approximately US$30 million per overhaul.(NASA, Kennedy Space Center To Perform Shuttle Modifications, news release 02-22, 5 February 2002; Mark Carreau, NASA To Overhaul Shuttles in Florida, Houston Chronicle, 6 February 2002.)
A combined U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin crew engaged in the first flight of a C-5 Galaxy modified under the Avionics Modernization Program (AMP). AMP was the first phase of an overall C-5 modernization program to upgrade the planes communications, navigation, and air-traffic-control surveillance equipment. The programs objectives were to improve the C-5s reliability and to satisfy emerging air-traffic-management requirements, so that the C-5 would be able to operate in global airspace without restrictions. During the 5-hour test flight, the crew demonstrated the crafts basic flying qualities and navigational system, verified new primary flight displays, and engaged in initial testing of stability-augmentation operations. Lockheed Martin planned to introduce additional components of the new, automatic flight-control system and the Global Air Traffic Managementcompliant systems. After completing installation of the AMP components, Lockheed Martin planned to commence the second phase of the C-5 modernization, known as the Reliability Enhancement and Re-engining Program.(Lockheed Martin, Initial C-5 Upgraded Under the Avionics Modernization Program Makes Its First Flight, news release, 23 December 2002, http: //www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/ InitialC5UpgradedUnderAvionicsModer.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Knight and Christopher Bolkcom, Strategic Airlift Modernization: Analysis of C-5 Modernization and C-17 Acquisition Issues, (report, Congressional Research Service, Washington, DC, 15 April 2008), CRS-4CRS-5.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASAs budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASAs accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASAs FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASAs lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASAs 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASAs accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAOs auditing methodology rather than in NASAs system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, NASA Space Station Cost Limits (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
The United States launched the fifth Milstar satellite on a Titan 4B-Centaur from Cape Canaveral, Florida, completing a fleet of communications satellites designed to provide government leaders and military troops with jam-resistant transmission nearly anywhere on Earth.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002 Activities (Washington, DC, 2002), p. 114, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2002.pdf (accessed 29 July 2002); Jesco von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002: The Year in Review, NASA, http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2002/yearinrev/ 02YearReview.html (accessed 23 July 2002).)
Boeing successfully launched its first Delta 4 rocket, which the U.S. Air Force would use in 2003 in the EELV program. The purpose of the EELV program was to develop reliable and cost- efficient launch capabilities for commercial and government payloads. The launch occurred at 5:39 p.m. (EST) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Delta 4, a Medium+ configuration of Boeings five-member Delta 4 family of rockets, deployed Eutelsats (European Telecommunications Satellite Organizations) commercial telecommunications satellite W5 into geosynchronous transfer orbit. During the next scheduled Delta 4 launchthe first mission for the EELV programthe Air Force planned to use a Delta 4 Medium rocket to deploy the DSCS III A3 satellite for the Defense Satellite Communication System.(The Boeing Company, Successful First Launch for Boeing Delta IV, news release, 20 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021120s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U. S. Air Force, U.S. Air Force Fact Sheet: Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle, http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/space/factsheets/eelv.htm (accessed 28 October 2008).)
NOAAs Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES), NOAA-M, launched on a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA intended the satellite, which was renamed NOAA-17 upon reaching orbit, to collect meteorological data to improve weather forecasting. The satellite was the third in a series of five satellites collectively referred to as the POES system. NOAA planned to transmit the satellites data to its National Weather Service, as well as to organizations in other countries. Lockheed Martin Space Systems had built and launched the satellite for NOAA, with NASAs GSFC managing the project and providing technical guidance.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 46; NOAA, NOAA-M Environmental Satellite Successfully Launched, 24 June 2002, http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories/s929.htm (accessed 18 August 2008); NOAA, Polar Operation Environmental Satellite: Polar Orbiting Satellites, http://www.oso.noaa.gov/poes/ (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. became the eighth Director of NASAs JSC, replacing Acting Director Roy S. Estess, who resumed his position as Director of NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC). Before assuming the post, Howell had worked for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) administering its safety, reliability, and quality-assurance contract with NASA, to provide safety and mission assurance for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs.(NASA JSC, Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. Named as Johnson Space Center Director, news release J02-17, 12 February 2002.)
NASA announced the assignment of three crew members to begin training for the ninth expedition to the ISS. The three were Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. NASA assigned American astronaut Daniel M. Tani to serve as backup for his fellow compatriot Fincke and selected cosmonauts Alexander F. Poleschuk and Roman Y. Romanenko to serve as backups for fellow Russians Kononenko and Padalka.(NASA, Astronauts Assigned for Space Station Expedition Training, news release 02-55, 18 March 2002.)
Scientists from California Institute of Technology announced that they had used NASAs HST to measure the true size of an orbiting, planet-like body beyond Pluto. The sphere was the most distant object that a telescope had measured within Earths solar system. Like its neighbor Pluto, the object, which is nearly 4 billion miles (6.4 billion kilometers) from Earth, lies in the Kuiper Belt, an icy debris field that extends 7 billion miles (11.3 billion kilometers) beyond the orbit of Neptune. Using the HST, scientists Michael E. Brown and Chadwick A. Trujillo were able to determine several properties of the sphere, including its diameter of 780 miles (1,250 kilometers). Although too small to be a planet, the sphere, which Brown and Trujillo named Quaoarafter a creation deity of the Native American Tongva peoplehas planet-like traits that Pluto lacks. For example, Brown and Trujillo found that Quaoar has a circular orbit around the Sun and is in the same plane as the other planets in Earths solar system. Brown and Trujillo announced their findings at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Societys Division for Planetary Sciences.(NASA, Hubble Spots an Icy World Far Beyond Pluto, news release 02-190, 7 October 2002; Usha Lee McFarling, Plutos Not So Alone Out There, It Appears, Los Angeles Times, 8 October 2002.)
NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced that they had agreed with a study teams recommendation that NASA and the Air Force continue to assess the construction of a joint reusable launch vehicle (RLV) demonstrator. After spending 120 days examining the two organizations shared requirements and their technologies to access space, the teams most critical recommendation had been that NASA and the Air Force should cooperate in assessing the construction of an RLV demonstrator for their joint operations. In addition, the study team had recommended that engineers eventually develop the demonstrator into a crew-operated vehicle for NASA and a cargo vehicle for the Air Force. NASA and the Air Force also agreed that experienced Air Force personnel should continue to work with NASA in joint study efforts, to refine their concepts of operations, requirements, and figures of merit, and to design reference missions.(NASA, NASA and Air Force Forge Ahead with Reusable Launch Technology, news release 02-87, 21 May 2002.)
NASA announced the release of the first test images from the HSTs recently reactivated Near- Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS). The test images of galaxies in various stages of development included the NGC 4013 and the Cone Nebula galaxies. The NICMOS had remained inactive for three years, until the crew members of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 had installed a new cooling system for the instrument on 3 March 2002 as part of HST Servicing Mission 3B. The new NICMOS Cooling System (NCS) had been a joint project of NASA and the U.S. Air Force; NASAs GSFC and the Creare Corporation had built the NCS.(NASA, Hubbles Infrared Camera Is Back in BusinessNew Images Released, news release 02-104, 5 June 2002; NASA, SM3B, http://hubble.nasa.gov/missions/sm3b.php (accessed 17 August 2008).)
The first Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), the product of a long-term program designed to provide military and other satellites with enduring, reliable access to space, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Lockheed Martin had developed the rocket, called the Atlas 5. The EELV placed the European television satellite Hot Bird 6 in its preliminary orbit 31 minutes after its launch, and the satellites thrusters later maneuvered it into its final orbit. The EELV program had resulted from the U.S. governments research into the 1986 Challenger disaster. The U.S. Air Force had reportedly paid Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company more than US$500 million each to design an EELV. The U.S. Air Force had requested an EELV that was an advanced version of existing rockets, rather than an entirely new system, estimating that, through 2020, the EELV could reduce the cost of placing military satellites into orbit by approximately US$10 billion. France-based Eutelsat (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization) owned the Hot Bird 6 broadcast satellite, which Alcatel Space had built.(William Harwood, Into Space, A New Kind of Rocket, Washington Post, 22 August 2002; Lockheed Martin, Inaugural Atlas V Scores Success for ILS, Lockheed Martin, news release, 21 August 2002, http://www. lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/InauguralAtlasVScoresSucceslForILSL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearingNASA Workforce and Management Challengesto garner information about NASAs efforts to address concerns regarding its human capital, competitive sourcing for the Space Shuttle program, and other matters. Committee members heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe; David M. Walker, Comptroller General of the United States; and Mark D. Roth, General Counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees. OKeefe discussed NASAs Strategic Human Capital Plan, a systemic method of managing human capital according to NASAs vision and mission. In addition, OKeefe announced the termination of the comprehensive Strategic Resources Review initiated during the Clinton administration to create a blueprint for NASAs future facility, missions, and workforce requirements. Roth argued that, because NASA expected a high number of retirements in the near future, its existing and proposed personnel policies were inadequate to address the resulting loss in human capital. Walker discussed methods NASA could use to strengthen its human capital and to address its difficulties with contract management, as well as the increasing expense of the ISS program and of space exploration.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Workforce and Management Challenges, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 18 July 2002, http://science.house.gov/publications/hearings_markups_details.aspx?NewsID=1424 (accessed 21 August 2008 through Lexis-Nexis Congressional); Larry Wheeler, OKeefe Scraps Review of NASA, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 July 2002.)
The U.S. House Government Reform Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management, and Intergovernmental Relations held a hearing, Financial Management at NASA: What Went Wrong? Stephen Varholy and Alan Lamoreaux of NASA and Gregory D. Kutz and Allen Li of GAO provided testimony to the Subcommittee. The hearing focused on NASAs methods of financial accounting and on the role of its former auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP, in assessing those methods. Kutz reported that NASAs system of accounting had made it difficult for GAO to assess NASAs financial records and questioned Arthur Andersen LLPs ability to assess those records accurately.(U.S. General Accounting Office, National Aeronautics and Space Administration: Leadership and Systems Needed to Effect Financial Management Improvements (testimony of Gregory D. Kutz and Allen Li before U.S. House Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management, and Intergovernmental Relations; report no. GAO-02-551T, Washington, DC, 20 March 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02551t.pdf (accessed 12 August 2002).)
167Inside Wallops, Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees, 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement, news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy, news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad OConnor, Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader, New York Times, 14 January 2002.)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the worlds leading professional society in the field, elected Charles Elachi, Director of NASAs JPL, as a fellow in the society. In his research concerning geological analysis of Earth, Elachi had developed 45 flight missions and instruments, including radar remote-sensing techniques used to study Venus.(NASA JPL, JPL Director Honored by Leading Aeronautic Institute, news release, 25 February 2002. 60)
Boeing and the U.S. Air Force signed a US$9.7 billion contract for 60 C-17 Globemaster III transport aircraft. The contract, an extension of previous agreements between the Air Force and Boeing, would increase the number of C-17s in the Air Force fleet to 180. The Air Force had been using C-17s to transport personnel, equipment, and supplies in support of combat and humanitarian missions.(The Boeing Company, Boeing and U.S. Air Force Sign $9.7 Billion C-17 Contract, news release, 15 August 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q3/nr_020815m.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
The ReMAP Task Force of NASAs Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) presented its final report to the NASA Advisory Council. NASA had charged the ReMAP Task Force with evaluating the research productivity and priorities of NASAs OBPR and with providing a framework for prioritizing a research program for the OBPR and the ISS. ReMAPs 173-page report identified two major goals of these programs: research enabling human exploration of space and basic research of intrinsic scientific interest. In addition, the report made several recommendations, for example, that NASA increase the ISSs facilities and equipment for scientific research, as well as the amount of time that ISS crew members dedicated to scientific operations. The report stated that, if NASA did not make these and other enhancements to the ISS, then NASA should cease to characterize the ISS as a science driven program.(NASA ReMAP Task Force, Report by the NASA Biological and Physical Research Maximization and Prioritization (ReMAP) Task Force to the NASA Advisory Council (report, Washington, DC, August 2002).)
The U.S. Air Force chose Boeing Integrated Defense Systems to produce the first three satellites for the GPS IIF satellite program. The U.S. Air Force had designed the GPS IIF program to provide new capabilities for civilian and military GPS usersa new civilian signal within the protected Aeronautical Radio Navigation System frequency band and secure operational military codes for military aircraft. The Air Force had also intended the GPS IIF to be compatible with the U.S. Air Forces Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV). Boeing had designed the GPS IIF to accommodate incremental technology upgrades, enabling the satellites to serve both the immediate needs of the GPS IIF program and the long-term needs of the planned next generation satellite system, GPS III.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Receives GPS IIF Production Approval, news release, 11 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021111t.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U.S. Coast Guard)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although OKeefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
George W. S. Abbey, Special Assistant to NASAs Administrator and former Director of NASAs JSC, announced his retirement from NASA effective 3 January 2003. Abbey had begun his career at JSC in 1964 as a U.S. Air Force officer. He had served as Director of JSC and had become a high-level manager for the ISS project. In 2001 he had left the post because of the soaring costs of the ISS.(NASA JSC, Statement by General Jefferson D. Howell Jr. on the Retirement of Former JSC Director George W. S. Abbey, news release J02-111, 7 November 2002; Houston Chronicle, Longtime NASA Official Retires, 8 November 2002.)
NASA appointed two veteran astronautsApollo Commander Thomas P. Stafford and Space Shuttle Commander Richard O. Coveyto lead the task force assisting NASAs return-to-flight team. The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), composed of distinguished experts and industry professionals representing a wide range of disciplines, would help the NASA team implement the CAIBs findings following the release of its final report. Stafford, a retired Lieutenant General in the U.S. Air Force who had flown four missions during the Gemini and Apollo programs, had also chaired the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on ISS Operational Readiness. Covey, a retired U.S. Air Force Colonel, had piloted the 1988 Shuttle Mission STS-26, the first flight following the Challenger accident. He had also piloted Mission STS-51I in 1985 and had commanded STS-38 in 1990 and STS-61 in 1993.(NASA, Former Apollo and Shuttle Commanders Lead Columbia Accident Report Task Force, news release 03-196, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03196_covey_lead.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
The GAO presented testimony to the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space regarding the impact of the Shuttle fleets grounding on ISS construction and maintenance. Based on a GAO report published in September, a report that the full Senate committee had requested, GAO testified that the grounding of the Shuttle fleet would increase the cost of completing the ISS and could expose the stations two-person crew to additional risk. NASA had originally estimated the cost of the ISS at US$10 billion, but since 1985, the U.S. Congress had appropriated US$32 billion to the project. The Bush administration had cancelled several planned ISS modules in 2001, to offset US$4 billion in cost overruns. Since the grounding of the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, several components of the stationcompleted and ready to launchhad reached their storage limit, necessitating their replacement or refurbishment. The inability to ferry heavy items to the ISS had hampered NASAs ability to correct known safety concerns, such as the delivery of additional shielding to protect the ISS crew dormitory from orbital debris. Furthermore, NASA had estimated that the probability of space debris penetrating ISS living quarters increased by 1.6 percent for each year that the ISS partners postponed installing new shielding. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had requested the report from GAO. Members of Congress had repeatedly asked NASA to provide financial details about the effect of the Columbia accident on the ISS program. However, GAOs September report stated that neither NASA nor GAO could accurately estimate the costs associated with the grounded Shuttle fleet. GAO testified that it would be able to make such an estimate once NASA had identified precisely when Shuttle flights would resume. NASA officials agreed with GAOs findings.(U.S. General Accounting Office, Shuttle Fleets Safe Return to Flight is Key to Space Station Progress (report no. GAO-04-201T, Washington, DC, 29 October 2003), 111, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04201t.pdf (accessed 8 May 2009); Marc Carreau, Costs Up for Space Station, Report Says, Houston Chronicle, 15 October 2003; Larry Wheeler, Report: Shuttles Absence Hurts ISS, GAO Claims Station Is in Survival Mode, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 October 2003.)
The newest Boeing Delta rocket, the Delta 4, launched the USA 167also known as the Defense Satellite Communications Systems Phase 3 (DSCSIII-A3), or Discus satelliteinto orbit, from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The American geostationary military communications satellite was the first U.S. Air Force craft launched atop Boeings newest Delta rocket, as well as the first mission for the U.S. Air Forces Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program. The craft, a triaxially stabilized spacecraft with solar power of 1.24 kilowatts, operating at six superhigh frequencies between 40 and 85 megahertz, joined the DSCS III constellation of eight similar craft to provide very secure global links to the U.S. military. The launch of the Discus satellite featured the smallest of the Delta 4s several possible configurations, with two stages and no booster rocket.
A 66-foot-high (20-meter-high) VLS-1 O3 rocket exploded on its launchpad during tests at Alcantara Launch Center in Brazil, delivering a serious blow to Brazils nascent space program. Brazil had hoped to be the first Latin American nation to place a satellite in orbit. According to the Brazilian Ministry of Defence, the accident, which occurred three days before a scheduled launch, killed 21 people, mostly civilian technicians, injured 20 others, and destroyed two research satellites. The rocket had successfully completed two days of tests before the explosion. Brazils Minister of Defence Jose Veigas Filho stated that, for unknown reasons, one of the four main motors of the US$2.2 million rocket had ignited, leading to the explosion that destroyed the launchpad. The accident was Brazils third failed attempt to launch a rocket with a research satellite.(Brazils Rocket Test Kills 21, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 August 2003; Stan Lehman, Brazil Mourns Dead, Vows to Reinforce Space Program, Houston Chronicle, 25 August 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched a Titan 4B rocket with a Centaur upper stage carrying USA 171, an Orion classified satellite serving the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The Air Force provided no comment on the payloads destination or its whereabouts following the separation of the second stage of the Centaur. The Air Force had delayed the launch of USA 171 since April 2002 because of a series of technical problems and issues with the payload. The launch was likely the last of the Titan-Centaur launches, with only three Lockheed Martinbuilt Titan 4 rockets and one Titan 2 remaining to launch. The Air Force had contracted with Boeing and Lockheed Martin to replace the Titan 4 family with the Boeing Delta 2 and the Lockheed Martin Atlas 5, to provide the Air Force with cheaper, more reliable access to space for military payloads.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 599, 1 October 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx599.html (accessed 3 February 2009); Associated Press, Air Force Launches Titan 4B Rocket Carrying Secret Military Payload, 9 September 2003; Chris Kridler, Titan Carries Spy Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 2003.)
Officials from Boeing and Finmeccanica, an Italian aerospace corporation, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in a joint ceremony held in Rome and at the Italian Embassy in Washington, DC. The purpose of the MOU was to explore joint initiatives and to pursue growth opportunities in aerostructures and commercial aircraft, aircraft modification, UAVs, satellite systems, navigation, launch services, missile defense, space infrastructure, and avionics. The MOU called for the creation of an executive steering committee to investigate the possibilities of collaborative activity in space navigation, satellite services, launch services, and services to the ISS. The committee would make the final decision about which activities the partnership would pursue.(UV Online.com, Finmeccanica and Boeing To Collaborate on UAVs, 23 January 2003, http://www.shephard.co.uk/news/category/1/uvonline/.)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASAs fleet, prolonging the crews stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the crafts parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trios welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing, Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz, Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
NASA awarded its Kennedy Space Center Integrated Communications Services (KICS) contract, valued at approximately US$190.7 million, to InDyne Inc. of McLean, Virginia. Under the cost- plus-award fee/firm-fixed price, indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity contract, InDyne would provide communications services at NASAs KSC in support of the Space Shuttle Program, ISS Program, Payload Carriers Program, and Launch Services Program Office payloads. The KICS contract was the first of five work packages in NASAs space mission communications and data services solicitation, which succeeded the NASA consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) and incorporated the requirements of the visual information technical contract as well as the telephone service requirements of the outsourcing desktop initiative.(NASA, First Contract in SMCDS Solicitation Awarded To InDyne, Inc., contract release c03-ff, 17 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_c03ff_indyne_contract.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
The U.S. Air Force launched an Atlas 2-AS rocket carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), marking the final launch of the II-AS model from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch cleared the way for officials from the military and from Lockheed Martin to begin renovating Launch Complex 3 to accommodate the Atlas 5 rocket. Renovation plans included raising the mobile service tower 30 feet (9.14 meters) to accommodate the taller launch vehicles, building a fixed launch platform, modifying the umbilical tower, and enlarging the flame trench. The Lockheed Martin Atlas team planned to launch the first Atlas 5 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2005.(Associated Press, Air Force Sends Spy Satellite into Space, 2 December 2003; Justin Ray, Atlas Soars on Secret Mission Under Cover of Darkness, Spaceflight Now, 2 December 2003.)
In the CAIBs third public meeting, U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Aloysius G. Casey, a retired three-star general and former Director of the Space Division of Air Force Systems Command, presented his opinions about the Columbia disaster, based on his decades of experience with missiles and rocket systems. Casey shared with the Board his knowledge of high-speed impacts, referring to the insulating foam that had fallen from the Shuttles external tank 81 seconds after the 16 January launch. He also shared his knowledge of the level of testing necessary to determine whether a system is qualified to fly. Casey stated that NASA needed to do a better job in quantifying the safety margins for all of the shuttles various systems and be more sensitive to clues the hardware may be offering when things dont work as designed. Board Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr., remarking that the subject of successful flights dont re-establish margins has come back again and again, called Caseys insight very helpful. However, Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASAs KSC, noted that he had never considered falling foam to be a safety issue and that it had never caused any significant damage in the program to date. Rather than a safety issue, Bridges had considered the foam a maintenance concern. Bridges commented that if he had been aware of the safety implications, he would have recommended a stop to flying.(Jim Banke, NASA Missed Trouble Signs, Expert Tells Columbia Board, Space.com, 25 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030325.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russias space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission, 2 April 2003, NASA Mission Archives: STS-106, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
The National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron, Ohio, inducted 17 aviation and aerospace inventors, among them Harold A. Rosen, recognized for his pioneering work in developing the worlds first 24-hour commercial communications satellite and for his subsequent contributions to satellite communications. Rosen had led the Boeing Satellite Systems team that had begun developing the geostationary Syncom in 1959. The team had planned for Syncom to communicate directly and continuously with any ground station in its line of sight, in contrast to the communications satellites in use at the time, which required expensive tracking computers. The first Syncom had failed to launch successfully, but Syncom 2 had reached its synchronous orbit on 26 July 1963. Later that year, Syncom 2 had relayed by satellite the first live two-way call between heads of statea phone call between President John F. Kennedy in Washington, DC, and Nigerian Prime Minister Abubaker Balewa in Africa. Syncom 3 had brought live coverage of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics to U.S. viewers. The satellites had remained active through 1966, surpassing their one-year design life. David L. Ryan, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Satellite Systems, remarked that contemporary satellites that deliver video, voice, and data communications are all descendants of Syncom, and when Harold Rosen and his colleagues launched Syncom, they launched a revolution and changed the world.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Satellite Pioneer Harold Rosen Inducted to National Inventors Hall of Fame, news release, 1 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030501n.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
An American GPS satellite, GPS 2R-9, launched atop a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS 2R-9also known as NAVSTAR 52 and USA 168replaced the aging GPS 2-5, which had been in orbit since 1989. The fleet of GPS satellites consisted of 28 spacecraft.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Kelly Young, Delta 2 To Carry GPS Satellite into Space, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 2003.)
A Delta 2 rocket launched, carrying a GPS-2R8 satellite and an Experimental Spacecraft System (XSS-10) microsatellite into orbit. The U.S. Air Force was launching the GPS-2R8 to replace the 22nd GPS satellite, which had launched 10 years earlier, joining a constellation of 26 operational GPS spacecraft. Although the military GPS created in the 1970s had generated a commercial industry with sales in excess of US$6 billion, the system had continued to exist primarily to serve the U.S. military. The U.S. Air Force was launching the 62-pound (28-kilogram) XSS-10 spacecraft to test new guidance and navigation software and to demonstrate new technologies, such as a miniature communications system, a lightweight propulsion system, and advanced lithium polymer batteries.(Jim Banke, Delta 2 Rolls, Launches GPS and Experimental Satellites, Space.com, 29 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030129.html (accessed 23 July 2008).)
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station, 27 October 2003.)
NASA announced its selection of Allied Aerospace Industries of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to manufacture three flight-ready experimental demonstrator vehicles for the X-43C project, a NASA-led initiative. NASAs LaRC had led the team, comprising members from the U.S. Air Force and from the aerospace industry, to design and develop the X-43C demonstrator vehicle and propulsion system. Following the example of the Hyper-X (X43-A), a vehicle designed to demonstrate short-duration, scramjet-powered flight at Mach 7 and Mach 10, the creators of the X-43C intended it to demonstrate free flight of a scramjet-powered vehicle, with acceleration capability between Mach 5 and Mach 7. Allied Aerospace Industries had also developed the X43-A vehicle. The Air Force had provided a dual-mode scramjet capable of operating as a ramjet or scramjet for the X-43C vehicles. The cost-plus-fixed-fee completion-type contract that NASA awarded to Allied Aerospace Industries was valued at US$150 million over 66 months, covering all work through completion of the Preliminary Design Review; options covered the final design, hardware fabrication, and all support activities. X-43C Project Manager Paul L. Moses remarked that the demonstrator vehicle would validate advanced technologies, design tools, and test techniques for designing reusable space-access vehicles in the future.(NASA, NASA Selects Allied Team To Provide Hypersonic Vehicles, contract release C03-ll, 8 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_c03ll_x43c.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Brian Berger, Hypersonic Efforts Get an Extra Boost: NASA, Air Force Providing $150 Million for Test Program, Space News, 21 October 2003.)
NASA announced the completion of tests, which had taken place on 27 August at Edwards Air Force Base in California, demonstrating the possibility of reducing the impact of sonic booms. The research team showed that modifying an aircrafts shape alters the shape of its sonic boom, thus reducing the sound level. Northrop Grumman Corporation had modified the fuselage and nose of an F-5E fighter jet for the demonstration. The modified jet and a regular F-5E had each flown at Mach 1.36 from the same supersonic corridor. The two aircraft had demonstrated no difference in performance except that the modified jets sonic boom was 33 percent less intense than that of the unmodified F-5E. Analysis and wind tunnel tests had predicted the outcome, but NASA had never before flight-tested the theory. Richard Weizman of NASAs Office of Aerospace Technology remarked that the demonstration was the culmination of 40 years of work by visionary engineers. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had managed the Shaped Sonic Boom Demonstration (SSBD) program under its Quiet Supersonic Platform Initiative. NASAs LaRC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC), as well as Northrop Grumman Corporation, had been partners in the SSBD program under a US$7 million cooperative agreement.(NASA, NASA Opens New Chapter in Supersonic Flight, news release 03-283, 4 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03283_supersonic_flight.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Irene Mona Klotz for United Press International Science News, Test Shows Shape Sheds Sonic Booms Bang, 22 September 2003.)
After a series of delays, a Titan 2 rocket carried into orbit the U.S. militarys Coriolis research satellite, launching from the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The refurbished Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missile placed the spacecraft in orbit 512 minutes after launch, and the rockets second stage deployed its payload approximately 1 hour later. The US$224 million Coriolis mission carried the Navys Windsat microwave polarimetric radiometer and the Air Forces Solar Mass Ejection Imager. The U.S. military had designed Windsat to measure wind speed and direction at or near the surface of Earths seas, providing improved weather forecasting to assist in planning naval operations. The Air Force intended the Solar Mass Ejection Imager to provide an early warning of coronal mass ejections from the Sun that impact Earth, disrupting communications and power grids.(Justin Ray, Coriolis Launched To Track Ocean Winds, Solar Storms, Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2003. 105)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASAs KSC, to head NASAs LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a natural selection to lead the Agencys premiere center for aviation and space research, according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director, news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred, 13 June 2003.)
NASA announced that Administrator Sean OKeefe had appointed three new members to the CAIB in compliance with a request from CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. The new members were Douglas D. Osheroff, the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Physics and Applied Physics at Stanford University and a 1996 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics; Sally K. Ride, a physicist and professor of Space Science at the University of California, San Diego, as well as a former NASA astronaut and the first American woman in space; and John M. Logsdon, Director of the George Washington University Space Policy Institute. OKeefe had also appointed NASA astronaut retired U.S. Air Force Colonel Michael J. Bloomfield, in response to Gehmans request that Bloomfield replace former astronaut Bryan D. OConnor as Astronaut Advisor to the Board. OConnor would return to NASA Headquarters in his role as NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, New Members Added to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, news release 03-097, 5 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03097.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
The U.S. Air Force Space Command announced its planned elimination of 1,125 positions over the next seven years, as part of a service-wide, post-September 11 initiative to reduce staffing levels. The move would free it to pour more resources into the Air Forces highest priority missions, such as special operations and intelligence. The plan called for the elimination of 314 civilian and 442 military positions by October 2004, at both senior and lower levels. U.S. Air Force Major Sean McKenna, a Space Command spokesperson, commented that the reductions did not indicate that the Air Force had assigned lower priority to space.(Jeremy Singer, Air Force Space Command To Cut Staff, Space News, 13 March 2003.)
American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit undertook a 612-hour spacewalk at the ISS to finish preparing the station for the arrival of a new crew. In the second spacewalk of their four-month mission, Bowersox and Pettit worked on power connections, replaced lighting for a transport trolley, reconfigured cables on a navigational gyroscope, and secured covers on the stations thermal control system. Cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin monitored the astronauts work from inside the ISS.(Reuters, Astronauts End Space Walk from Orbiting Station, 9 April 2003. 126)
NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale, living aboard the ISS, set a new U.S. space recordFoale had spent more time in orbit than any other American had achieved. During four Shuttle missions, an expedition aboard Russias former space station Mir, and his current residence at the ISS, Foale had spent more than 231 days in space, surpassing Carl E. Walzs previous record for an American in space230 days, 13 hours, 3 minutes, and 37 seconds. Walz had participated in four Shuttle missions and one ISS expedition in 2002. Along with astronaut Daniel W. Bursch, Walz continued to hold the U.S. record for the longest, single spaceflight196 days.(NASA, NASA Astronaut Breaks U.S. Space Endurance Record, news release 03-400, 9 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03400_Foale_record.html (accessed 23 March 2009); Todd Halvorson, Astronaut Michael Foales 231 Days in Orbit Sets Record, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 December 2003; Associated Press, Astronaut Sets Record for Time in Space, 9 December 2003.)
Japan merged its three space agencies with the goal of saving US$89.8 million a year. According to the new configuration, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) would manage the unified entities of the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, NASDA, and the National Aerospace Laboratory. Modeled on NASA but about one 10th of the size of its American counterpart, JAXA had 1,800 employees and an initial annual budget of US$1.66 billion.(Reuters, Japan Streamlines Its Space Effort: Three Agencies Merged into JAXA; Tokyo Keeps Its Eye on Beijing, 2 October 2003.)
Chinese taikonaut Yang Liwei successfully completed his 21-hour mission of 14 orbits around Earth aboard the Shenzhou 5, landing safely in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From aboard the ISS, American astronaut Edward T. Lu, speaking in Chinese, had welcomed Yang to space and wished him a safe journey and success. Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko had told Mission Control in Houston that he was glad to have someone else in space besides himself and Lu, congratulating the great accomplishment of thousands of people in the Peoples Republic of China who had worked together to send Yang into space. After emerging from his capsule, Yang stated that Shenzhou 5 had operated very well, that he felt well, and that he was proud of the motherland.(John Pomfret, Chinas First Space Traveler Returns a Hero: Craft Made 14 Orbits in 21-Hour Mission, Washington Post, 16 October 2003; Ching-Ching Ni, China Completes Spaceflight: Nations First Astronaut, Lt. Col. Yang Liwei, Returns from Earth Orbit, Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2003.)
A Delta 2 rocket carried NASAs Ice Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) into orbit, launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. ICESat was one in a series of Earth Observing System (EOS) spacecraft to follow the Terra satellite, launched in December 1999, and the Aqua satellite, launched in May 2002. NASA had designed the 661-pound (299.8- kilogram) craft to measure the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica, so that scientists could determine whether global sea levels were rising or falling. The crafts only instrument, the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System, would beam rapid pulses of laser light to the icy surface, and the ice sheets would reflect the light back to the satellite, acting like radar. The GPS would determine the ICESats location as it fired its laser, enabling program scientists to measure the ice sheets topography. The rocket also carried a second, smaller craft into orbitCHIPSat, NASAs 131-pound (59-kilogram), University Explorer Class probe, the Cosmic Hot Interstellar Plasma Spectrometer. CHIPSat would gather data on the origin, physical processes, and properties of the hot gas between stars. The CHIPSat mission was the first U.S. mission to use end-to-end satellite operations over the Internet, treating the craft something like a node on the Internet.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches ICE and CHIPS Satellites, news release 03-011, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-011.txt (accessed 22 July 2008); Associated Press, Rocket Carrying NASA Satellites Launched, 12 January 2003; Jim Banke, Boeing Launches Pair of Science Research Satellites for NASA, Space.com, 12 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030112.html (accessed 22 July 2008).)
Soyuz TMA-3/ISS-9S launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan transporting to the ISS the Expedition 8 crewAmerican Mission Commander C. Michael Foale, Russian Flight Engineer Alexander Y. Kaleri, and Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque. Foale and Kaleri were traveling to the ISS for a 200-day mission, replacing American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko who were completing a six-month stay aboard the orbiting station. Duque would conduct 10 days of scientific experiments on the ISS and would return to Earth with Lu and Malenchenko.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Dmitry Solovyov for Reuters, ISS Crew Blasts Off at Baikonur, 20 October 2003; Justin Ray, New Station Residents Arrive at Their Orbiting Home, Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
In its first launch since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in February, NASA launched its Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) research satellite aboard a Pegasus XL rocket released from an L-1011 cargo plane that had flown out of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. GALEX carried a telescope measuring 19.7 inches (50 centimeters) in diameter, designed to provide a wide-angle view of the ultraviolet light that distant galaxies emit. NASA had planned the mission, which would survey the light emitted by a million galaxies over 28 months, to learn more about galaxies dominated by hot, short-lived stars that give off a great deal of energy as ultraviolet light. The mission cost US$103.7 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Associated Press, NASA in 1st Launch Since Columbia Breakup, 28 April 2003. 427 Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, BeppoSAX Satellite Falls Harmlessly into Ocean, 30 April 2003.)
NASA announced that scientist David Atlas of NASAs GSFC and University of Colorado scientist Christopher Williams had created the first full-body scan of an evolving tropical thunderstorm, using data collected from an unusual storm over the Amazon rain forest, which had occurred in February 1999. At that time, a team of scientists from NASA, NOAA, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, and several universities had used sensitive radar equipment, such as scanning Doppler and vertically oriented Doppler, to detect and measure different types of particles from the storms base to its top, approximately 8.7 miles (14 kilometers) above the rainforest floor. Participants from the University of North Dakota had operated a jet aircraft to gather some of the data. One of the studys goals had been validating the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite measurements, to help plan the TRMMs successor, the Global Precipitation Mission. TRMM had provided data about how such storms operate, thus enabling scientists to understand how wind circulates in the upper atmosphere. The research, which Atlas and Williams had published in the American Meteorological Societys Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, provided new insight into the intense and hazardous conditions within storms. Scientists expected the research to improve forecasts, helping aircraft avoid dangerous storms and making air travel safer, and to improve satellite measurements of precipitation.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA Scientists Take First Full-Body Scan of Evolving Thunderstorm, news release 03-07, 15 January 2003, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/2003/03- 07.htm (accessed 28 July 2008); Reuters, NASA Takes First Full-Body Scan of Thunderstorm, 15 January 2003; Lee Bowman for Scripps Howard News Service, Probing the Inner Workings of Storm Clouds, 16 January 2003.)
Missile Defense Agency (MDA) officials announced that the flight test in December 2002 of the Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system had been unsuccessful, because a faulty computer-chip connection in the Raytheon exoatmospheric kill vehicle (EKV) had prevented the EKV from separating from its booster during flight. Although the MDA had not recovered the EKV, engineers had determined the problem with the chips connection using laboratory simulations, concluding that no significant underlying problem with the EKV technology had caused the failure. The December test, the third unsuccessful GMD intercept attempt, had been the second attempt in which the EKV had failed to separate from the booster. U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Ronald T. Kadish, Director of the MDA, remarked that quality-control problems had likely caused the test failure and announced the formation of an office to improve the MDAs performance.(Marc Selinger, Test Failure of GMD System Blamed on Problem with Computer Chip, Aerospace Daily, 5 March 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin launched the Milstar II military communications satellite into orbit aboard a Titan 4B launch vehicle with a Centaur upper stage. The satellite joined four other Milstar satellites already in orbit, completing the constellation. The Milstar constellation provided secure, global communication links for U.S. military joint forces, transmitting voice, data, and imagery, as well as providing video-teleconferencing capabilities. Milstar II was the third satellite to carry the Boeing Satellite Systemsbuilt, medium-data-rate payload, which had 32 channels, each capable of processing data at speeds of 1.5 megabits per second. The craft carried a low-data-rate payload as well, built by Northrop Grumman Space Technology.(Lockheed Martin, U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin Team up to Successfully Launch Final Milstar II Satellite on a Titan IV B Rocket, news release, 8 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/USAirForceLockheedMartinTeamUpSucce.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
Hellas-Sat, a geostationary communications satellite jointly owned by Greece and Cyprus, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard an Atlas 5 rocket with a Russian RD-180 motor. The 3.45-tonne (3.8-ton or 3,450-kilogram) Astrium Eurostar 2000+ model carried 30 Ku-band transponders to provide voice, video, data, and broadcast services to Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. The launch, the second for the Atlas 5 series, was the 65th consecutive successful flight for the Lockheed Martinbuilt Atlas rocket and for mission provider International Launch Services (ILS).(Lockheed Martin, ILS Launches Hellas-Sat on Atlas V65 Successes in a Row for Atlas, news release, 13 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/ILSLaunchesHellasSat)
NASA released the final report of the Hubble Space TelescopeJames Webb Space Telescope (HST-JWST) Transition Plan Review Panel, an advisory panel assembled to review NASAs plans for removing the HST from service as early as 2011, when NASA was preparing to launch the JWST. John N. Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, had chaired the independent panel of astronomers. The panel recommended three options to NASA: 1) to launch two additional Shuttle-servicing missions to the HST in 2005 and 2010, to maximize the scientific productivity of the telescope; 2) to launch one Shuttle-servicing mission before the end of 2006, to replace gyroscopes and, possibly, to install a propulsion device to de-orbit the craft once scientific operations had become impossible, or, alternatively, to de-orbit the craft using an autonomous robotic system; and 3) if no Shuttle missions were possible, to launch a robotic mission to install a propulsion module to bring down the HST in a controlled descent once scientific operations had become impossible. The panel also described various ways to extract maximum scientific return from the HST if NASA opted for any of the recommended three scenarios.(NASA, Panel Identifies Three Options for Space Telescope Transition, news release 03-264, 14 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03264_telescope_transition.html (accessed 23 January 2009); NASA Space Telescope Transition Plan Review Panel, Report of the HST-JWST Transition Panel: Executive Summary (report, Washington, DC, August 2003), http://www.nasa.gov/ audience/formedia/features/ MP_Public_Reports.html (accessed 23 January 2009); Sam Silverstein, Hubble Review Panel Urges Second Extra Servicing Mission, Space News, 19 August 2003.)
Russias Space Forces launched a Molniya 3-53 military communications satellite aboard a four- stage Molniya-M rocket from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region of Russia. Molniya 3-53 was the second Molniya communications satellite launched in 2003.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, Russia Lofts Military Payload from Plesetsk, Makes Plans for Commercial South American Shots, 20 June 2003; Stephen Clark, Molniya Satellite Deployed from Plesetsk Spaceport, Spaceflight Now, 20 June 2003.)
Northrop Grumman Corporation, Raytheon Company, and the Boeing Company formed a team to develop the U.S. Air Force E-10A Multi-Sensor Command and Control Aircraft (MC2A), a next-generation aircraft that could replace the Airborne Warning and Control System and the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System aircraft. The initial agreement called for the production of five MC2A craft for the U.S. Air Force, but the program could increase to allow for production of as many as 50 such aircraft. Boeing would provide its twin-jet 767-400 transport aircraft as a platform for powerful multifunction radar with the capability of detecting enemy forces on the ground, as well as low-flying cruise missiles. Northrop Grumman and Raytheon would develop a radar and electronic self-defense system to integrate with a Battle Management Command and Control System produced under a separate contract.(Northrop Grumman, Northrop Grumman, Boeing and Raytheon Announce Teaming Agreement for Next- Generation Air Force Surveillance System, news release, 12 May 2003, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=40216 (accessed 8 December 2008); Congress Daily, Aerospace Giants To Team Up On Air Force Project, 12 May 2003.)
Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASAs plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit, Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives, http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
NASA released the first pictures from its Space Infrared Telescope Facility and officially renamed the craft Spitzer Space Telescope. NASA had named the telescope for one of the 20th centurys most influential scientists, Princeton University astronomer Lyman Spitzer Jr., who in 1946 had first proposed placing telescopes in space. Spitzer had been a major force behind the 1990 launch of the HST, the first of NASAs Great Observatories. With the release of the Spitzer Space Telescopes first observationsa glowing stellar nursery; a swirling, dusty galaxy; a disc of planet-forming debris; and organic material in the distant universeProject Scientist Michael Werner of NASAs JPL remarked that the telescope was working extremely well. The fourth of its Great Observatories, NASA had designed the craft with powerful infrared detectors to capture never-before-seen cosmic features. Unlike its predecessor Great Observatories, which circle Earth, NASA had deployed the Spitzer Space Telescope in a novel trajectory that placed it in an orbit closely trailing that of Earth.(NASA, NASA Releases Dazzling Images from New Space Telescope, news release 03-411, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03411_newly_named_prt.htm (accessed 23 March 2009); Patty Reinert, Stargazers Delight: NASAs New Space Infrared Telescope Puts On a Dazzling Show, Houston Chronicle, 19 December 2003.)
NASA announced that 12 new teams would join the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), a research consortium studying the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life on Earth and in the universe. The new teams, with members from the Carnegie Institution of Washington, DC; Indiana University in Bloomington; Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts; SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California; and NASAs ARC and GSFC would join the four lead teams that NASA had selected in 2001. The five-year awards, with annual funding levels of US$1 million, would commence in the autumn of 2003 when the agreements with the NAIs 11 founding teams had concluded. Six of the new teams were among the founding member teams.
The U.S. Air Force launched its Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F16 craft aboard a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, marking the final launch of the Lockheed Martin launch vehicles. In keeping with its 1986 agreement with the U.S. Air Force, Martin Marietta had converted 14 Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) into space launch vehicles. The Air Force had used the converted missiles to launch weather and spy satellites into low Earth orbit; the first such converted missile launched in September 1988. The Titan 2 that launched the DMSP F16 satellite was the 13th of the 14 converted ICBMs to launch; the Air Force had no plans for the 14th converted ICBM except to hold it as a spare. The successful launch of the satellite marked the end of the 33 months of postponements of the US$450 million mission that had resulted from technical problems. The Air Force intended for the craft to track clouds, storm systems, and hurricanes, planning to use the data that the satellite collected to forecast weather and to monitor ice and snow coverage, pollution, and fires. The constellation of two primary DSMP satellites and older backups provided meteorologists with information for generating forecasts, which commanders and troops relied upon for strategic and tactical planning. DSMP F16 replaced DSMP F15, which had launched in December 1999, as the lead craft in the constellations mid-morning orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Justin Ray, US Weather Satellite Finally Escapes Grasp of Hard Luck, Spaceflight Now, 14 October 2003; Roger Fillion, Titan II Rocket Soars into Retirement, Rocky Mountain News (Denver, CO), 21 October 2003.)
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarins known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronauts radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Stations Sticky Hatch, 15 January 2003.)
NASA launched the first of two Mars Exploration Rovers from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The destination of the 384-pound (174-kilogram) rover Spirit was the Gustev Crater, a site that scientists believed had been a crater lake. NASA intended the second of the identical rovers, called Opportunity, to launch later in June and to land on the opposite side of Mars from the Gustev Crater at a site called Meridiani Planum, which had a large deposit of a type of mineral (gray hematite) that usually forms in wet environments. NASA had designed the rolling rovers to capture sharper images, explore wider regions, and examine rocks better than any previous craft that had landed on Mars, searching for evidence of wet environments on the planet.(NASA, NASA Prepares Two Robot Rovers for Mars Exploration, news release 03-189, 4 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03189_ROVERS.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, First of NASA Rovers En Route to Mars, 11 June 2003.)
NASA announced that a two-year collaboration between researchers at Stanford University and NASAs ARC had resulted in a successful test of an alternative paraffin-based rocket fuel intended to increase operational safety, reduce costs as compared to solid fuels, and, eventually, to provide the fuel in Space Shuttle booster rockets. The researchers had developed a nontoxic, easily handled fuel, producing as by-products carbon dioxide and water, rather than the aluminum oxide and acidic gases that conventional rocket fuel produces. Arif Karabeyoglu had led Stanford Universitys contribution to the fuel research, developing the theory of a fast- burning, low-cost, paraffin-based fuel in his doctoral thesis, which Stanford and NASA had partially funded. The testing series had begun on 24 September 2001 at ARCs Hybrid Combustion Facility, a heavy-duty test chamber capable of accommodating pressures of up to 60 atmospheres. The first phase of the testing program had consisted of approximately 40 runs.(NASA, NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel, news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
Administrator Sean OKeefe announced an agreement between NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which provided for NIMA to capture detailed satellite images of Space Shuttles in orbit. NASA had sought this agreement with NIMA because of critics pointed questioning of NASAs decision not to capture satellite images that it could have used to check for damage to Columbias heat shields while the Shuttle was in orbit. The agreement would enable NASA to employ NIMA assets during targets of opportunity without requiring NASA to make a specific request for imaging. Before the disaster, NASA had turned down a NIMA offer to capture images of Columbia, and NASA officials had withdrawn an unofficial request for U.S. Air Force telescopes to capture images. OKeefe stated that the agreement did not represent any NASA decision about whether those images might have helped determine damage to Columbia.(Associated Press, Military To Capture Future Shuttle Flight Images, 29 March 2003. 123)
The ISS marked its 1,000th consecutive day of human residency aboard the station. The first crew had arrived 2 November 2000, and since then, seven crews had lived and worked on the ISS. During that time, the living and working area had increased by 6,000 cubic feet (170 cubic meters) to the current area of 15,000 cubic feet (424.8 cubic meters), and ISS partners expected the station would eventually more than double its size. The seven ISS crews, consisting of 10 American and 10 Russian crew members, had conducted 12 spacewalks and had welcomed 11 visiting Space Shuttles, 4 Soyuz taxi crews, and 10 Progress cargo vehicles. Crews had added to the ISS the largest solar arrays ever produced for use in space, the first track-mounted railcar in space, and a science facility described as the most sophisticated space laboratory to date.(NASA, Milestone Marked in Space1,000 Days of Human Presence on Station, news release 03-251, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03251_iss1000_days.html (accessed 23 December 2008). 491 William Glanz, NASA Outlines Cost of Columbia Probe, Washington Times, 1 August 2003.)
NASA announced that it had positively identified the remains of all seven members of STS-107 at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, and that officials in Angelina County, Texas, had signed the death certificates. Eileen Hawley, spokesperson for NASAs JSC in Houston, said that officials had released the crew members remains to their families for private memorial services. NASA had already returned the remains of Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon to Israel, where burial services had taken place on 11 February.(NASA JSC, Columbia Astronaut Remains Identified, news release H03-070, 13 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/2003/h03-070.html (accessed 14 August 2008); Associated Press, Remains of All Shuttle Astronauts Identified, 14 February 2003.)
NASA announced the release of the first scientific product of the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) mission, a joint effort of NASA and the German Aerospace Center. The GRACE mission had produced the most accurate map to date of Earths gravity field, using preliminary data collected over 111 days. Project scientists had created the map from selected data, which they had used to calibrate and validate the instruments of the pair of American and German satellites comprising GRACE. The satellites had measured Earths gravitational force from orbits 500 kilometers (310.7 miles) high, with 220 kilometers (136.7 miles) separating them, making a pass of the entire planet once each month, and producing measurements of unprecedented accuracy. The measurements provided precise views of ocean currents and tidal changes, enabling scientists to better understand how the oceans affect climate. Although the data was preliminary, NASA had released it to oceanographers immediately, months in advance of the scheduled start of routine GRACE scientific operations, underscoring the missions importance and the datas value.(NASA, Oceanographers Catch First Wave of Gravity Missions Success, news release 03-244, 21 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03244_gravity_success.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Larry OHanlon, Gravity Map Shows Earth Is Very Lumpy, Discovery News, 29 July 2003.)
Undersecretary of the U.S. Air Force Peter B. Teets testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Environment, Technology, and Standards that the National Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) System spacecraft would not be available until late 2009 or 2010, at the earliest. The U.S. Air Force and NOAA had jointly funded the system, the first of its kind, originally planning to deliver it in early 2008. The Bush administration had decided to request less money for the project in the near term than it had previously planned, and that decision had reportedly caused the delay. Because of the postponement of the delivery date, the Air Force and NOAA would need to restructure the contract to account for anticipated cost growth. The new system would replace the polar-orbiting systems that the agencies had previously operated separately. Greg Withee, NOAAs Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, stated that the delay could result in a 21-month gap in coverage if NOAA encountered problems with its existing fleet.(Jeremy Singer, Delay Means Cost Growth for New Weather Satellites, Space News, 17 July 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force 45th Space Wing transferred operation of Launch Complex 47 at Cape Canaveral Air Station to the Florida Space Authority (FSA) by means of a licensing agreement under the Commercial Space Transportation Act. J. Gregory Pavlovich, Commander of the 45th Space Wing, stated that the transfer of operations was a positive development, remarking that, although the Air Force had previously scheduled the launchpad for deactivation, licensing it to the FSA would enable Launch Complex 47 to remain available for educational use for years into the future. Under the agreement, Brevard Community College could offer as many as 200 educational launch opportunities over the following five years, allowing for hands-on technical education that would help motivate students to join the aerospace workforce.(Jim Banke, Florida Space Authority Will Run Cape Launch Pad for Education, Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/fsa_cx47_031107.html (accessed 17 March 2009).)
The Canadian Space Agency successfully launched its scientific satellite SciSat 1 aboard a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet flying out of Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The 330-pound (150-kilogram) atmospheric-research satellite carried two instrumentsthe Fourier Transform Spectrometer and the Measurements of Aerosol Extinction in the Stratosphere and Troposphere Retrieved by Occultation (MAESTRO)intended to monitor atmospheric ozone and dust composition in an altitude range of 4 to 100 kilometers (2.(Associated Press, Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program, 11 January 2001; Associated Press, Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth, 16 January 2001.)
NASAs ARC in Mountain View, California, closed three wind tunnels until the end of FY 2003 because of budget cuts, fewer defense contracts, and the increased use of computer simulations. NASA reported that, unless it received major contracts from the DOD or from the private sector within a year from October 2003, ARC would close the wind tunnels permanently. Two of the wind tunnels, the largest and second-largest wind tunnels in the world, had operated for nearly six decades, testing dozens of aircraft and spacecraft, including Korean Warera fighter planes, helicopters, and the Space Shuttle. The largest wind tunnel, known as 80 by 120 in reference to its height and width, was the only wind tunnel in the world that could accommodate full-size aircraft. With the closure of the three tunnels, ARC dismissed 23 contractors and reassigned 23 employees, changes that would save ARC US$12 million per year in operational costs.(Joshua L. Kwan, NASA/Ames Center Shuts Wind Tunnels, San Jose Mercury News (CA), 19 May 2003.)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the Boeing-built AsiaSat 4 satellite aboard a Lockheed Martinbuilt Atlas 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, marking 64 consecutive successful launches for the Atlas rocket over 10 years. The mission was ILSs third launch for AsiaSat, the dominant satellite operator in its region. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed the AsiaSat 4 craft, a high-power 601HP spacecraft, to provide 15 years of direct-to-home communications and broadband services to customers in Asia and Australia.(Lockheed Martin, Atlas III Launch of Asiasat 4 Successful in 1st ILS Mission of 2003, news release, 11 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/AtlasIIILaunch OfAsiaSat4)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims, 28 January 2003. 110)
NASA launched its MESSENGER spacecraft on a seven-year mission to study Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun. MESSENGERMercury Surface, Space Environment, Geochemistry, and Ranginglaunched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:16 a.m. (EDT). Six countries had provided equipment for the spacecraft, which would photograph Mercurys surface and analyze the planets magnetic field and mineral composition. Project scientists planned to use the resulting data to determine whether Mercurys composition is similar to that of Earth, Mars, and Venus. Although the spacecraft was not the first to photograph MercuryNASAs Mariner 10 had photographed the planet during flybys in 1974 and 1975MESSENGER was the first spacecraft designed to examine Mercury while orbiting the planet.(Mark Carreau, Messenger Leaves on 7-Year Voyage, Houston Chronicle, 4 August 2004; NASA, NASA Sending a Messenger to Mercury, news release 04-215, 15 July 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 10 left for the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-5/ISS-9S, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 11:06 p.m. (EDT). The crew members were American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonauts Yuri G. Shargin and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Chiao and Sharipov would stay at the ISS until April 2005, and Shargin would spend eight days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew of Expedition 9.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report: SS04-035, news release SS04-035, 13 October 2004. 212)
NASA launched its Gravity Probe B (GP-B) on a Boeing Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 12:57 p.m. (EDT). NASA had designed the satellite to test two fundamental aspects of Albert Einsteins theory of relativity. According to Einsteins theory, time and space create a veritable fabric in space. When massive objects, such as Earth and other planets, distort the fabric of space, causing relatively smaller objects to move towards them, they create gravity. Einsteins theory of relativity also states that large objects twist the fabric of space around them as those objects spin on their axes. Gravity Probe A, which NASA had launched in 1975, had tested the former part of the theory, and GP-B would test both aspects. GP-B contained some of the most accurate scientific instruments ever constructed, including the most precise gyroscopes ever built.
American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka successfully completed repairs to the ISS during a much-delayed spacewalk lasting 6 hours. Among the numerous repairs that Fincke and Padalka completed were the replacement of a faulty circuit breaker and the restoration of power to a gyroscope that helped stabilize the ISS. The ISS partners had rescheduled the spacewalk from 24 June 2004 because of problems with the crew members spacesuits.(Mark Carreau, Finally, Spacewalk a Success, Houston Chronicle, 1 July 2004; NASA, International Space Station Status Report, news release SS04-018, 1 July 2004.)
Commercial airlines Air France and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines announced that they would merge, creating the worlds largest airline, in terms of revenue. Under the terms of the merger, the two companies would trade stock shares, with KLM shareholders tendering almost 42 million sharesnearly 90 percent of the companys capital. Air France would issue approximately 46 million new shares to KLM shareholders, reducing the French governments interest in the airline from 54 percent to less than 45 percent of total shares. The combined annual revenue of the two companies would be nearly US$23 billion, eclipsing the US$17.4 billion annual revenue of American Airlines, which had previously received the highest revenue of any airline.(Los Angeles Times, Air Frances Completes Deal with KLM Royal Dutch, 5 May 2004.)
Astronomer Fred Lawrence Whipple, a pioneering comet researcher, died at the age of 97. Whipple, born on 5 November 1906 in Red Oak, Iowa, had begun his research at Harvard University in 1931, studying meteors and Earths atmosphere. During his career, Whipple had contributed to many significant scientific achievements, including a meteor bumper known as the Whipple shielda device that protects spacecraft from meteor collisions. However, Whipple was best known for research defying conventional scientific theories about comets: whereas many scientists had suspected that comets were composed of sand and rock bound by gravity, Whipple had theorized that comets are discrete bodies with a frozen nucleus that heats up and emits propulsive jets of gas and dust. Later spacecraft missions to comets had proven his theory correct.(Adam Bernstein, Fred L. Whipple, 97, Dies; Comet Research Pioneer, Washington Post, 1 September 2004. 679 NASA, NASA Selects Contractors for Vision for Space Exploration Studies, news release C04-s, 1 September 2004.)
NASA launched an Earth-observation satellite called Aura from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 3:01 a.m. (PDT). The spacecraft was one of three satellites in NASAs Earth Observing System (EOS)the two others were Terra, which monitored land, and Aqua, which monitored the planets water cycle. NASA had created Aura to collect scientific data on global air quality, ozone recovery, and climate change, equipping the satellite with four instruments: the High Resolution Dynamics Limb Sounder, the Microwave Limb Sounder, the Ozone Monitoring Instrument, and the Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer. Project engineers hoped that the instruments would enable the spacecraft to collect the most detailed measurements to date of atmospheric pollution, climate change, and the ozone layer.(NASA, Aura Launched, To Better Understand the Air We Breathe, news release 04-217, 15 July 2004; Eric D. Tytell, Satellite To Study Atmospheric Pollutants, Los Angeles Times, 16 July 2004.)
The GAO released its assessment of NASAs efforts to upgrade the Space Shuttle fleet in the wake of the Columbia tragedy. NASA planned to implement the recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, as well as those of its own Space Shuttle Service Life Extension Program (SLEP). The GAO report stated that before NASA determined the upgrade requirements and priorities for the Shuttles, it should first determine the Shuttles operational life and the requirements for meeting the objectives of the Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP). Before the announcement of the new Vision for Space Exploration, the ISTP had encompassed the space policy of the United States. However, GAO noted that the establishment of President Bushs new Vision for Space Exploration, which formally changed the duration of operations for both the Space Shuttles and the ISS, had largely invalidated the recommendations offered in GAOs assessment.(U.S. General Accounting Office, Space Shuttle: Further Improvements Needed in NASAs Modernization Efforts (report no. GAO-04-203, Washington DC, 15 January 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04203.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASAs X-43A research vehicle established an unofficial world speed record for aircraft of nearly 7,000 miles per hour (11,265 kilometers per hour) or Mach 1010 times the speed of sound. The X-43A contained an experimental enginecalled a supersonic combustion ramjet or scramjet. The scramjet engine had no moving parts and did not use fuel from an on-board tank, as is the case with rockets. Instead, the engine used oxygen from the atmosphere, passing through the vehicle, to ignite fuel. NASA had explored the use of scramjets as an alternative to rocket power for space-access vehicles, with the hope that scramjet vehicles would operate more like an airplane than a rocket. The mission lifted off from NASAs DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:30 p.m. (PST). A NASA B-52 carried the unpiloted X-43A to an altitude of 40,000 feet (7.6 miles or 12.2 kilometers). Before the X-43A had attained at an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers), a Pegasus rocket booster launched from the B-52, providing an initial acceleration that enabled the X-43A to attain an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers). The experimental aircraft flew for nearly 10 seconds at that altitude before descending into the Pacific Ocean as planned, nearly 800 miles (1,287 kilometers) off the coast of California.(John Johnson, X-43A Aircraft Sets Speed Record at 6,500 MPH, Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2004; NASA, NASAs X-43A Scramjet Breaks Speed Record, news release 04-373, 16 November 2004.)
Former astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper died at age 77 in Ventura, California. One of the original seven astronauts for the Mercury program, the United States first human spaceflight program, Cooper was born in Shawnee, Oklahoma, on 6 March 1927. He had joined the U.S. Air Force in 1949, and NASA had selected him as a Mercury astronaut in April 1959. In May 1963, Cooper had piloted the programs last mission, which lasted 34 hours and 20 minuteslonger than all the combined duration of all previous Mercury missions. Cooper had made his second and final trip to space on Gemini 5 in August 1965, in a two-person mission that had set a record for space endurance of 191 hours. The mission had demonstrated that humans could survive in a weightless environment and, therefore, that a trip to the Moon was feasible. In addition, Cooper had been the first American astronaut to make two spaceflights, to sleep in space, and to appear in a televised broadcast from space. After retiring from the Air Force in 1970, he had run several companies, including a consulting firm specializing in projects ranging from aerospace to hotel development.(John Johnson, Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr., 77, Los Angeles Times, 5 October 2004; Matthew L. Wald, Gordon Cooper, Astronaut, Is Dead at 77, New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
NASA launched the Swift satellite from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA and an international team of participants had designed the spacecraft to detect and analyze gamma-ray bursts (GRBs)ephemeral explosions that occur throughout the universe, usually far from Earth. GRBs may indicate a number of significant cosmological events, such as the collision of extremely dense celestial bodies or the formation of black holes. Swift was equipped with three telescopes to study GRBs, including the Burst Alert Telescope, which could detect and locate GRBs, and the X-ray Telescope (XRT) and Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope (UVOT), two telescopes that could study the bursts afterglows. Among the many participants in the Swift mission were the Italian Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches Swift Satellite, news release 04-382, 22 November 2004; New York Times, NASA Starts Hunt for Celestial Bodies, 21 November 2004.)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 11, a six-month mission set to launch in April 2005. Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would serve as Station Commander, and American astronaut John L. Phillips would serve as Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer. In 2000 Krikalev, who had experienced the most spaceflights of any Russian cosmonaut, had served as a member of the first ISS crew for Expedition 1. Phillips also had ISS experience as a member of Mission STS-100 in 2001. The backup crew members for Expedition 11 were American astronaut Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin.(NASA JSC, Next International Space Station Crew Named, news release H04-383, 23 November 2004.)
NASAs X-43A Hyper X plane set a new record for flight speed, traveling at Mach 7, which is nearly 5,000 miles (8,050 kilometers) per hour and seven times the speed of sound. The flight was also the first free flight of an aircraft powered by a supersonic combustion ramjet enginea scramjeta type of engine that provides thrust by funneling air and fuel into a hollow chamber at extremely high speed. The 12-foot-long (3.7-meter-long) unpiloted, experimental aircraft flew for approximately 11 seconds over the Pacific Ocean, at an altitude of 95,000 feet (approximately 29,000 meters), before NASA deliberately landed the aircraft in the ocean. NASA used a modified B-52 aircraft to carry the X-43A into the sky, launching the X-43A into flight using a Pegasus rocket mounted to the B-52. The test flight, which took place near San Nicolas Island off the California coast, originated from NASAs DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California.(Peter Pae, Fast Times at 12 OClock High: 5,000 MPH, Los Angeles Times, 28 March 2004; NASA, X-43A Soars on Scramjet Power, 27 March 2004.)
The GAO published an assessment of the efforts of the DOD and the military services to develop personnel for space-related national security matters and to integrate those personnel into their forces. In the National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2004 (Pub.L.No. 108-136), the U.S. Congress had required the DOD to create a strategy to develop and integrate personnel who were capable of operating space-based systems and of developing space-related concepts, doctrine, and technology. In addition, Congress had required GAO to assess those efforts. In its report, GAO stated that the DOD did not have a plan to implement its strategy for developing and integrating space personnel. GAO also found that the military services varied in the extent to which they had implemented plans to develop and manage their space personnel. The report included recommendations to address these issues.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Defense Space Activities: Additional Actions Needed to Implement Human Capital Strategy and Develop Space Personnel (report no. GAO-04-097, Washington, DC, 11 August 2004).)
A NASA-funded study found that artificial surfaces in urban areas often cause temperatures to increase, enabling longer growing seasons in cities than in surrounding rural areas. Using data from NASAs Terra satellite, a team of Boston University scientists led by Xiaoyang Zhang compared the growing seasons of 70 North American cities with those of adjacent rural areas. The scientists discovered that the growing season in urban areas lasted nearly 15 days longer than the growing season in rural areas. In addition, the data revealed that urban climates affect vegetation located up to 10 kilometers (6 miles) from urban land cover. According to the scientists, high concentrations of artificial surfaces in urban areas cause surface temperatures to be relatively higher in urban areas than in surrounding rural areas. In addition, the scientists suggested that their findings demonstrated how land use and other human activities affect Earths environment.(NASA, NASA Plays Key Role in Largest Environmental Experiment in History, news release 04-242, 27 July 2004; X. Zhang et al., The Footprint of Urban Climates on Vegetation Phenology, Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 12 (25 June 2004): L12209.)
The crew of Expedition 9 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:36 a.m., local time. American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka had spent 188 days at the ISS, where they had performed four spacewalks. Returning with them was Russian cosmonaut Yuri G. Shargin, who had traveled to the ISS on 13 October 2004 with the crew members of Expedition 10.(Mark Carreau, Station Crew Returns to Earth, Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2004; Stefano S. Coleman, Two Safely Back After 6 Months on Space Station, New York Times, 24 October 2004.)
The U.S. Air Force awarded the Boeing Company a US$472 million contract to develop a military satellite system capable of secure, high-capacity global communications for NASA, the U.S. intelligence community, and the DOD. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would lead a team of companies that would conduct risk-reduction and system-definition studies for the Transformational Communications MILSATCOM (Military Satellite Communications) Space Segment, which uses laser communications, advanced processors, and other advanced technologies to provide communications for airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The companies selected to conduct research on the project included Ball Aerospace, Cisco Systems, and Raytheon.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Awarded $472 Million for Next-Generation Military Satellite System, news release, 23 January 2004, http//www.boeing.com/news/releases/2004/q1/nr_040123s.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
NASA announced it would undergo an internal reorganization to meet its new objectives under the Vision for Space Exploration, the blueprint for American space policy that President George W. Bush had released one day before. The reorganization included the creation of a new office to develop a new CEV and other technologies for future missions to the Moon and Mars. NASA named Craig E. Steidle to oversee the new Office of Exploration Systems. Furthermore, NASA renamed its Office of Aerospace Technology, which had previously been responsible for spacecraft development. Under its new nameOffice of Aeronauticsit would have responsibility for developing aviation technologies. J. Victor Lebacqz, former Acting Associate Administrator of the Office of Aerospace Technology, became Associate Administrator of the new Office of Aeronautics.(Patty Reinert, New NASA Office To Focus on Advancing Bush Space Agenda, Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2004; Kenneth Chang, NASA Creating Office for Missions to the Moon and Beyond, New York Times, 16 January 2004.)
In a newly released survey, U.S. federal government employees ranked NASA as the best place to work in the federal government. The Office of Personnel Management had collected the data during a 2002 survey of federal employees, and the nonpartisan Partnership for Public Service and American Universitys Institute for the Study of Public Policy Implementation had produced the rankings. According to the survey, in eight out of 10 categories related to employment satisfaction, federal employees had ranked NASA firstfederal employees had ranked NASA as the best place to work for women, for racial minorities, and for individuals under 40 years of age.(Stephen Barr, NASA Soars to Top of Satisfaction Ratings Among Various Workers, Washington Post, 16 April 2004.)
NASA announced the establishment of the DART Mishap Investigation Board to determine why the DART spacecraft had failed to complete its mission on 15 April. Initially, NASA had believed that DART had come within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the target satellite before low fuel readings prompted it to abort its mission. However, NASA spokesperson Kimberly D. Newton later explained that new data had indicated that DART had bumped the satellite, boosting its orbit by as much as 5.75 miles (9.3 kilometers). However, DART had abandoned its target approximately halfway through its 24-hour mission. The Board consisted of seven voting members from NASAs MSFC, NASAs GSFC and ARC; the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; and the U.S. Air Force Space Command. NASA assigned eight federal employees to serve as advisors to the Boardsix from MSFC, and one each from NASAs JSC and NASA Headquarters. NASA selected Scott D. Croomes of MSFC to chair the Board and Kerry L. Remp of GRC to serve ex officio, to assure that board activity conformed to NASAs procedural requirements.(NASA, NASA Announces Dart Mishap Investigation Board Members, news release 05-105, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05105_DART_mishap_board.html (accessed 29 June 2009); NASA Engineering and Safety Center, NESC Review of Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) Mission Mishap Investigation Review Board (MIB) (NESC Request No. 05-020-E, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, December 2006), http://klabs.org/richcontent/Reports/Failure_Reports/dart/ 167813main_rp-06-119_05-020-e_dart_report_final_dec_27.pdf (accessed 18 November 2009); Chris Kridler, Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-112, the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which effectively allowed U.S. astronauts to continue flying on Russian spacecraft, thereby maintaining the United States access to the ISS. The terms of the original act, passed in 2000, did not permit U.S. government agencies to make extraordinary payments to Russia, including purchasing space on Soyuz spacecraft, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. However, at the time that Congress had passed the original act, Russia had an agreement with the United States to provide 11 free voyages on Soyuz spacecraft to U.S. astronauts, so that NASA did not have to purchase space on Soyuz. In September 2005, American astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. had become the 11th U.S. passenger on a Soyuz, and, subsequently, Russia had required payment for any carriage of U.S. astronauts. Therefore, NASA had asked Congress to amend the act so that it could buy space on Russian spacecraft.(Guy Gugliotta, U.S. Access to Space Station Is Preserved, Washington Post, 11 November 2005.)
Aera Corporation, which had competed as American Astronautics in the X Prize private spaceflight competition, signed a five-year launch support agreement with the U.S. Air Force, securing access to Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. Although Aera had yet to launch a single test vehicle, the company planned to launch paying customers by the end of 2006. Aeras President and Chief Operating Officer Lewis Reynolds explained that the company had used computer-based modeling for most of its testing and had done very little testing of actual physical components for the spacecraft. The company intended to apply for a FAA launch license within 30 days and to secure a manufacturing facility for its seven-seat spaceship, the Altairis, by the end of April.(Alan Boyle, Dark Horse Makes Bold Claims in Space Race, MSNBC.com, 8 March 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7121988// (accessed 2 September 2009).)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns, news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns, Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
An international group of astronomers led by Debra A. Fischer of San Francisco State University announced that they had discovered the largest solid core yet found in an exoplanet. The planet, called HD 149026b, has a solid core that is approximately 70 times larger than Earths mass. The discovery was the first observational evidence of the core accretion theory of planetary formation, which posits that planets begin as small rock-ice cores and acquire additional mass through gravitational attraction of gas and other matter. The competing gravitational instability theory holds that planetary formation occurs after the rapid gravitational collapse of large gas clouds. Fischer and the other astronomers reported that they had determined that the mechanism of gravitational instability was unlikely to have produced the large, rocky core of HD 149026b.
The U.S. Air Force launched the most technologically advanced GPS satellite ever developed, the GPS IIR-14, on a Delta-2 rocket at 11:37 p.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS IIR-14 was the first of eight satellites planned for the new GPS, which the Air Force had created to provide improved encryption and GPS antijamming capabilities for the U.S. military, as well as an improved GPS signal for civilian users. At the time of the launch, the GPS constellation consisted of 28 satellites, which the Air Force was operating for both civilian and military users.(Lockheed Martin, First Modernized GPS Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully by the U.S. Air Force, news release, 26 September 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/ FIRSTMODERNIZEDGPSSATELLITEBUILTBYL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at Californias Edwards Air Force Base at 5:11 a.m. (PDT). The missionofficially designated STS-114was NASAs first Shuttle mission since the February 2003 loss of Columbia. The Shuttles successful reentry was particularly important, because the Columbia accident had occurred during the reentry phase of its mission. The missions primary objectives were to test and evaluate new safety procedures for Shuttle missions and to continue construction and maintenance of the ISS. Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson had performed some of the ISS and Shuttle maintenance tasks during three spacewalks on 30 July, 1 August, and 3 August. The total duration of STS-114 was 13 days, 21 hours, and 32 minutes.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114. 257)
The Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios launched Cosmos 1, the first solar-powered spacecraft, at 3:46 p.m. (EDT), on a Volna rocket from a Russian submarine in the Barents Sea. Russian Space Agency officials, however, were not certain that the spacecraft had attained orbit. The spacecrafts sponsors, the Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios, are U.S. nonprofit organizations that seek to increase the publics knowledge of and involvement in space exploration. The late American scientist Carl Sagan had helped found the Planetary Society, and Ann DruyanSagans widowhad founded Cosmos Studios. The two organizations had designed the craft and launched the mission to demonstrate the feasibility of solar power technology as an effective means of space travel. The pressure of solar light particlesphotonson the spacecrafts large, triangular, mirror-like solar sails were to propel the engineless, fuel-free Cosmos 1.(John Antczak for Associated Press, Solar Sail Spacecraft Launched from Russian Submarine, 21 June 2005; The Planetary Society, Projects: Solar Sailing, http://planetary.org/programs/projects/ solar_sailing/ (accessed 10 August 2009).)
The U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the December 2004 inaugural launch of Boeings Delta 4 Heavy Rocket, which had failed when engines shut down prematurely. The Air Force and Boeing had intended the launch of the rocket, which was transporting a dummy payload, as a full dress rehearsal. The plan had been to test the newest and largest member of Boeings next-generation rocket series before critical national security satellites began using it. Boeing had designed the rocket with three Common Booster Cores, each with a cryogenic main engine. The three cores, secured together, formed a craft capable of launching large cargo into space. The investigation had determined that each boosters engines had undergone premature shutdown during the launch, after internal sensors incorrectly determined that the engines had exhausted their liquid-oxygen fuel supply. Investigators had concluded that cavitationbubbles in the liquid oxygen plumbinghad caused the glitch. Major Rodney Houser, the lead investigator for the Air Force, stated that the investigating team would focus on determining the cause of the cavitation within the liquid-oxygen feed system and on implementing corrective measures to prevent the problems repetition.(Justin Ray, Delta 4-Heavy Investigation Identifies Rockets Problem, Spaceflight Now, 17 March 2005. 235)
Soyuz TMA-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying the Expedition 11 crew of three to the ISS. Russian Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American Flight Engineer John L. Phillips would replace Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Italys Roberto Vittori, also aboard, would conduct scientific experiments at the ISS before returning to Earth with Chiao and Sharipov.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, Soyuz Rocket Blasts Off to Station, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 April 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched two military satellites aboard an Atlas 3B, the last of Lockheed Martins Atlas 3 rockets. The launch marked the 145th and final launch from Complex 36 at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after 43 years of operation. NASA had built the complex in the early 1960s, specifically for its Atlas-Centaur program, which included the launches of NASAs historic Surveyor, Mariner, and Pioneer missions. Launches from the site had proved highly successful; the launch of the last Atlas 3B marked the 75th consecutive successful Atlas rocket launch, including all six Atlas 3 flights. Launch Complex 36 was one of the United States oldest continuously operating launch sites and the last of the U.S. launch sites to use a traditional blockhouse to control the launch. The final Atlas 3B carried a pair of formation-flying, classified satellites, which analysts believed were part of the Naval Ocean Surveillance System (NOSS) of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). Satellites in the NOSS, a network for monitoring ships around the globe, were reportedly capable of detecting radio transmissions from ships to pinpoint their locations precisely.(Justin Ray, Last Atlas 3 Rocket Launches a Pair of Spy Satellites and Atlas Rocket Workers Say Goodbye to Complex 36, Spaceflight Now, 4 February 2005; Todd Halvorson, Atlas 3 Climbs Through Fog to Final Successful Mission, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 February 2005.)
NASA officially refuted news reports that had circulated on 16 February claiming that NASA scientists affiliated with ARC had found strong evidence that life might exist on Mars. According to the news reports, during a private meeting in Washington, DC, two astrobiologists from Ames had told a group of space officials that they had found strong evidence, in the form of methane signatures, that life currently exists on Mars, hidden in caves and sustained by pockets of water. NASA stated that it did not have any observational data from any current Mars missions to support the claim. NASA further stated that the work the scientists had conducted did not directly support any conclusion regarding the existence of life on Mars but, rather, that the scientists research could help formulate a strategy for searching for such life. The scientists had not submitted any research papers asserting the existence of Martian life to any scientific journal.(NASA, NASA Statement on False Claim of Evidence of Life on Mars, news release 05-052, 18 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05052_mars_claim.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Bloomberg News, NASA Says Claims of Evidence of Current Life on Mars Are False, 19 February 2005; Brian Berger, Exclusive: NASA Researchers Claim Evidence of Present Life on Mars, Space.com, 16 February 2005, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/mars_life_050216.html (accessed 28 August 2009).)
NASA launched a new environmental satellite for NOAA, aboard a Boeing Delta 2 7320-10 expendable launch vehicle, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The NOAA-18 (N), the fourth in the series of five Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellites (POES) carrying improved imaging and sounding capabilities, would improve weather forecasting and monitor environmental events globally, collecting data about Earths surface and atmosphere. The craft also carried instruments used in COSPAS-SARSAT, the international Search-and-Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking System (COSPAS is the Russian acronym for Cosmicheskaya Sistema Poiska Avariynyh Sudo, which means Space System for the Search of Vessels in Distress). Established in 1982, COSPAS-SARSAT had saved 5,000 lives in the United States and 18,000 worldwide.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619; NASA, NASA Successfully Launches Environmental Satellite, news release 05- 129, 20 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05129_ NOAA_)
NASA launched its Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) at 7:43 a.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida on an Atlas 5 launch vehicle. The occasion marked the first time that NASA had used an Atlas 5 to launch an interplanetary mission. NASA had designed the MRO to conduct highly detailed analyses of Marss atmosphere, surface, and subsurface. From low orbit, the MRO would evaluate landing sites for future Mars missions and search for sites where water might have previously existed. NASA planned to examine the MRO data to seek evidence of previous life on the planet and to study planetary climate change. After two years of gathering data, the MRO would relay the information to Earth, using two robotic probes scheduled to arrive on Mars in 2008 and 2010.(NASA, NASAs Multipurpose Mars Mission Successfully Launched, news release 05-218, 12 August 2005; Thomas H. Maugh II, New Mars Orbiter Embarks on Ambitious Fact-Finding Mission, Los Angeles Times, 13 August 2005.)
The American Academy of Arts and Sciences released United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities, a research paper highly critical of the Vision for Space Exploration. In the paper, former Director of NASAs JSC George W. S. Abbey and former White House science advisor Neal F. Lane stated that the Vision for Space Exploration does not address major obstacles to the United States progress in space exploration and science. Those problems include predicted shortfalls in the U.S. engineering and science workforce and declining international cooperation on existing and planned space missions. Abbey and Lane also stated that the United States would be unlikely to realize the Visions objectives because of the diminishing U.S. commitment to the countrys commercial space industry and the declining role of basic science in the U.S. space program and in the national economy. NASA officials did not comment on the paper, stating that they had not yet seen it.(John Schwartz, Report Says Space Program Is Lacking Money and Focus, New York Times, 23 June 2005; George W. S. Abbey and Neal F. Lane, United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities (Occasional Paper, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA, 2005), 12.)
The Expedition 10 crew, American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov, returned to Earth from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-5 after almost 193 days in space. Together with Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, who had conducted scientific experiments at the ISS after his arrival on 17 April with Expedition 11, the crew landed on target in north-central Kazakhstan. Although the crew and recovery team encountered no major problems, weeks of heavy snow and rain had caused flooding in the steppes, complicating the recovery. Only three of the 10 recovery helicopters were able to land in the wet conditions. During their mission, Chiao and Sharipov had maintained ISS systems and conducted scientific research. They had replaced critical hardware in the Joint Quest Airlock, repaired U.S. spacesuits, completed two spacewalks to prepare the ISS for the arrival of a new European cargo spacecraft during the next year, and submitted a scientific research paper on the use of ultrasound in space. Chiao had voted in the U.S. presidential election the previous November, the first astronaut to do so in space. Vittori had spent 10 days in space, eight of them aboard the ISS, and had performed 22 experiments, including tests of astronaut fatigue, research on the durability of components of microsatellites, research into the electromagnetic waves that emanate from Earth and may be related to earthquakes, and experiments growing shoots as a potential food source for people in orbit.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report SS05-020a, 24 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020a_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Shamil Zumatov for Reuters, Russian, U.S., Italian Space Crew Return to Earth, 25 April 2005; Agence-France Presse, Astronauts Home Safely from International Space Station, 26 April 2005.)
NASAs implementation of its Integrated Financial Management Program (IFMP)NASA had begun implementing the IFMP in 2000 as a single accounting system to replace 11 separate accounting systems. At the request of the U.S. Congress, in 2003 GAO had examined NASAs progress on IFMP implementation and had recommended that NASA make 45 changes to the program. In its assessment of NASAs efforts to implement those recommended changes, GAO stated that NASA had made slow progress and still needed to implement most of the recommendations. The report also stated that NASAs financial management problems were in danger of threatening its capacity to manage its programs and to allocate its budget to projects and programs. NASA responded that it had made significant improvements under the IFMP and had made progress on more of GAOs recommendations than GAO had indicated in its report.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Business Modernization: Some Progress Made Toward Implementing GAO Recommendations Related to NASAs Integrated Financial Management Program (report no. GAO-05-799R, Washington, DC, 9 September 2005); Tamara Lytle, NASA Still Cant Balance Its Books, Auditors Say, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 October 2005.)
NASA announced the inauguration of SERVIR, an innovative regional monitoring system designed to provide early warnings to Central American decision makers about various ecological and climatic changes. SERVIR, Spanish for to serve, is the acronym for the Spanish phrase, Sistema Regional de Visualizacion y Monitoreo (Regional Visualization and Monitoring System). The purpose of the system was to aid the governments and industries of the seven countries of Central America and the southern Mexican states. NASA scientists had developed the system to track weather, climatological, and ecological eventsfor example, to monitor wildfires, red tides, and toxic algae bloomsusing NASAs research in Earth sciences and space-based observations. Daniel E. Irwin, SERVIR Project Manager at NASAs MSFC, remarked that the system was an excellent tool for gauging slow or periodic shifts in climate that could lead to drought or other long-term problems, in addition to identifying quick-forming weather phenomena that threaten human lives.(NASA, NASA Develops Central American Monitoring System, news release 05-038, 4 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05038_panama.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
The National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) in Hampton, Virginia, released a report commissioned by the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice and Science, which had concluded that, to keep pace with Europe, the U.S. government would need to spend more on aeronautics, not less. The report, Responding to the Call: Aviation Plan for American Leadership, recommended that, over the next five years, the U.S. government should restore NASAs aeronautics funding to 1998 levels, a goal that implied a spending level approximately twice that of President George W. Bushs proposal for FY 2006. The study team comprised more than 250 of the nations top aviation experts representing industry and academia. NIA President and Executive Director Robert Lindberg remarked that the United States aviation capabilities had eroded, despite the position of aviation as a critical component in the U.S. balance of trade. The report of more than 1,000 pages provided detailed investment plans, budgets, and needs assessments for seven aeronautics sectors: airspace systems, aviation safety and security, subsonic aircraft, supersonic aircraft, hypersonic technologies, rotorcraft, and workforce and education.(National Institute of Aerospace, NIA Releases Congressionally-Requested Aviation Plan, 3 May 2005, http://www.nianet.org/pressreleases/AviationPlan_050305.php (accessed 16 September 2009); Allison Connolly, Survey: NASA Cant Afford To Fall Behind in Aeronautics, Virginian Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 4 May 2005. 788 BBC News, First Marsis Radar Boom Deployed, 6 May 2005; Maggie McKee, Mars Express To Deploy Divining Rod at Last, New Scientist, 4 May 2005.)
NASA announced the establishment of the Exploration Systems Advisory Committee (ESAC), composed of leading experts from government, academia, and industry. NASA named Lester L. Lyles, a former commander of the U.S. Air Force Materiel Command to chair ESAC. Lyles had extensive experience managing large, high-technology organizations involving aeronautical and astronautical research, development, acquisition, and logistics. The committee would provide advice and recommendations to NASAs Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems, including input regarding plans, policies, programs, and other matters pertinent to the directorates responsibilities.
USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASAs Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probesViking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral, Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASAs budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASAs space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASAs Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
The Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft, a NASA technology demonstrator, launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, aboard a Pegasus-XL HAPS rocket released from an L-1011 cargo aircraft. NASA intended the launch to test the 360-kilogram (793.76-pound or 0.4-ton or 0.36-tonne) satellites video-guidance-system technology, which would enable DART to rendezvous with an experimental military communications satellite and maneuver around it. The technology would allow future spacecraft to approach and dock with another craft automatically.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the crew of ISS Expedition 12 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 11:55 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 12 were American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 11, comprising Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to remain at the station for nearly six months. The launch also included American executive Gregory Olsen, who would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with the Russian Space Agency. Olsen planned to return to Earth with the Expedition 11 crew on 10 October 2005.(NASA, Expedition 12 on the Way to International Space Station, news release 05-292, 30 September 2005. 843 NASA, Langley Center Director Lesa B. Roe, 3 October 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/ about/roe_bio.html (accessed 13 July 2009); NASA, Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director, news release 03-042, 13 June 2003.)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASAs workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administrations 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASAs efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttles retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASAs failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASAs ability to accomplish this, such as NASAs near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the Presidents Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 119, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
NASA and the FAA brought a demonstration of the Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) to Foley Square in downtown New York City. SATS represented one aspect of a public- private partnership focused on developing technology that would enable more people to fly directly to their destinations at their own convenience. The ultimate goal of the SATS project was for people to be able to access air travel in much the same way that they hail a cab. NASAs SATS Project Manager Jerry N. Hefner described a scenario in which a person would board a plane in his or her neighborhood to fly to a destination 500 miles away, without changing planes and without going through a hub. Instead, SATS would fly into and out of underused rural and suburban airports, reducing congestion at larger airports and easing traffic on interstate highways across the country. SATS Project Manager for the FAA Peter C. McHugh commented that those involved in the project believed that, as the travel population using SATS aircraft grew, minimal interference or intersection with the larger airline system would occur.(Roger Clark for NY1 Cable TV, NASA Tries To Change the Way Americans Fly, 16 March 2005. 234)
Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company announced the formation of a joint venture called United Launch Alliance, combining the production, engineering, testing, and launch operations associated with U.S. government launches of Boeing Delta and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. The merger ended a two-year legal battle between the two largest government contractors, in which Lockheed Martin had accused Boeing of cheating to win rocket-launch work. The venture eliminated market competition for launching weather satellites for NOAA, scientific satellites for NASA, spy satellites for the National Security Agency, and communications satellites for the U.S. Air Force. According to the agreement, the joint venture would produce both Boeings Delta and Lockheeds Atlas rockets, consolidating production at Boeings Decatur, Alabama, facility. Lockheeds Denver, Colorado, office would serve as headquarters, housing the engineering and administrative functions. Lockheed Martins Vice President of Financial Strategies Jeffrey D. MacLauchlan remarked that the preservation of the two separate rocket families was the crux of the ventures appeal to the federal government.(Lockheed Martin, Boeing, Lockheed Martin To Form Launch Services Joint Venture, news release, 2 May 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/BoeingLockheedMartin FormLaunchServi.html (accessed 17 September 2009); Renae Merle, Boeing, Lockheed Join Rocket Division, Washington Post, 3 May 2005.)
The crew of Expedition 11 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 9:09 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 11 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The two men had spent 179 days in space, during which time they had performed a variety of scientific experiments and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Accompanying Krikalev and Phillips on their return was American contractor Gregory Olsen, who had spent eight days on the ISS performing research under a commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency.(NASA, Expedition 11 Safely Returns from International Space Station, news release 05-340, 10 October 2005.)
NASA announced the successful completion of flight tests above a virtual forest fire to evaluate new flight-control software on board two small UAVs. The software experiment had sought to guide the UAVs simultaneously around obstacles, using principles derived from studies of the movements of fish and birds. Engineers and technicians from NASAs ARC and DFRC had conducted the flight tests over a remote area of Edwards Air Force Base in California, to investigate cooperative flight strategies for atmospheric sampling and for airborne monitoring and surveillance of natural disasters. John E. Melton of ARC, Principal Investigator for the Networked UAV Teaming Experiment, explained that his team had used two autopilot-equipped APV-3 UAVs, each with a 12-foot wingspan, to flight-test several novel approaches for assisting wildfire-suppression crews. The two craft had flown along computer-generated paths to demonstrate their ability to avoid obstacles in a cooperative and synchronized manner, without the assistance of flight personnel. Melton commented that the technology could eventually enable swarms of aircraft to move safely from one area to another as a group, collecting air samples on scientific missions or helping ground personnel monitor natural disasters.(NASA, New Software Allows UAVs to Team Up for Virtual Experiments, news release 05-078, 17 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05078_UAV_Software.html (accessed 6 June 2009).)
The first successful launch at a commercial spaceport in the United States took place when the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport launched a rocket called the Minotaur, carrying two satellites. The state governments of Virginia and Maryland had funded the spaceport to serve the commercial space launch market. Other institutions contributing to the venture included Old Dominion University and several aerospace companies. The facility was located on land leased from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) near Chincoteague, Virginia. Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, had built the rocket. One of the satellites it carried was a U.S. Air Force tactical surveillance satellite called TacSat-2. The other was a 10-kilogram (22-pound) NASA satellite called GeneSat 1, designed for experiments on E. coli bacteria.(Michael E. Ruane, At Va. Spaceport, Rocket Launches 1,000 Dreams, Washington Post, 17 December 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 638, 1 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx638.html (accessed 1 July 2010).)
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued its report, NASAs Deep Space Network: Current Management Structure Is Not Conducive To Effectively Matching Resources with Future Requirements. The report concluded that, although Deep Space Network (DSN) is able to meet most of the requirements of its current workload, serious questions exist as to whether it will be able to keep up with both near-term and future demands. The report also found that system infrastructure, which has been marked by extensive deferred maintenance, is aging and is likely to become increasingly fragile and subject to breakdown at a time when demand is anticipated to increase. Managed by NASAs JPL, DSN comprised communications antennas measuring up to 70 meters (229.6 feet), located in California, Australia, and Spain. Established in 1959, DSN supported an average of 35 to 40 deep space missions each year. However, the number of new deep space missions continued to increase, and existing legacy missions, such as Voyager missions, had remained in operation longer than initially planned. Therefore, NASA projected that, by 2020, DSN would have to support twice as many missions as currently. In a written response to GAOs report, NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that, although no mission had been unable to meet its mission requirements due to a lack of capability in the DSN, NASA shared GAOs concerns about the future capacity and capabilities of the system. She also noted that NASA had initiated a study to review the management structure for all of NASAs space communications activities.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASAs Deep Space Network: Current Management Structure Is Not Conducive To Effectively Matching Resources with Future Requirements (report no. GAO-06-445, Washington, DC, 27 April 2006), 2, 22, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06445.pdf (accessed 24 June 2010); Brian Berger, GAO Warns Deep Space Network Ill-Equipped To Meet Future Demands, Space News, 23 May 2006.)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 14, a six-month mission scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in September 2006. American astronaut Michael E. Lopez- Alegria would command the mission and serve as NASAs station science officer, and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin would serve as Flight Engineer. American astronaut Sunita L. Williams, making her first spaceflight, would join Expedition 14 in progress, after traveling to the ISS on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-116, scheduled for December 2006. ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter would travel to the ISS aboard Space Shuttle Discovery STS-121, scheduled for summer 2006, serving as the third astronaut on Expedition 13 and later joining the Expedition 14 crew until Williamss arrival. Lopez-Alegria had served on board Space Shuttle Columbia STS-73 in 1995, on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-92 in 2000, and on Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 in 2002, conducting five spacewalks during the assembly of the station complex. Tyurin had served as Flight Engineer of ISS Expedition 3 in 2001. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 14, American astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Clayton C. Anderson.(NASA, NASA Announces 14th International Space Station Crew, news release 06-209, 2 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06209_14th_ISS_crew.html (accessed 16 March 2010); Tariq Malik, NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew, Space.com, 3 May 2006.)
NASAs Discovery returned to Earth, landing at NASAs KSC at 9:14 a.m. (EDT) to complete the 13-day Mission STS-121. During STS-121, the crew had tested the use of Discoverys robotic arm boom extension as a work platform, performed repairs to the exterior of the ISS, delivered 14 tons (12.7 tonnes or 12,700 kilograms) of equipment and supplies to the orbiting space station, and transported ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter to the ISS. Reiter joined Russian Pavel V. Vinogradov and American Jeffrey N. Williams as an ISS crew member, marking the first time since May 2003 that the ISS had three crew members. Discovery crew had also tested improved safety procedures and equipment for the Shuttle. Furthermore, the flight had verified the safety of a significant aerodynamic modification to the Shuttles external fuel tank. More specifically, NASA had removed protuberance air load ramps from the external fuel tank, because a piece of foam had jettisoned from that area of the tank during Discoverys launch for the Return to Flight Mission (STS-114) in 2005.(NASA, NASA Welcomes Space Shuttle Crew Back to Earth, news release 06-280, 17 July 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/sep/HQ_06321_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
NASA announced the crew for the Space Shuttle Discovery STS-120 mission, scheduled to launch an Italian-built U.S. module for the ISS in summer 2007. The Node 2 module would interconnect the research, habitation, control, and docking modules of the ISS. American astronaut Pamela A. Melroy, the second woman to command a Shuttle, would command the mission, and American astronaut George D. Zamka would serve as Pilot. Melroy had served as Pilot of Space Shuttle Discovery STS-92 in 2000 and as Pilot of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 in 2002. Other crew members would be American astronauts Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, and Michael J. Foreman, and Italian astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli of ESA. NASA and the Italian space agency, Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI), had arranged Nespolis mission within the framework of a MOU. According to the terms of the MOU, Italy would supply three pressurized Multi-Purpose Logistic Modules (MPLM) to the United States, which would assign to Italy flight opportunities and the use of the ISS.(ESA, ESA Astronaut Paolo Nespoli Assigned To Crew for Shuttle Flight STS-120, news release 19-2006, 19 June 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_19_2006_p_EN.html (accessed 8 June 2010); NASA, NASA Assigns Crew for Shuttle Mission, news release 06-242, 19 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_ 06242_crew_shuttle.html (accessed 8 June 2010).)
To raise money for the Russian space program, ISS crew member Mikhail V. Tyurin drove a golf ball off the ISS during a spacewalk, an event that comprised a small, but highly publicized, part of the 5.5-hour spacewalk. Tyurin and American astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria spent most of the spacewalk conducting serious tasks, such as installing a proton detector to monitor solar eruptions. NASA beamed imagery of the event to Mission Control, showing Tyurin using a 6- iron to drive a lightweight replica of a golf ball off a special spring-loaded tee. Element 21 Golf Company of Toronto, Canada, had paid the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos an undisclosed fee for the golf outing, and NASA had approved it after determining that the ball posed no threat to the ISS. NASA expected the ball to enter Earths orbit and to incinerate in the upper atmosphere within a few days.(Mark Carreau, After Sending Golf Ball into Space, Its Down To Business, Houston Chronicle, 23 November 2006; Stefano S. Coledan, From Outer Space, a Cry of Fore! New York Times, 23 November 2006.)
In a comprehensive survey published in the Journal of Glaciology, H. Jay Zwally, of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in Maryland, and a team of NASA scientists confirmed
NASAs Stardust mission return capsule landed at the U.S. Air Force Utah Test and Training Range at 5:10 a.m. (EST). The spacecraft, which had launched on 7 February 1999, flying 2.88 billion miles (4.63 billion kilometers) and circling the Sun three times, was the first to bring comet material from outer space. On 2 January 2004, Stardust had flown within 149 miles (239.79 kilometers) of comet Wild 2s nucleus, to collect microscopic dust particles. During the voyage, the spacecraft had captured bits of interstellar dust streaming into the solar system from other parts of the galaxy. NASA expected that the 100-pound (45.36-kilogram) capsule ejected from Stardust would contain approximately 1 million samples of comet and interstellar dust particles, trapped in a material like spun glass, called aerogel. NASA would transfer the capsule to a laboratory at its Johnson Space Center (JSC), where scientists would examine the samples. According to Principal Investigator for the mission, Donald E. Brownlee, of the University of Washington, Seattle, this has been a fantastic opportunity to collect the most primitive material in the solar system. We fully expect some of the comet particles to be older than the Sun.(Guy Gugliotta, Stardust Capsule Brings First Comet Sample to Earth, Washington Post, 17 January 2006; Warren Leary, Space Capsule Bearing Comet Dust Lands in Utah, New York Times, 17 January 2006; NASA, NASAs Comet Hunter on Final Approach for Sunday Landing, news release 06-028, 12 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06028_stardust.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos launched the crew of ISS Expedition 13 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 9:30 p.m. (EST) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 13 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Pavel V. Vinogradov and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 12, which comprised American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to stay at the station for six months. In NASAs second return-to-flight mission, STS-121, scheduled for July 2006, Discovery would bring ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter to the ISS to join the crew of Expedition 13. The Russian spacecraft also transported astronaut Marcos C. Pontes of the Brazilian space agency, Agencia Espacial Brasileira (AEB), who had joined NASA as an international astronaut in 1998. Pontes, the first Brazilian to fly in space, would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with Roskosmos, returning to Earth with the Expedition 12 crew on 8 April 2006.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report SS06-013, 29 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_SS06013_ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 24 September 2009); NASA, International Space Station Status Report: SS06-014, 1 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_SS06014_ ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Tariq Malik, Orbital Rendezvous: Fresh Crew, Brazilian Astronaut Arrive at ISS, Space.com, 1 April 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060401_exp13_ docking.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
Albert Scott Crossfield, legendary test pilot and aeronautical engineer, died at the age of 84, when his single-engine Cessna plane crashed. During his five-year tenure (19501955) as a research pilot for NASAs forerunner, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Crossfield had flown most of the experimental aircraft tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California. In 1953, at the controls of a Douglas D-558-2 Skyrocket, he had been the first person to fly at twice the speed of sound, achieving a speed of Mach 2more than 1,320 miles per hour (2,124 kilometers per hour). Crossfield had later become the chief test pilot for North American Aviation, where he was the consultant for the revolutionary X-15 rocket-powered airplane. One of his two-dozen flights aboard the X-15 had reached Mach 2.97, almost three times the speed of sound. In 1993 Crossfield had received the NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal for his contributions to aeronautics research and development. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin described Crossfield as not only one of the greatest pilots who ever flew, but also an expert aeronautical engineer, aerodynamicist, and designer who made significant contributions . . . to systems testing, reliability engineering, and quality assurance for the Apollo command and service modules and Saturn V second stage.(Dennis McLellan, Scott Crossfield, 84; 1st Man To Fly at Twice the Speed of Sound Helped Craft X-15 Rocket Plane, Los Angeles Times, 21 April 2006; NASA, NASA Administrator Statement Regarding the Tragic Loss of Aviation Pioneer A. Scott Crossfield, news release 06-191, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/apr/HQ_)
James A. Van Allen, a major figure in physics and space exploration, died at the age of 91. Born in 1914, Van Allen had played a prominent role in early American rocket research, including the development of the radiation detectors contained in the United States first successful satellite, Explorer 1. Launched January 1958, Explorer 1 had captured data revealing two belts of charged particles above Earths magnetic fieldphenomena later known as the Van Allen radiation belts. The finding was among the first major scientific discoveries of the early space age. In 1958 Van Allen had chaired a group of scientists who recommended that the United States create an independent national space agency by 1960 and launch a human mission to the Moon by 1968. Van Allen later became involved in several NASA projects, including the development of Galileo, Pioneers 10 and 11, and several Mariner spacecraft. During his lifetime, Van Allen had received numerous awards, including the National Medal of Science and NASAs Medal of Exceptional Achievement.(Walter Sullivan, James A. Van Allen, Discoverer of Earth-Circling Radiation Belts, Is Dead at 91, New York Times, 10 August 2006; NASA, James A. Van Allen (19142006), http://history.nasa.gov/sputnik/vanallen.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
NASA produced the first live, high-definition television broadcasts from space, in cooperation with JAXA, American broadcaster Discovery HD Theater, and Japanese broadcaster Nippon Hoso Kyokai (NHK). During two 20-minute broadcasts, beamed live from the ISS, crew member Thomas A. Reiter filmed a narrated tour of the station, led by fellow crew member Michael E. Lopez-Alegria. The event was the result of a 2002 agreement between JAXA and NASA. Discovery and NHK had supplied the cameras and transmission equipment in exchange for first broadcast rights. NASA planned to use the equipment for educational and scientific purposes. NASA had produced high-definition footage during earlier missions but had possessed no equipment enabling broadcast from space.(Mark Carreau, Space Station Transmits Live High-Definition TV Signals, Houston Chronicle, 16 November 2006; NASA, NASA Schedules First Live HDTV Broadcast from Space, media advisory M06-176, 9 November 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/nov/HQ_M06176_HDTV.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
NASA launched two meteorological satellites, CloudSat and CALIPSO (Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations), aboard a Boeing Delta 2 rocket, at 11:02 (UT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellites would eventually circle 438 miles (705 kilometers) above Earth in a Sun-synchronous polar orbit. CloudSat, an experimental mission designed to study the effects of clouds on climate and weather, was 1,000 times more sensitive than typical weather radar, using millimeter-wavelength radar to measure the altitude and properties of clouds. CALIPSO carried three instruments to study the role that clouds and atmospheric aerosols (airborne particles) play in regulating Earths weather, climate, and air quality. The two satellites would become part of a constellation of Earth-observing satellites known as the A-train, joining the satellites Aqua, Aura, and PARASOL.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630; NASA, NASA Launches Satellites for Weather, Climate, Air-Quality Studies, news release 06-190, 28 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/apr/HQ_06190_Cloudsat_ CALIPSO_launch.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Jesco von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2006The Year in Review, July 20, 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2006/us.html (accessed 3 March 2010).)
NASA announced major personnel changes at three of its centers, Ames Research Center (ARC) in California, Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida, and Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. G. Scott Hubbard, Director of ARC, announced his resignation, stating that he had agreed to assume the Carl Sagan Chair for the Study of Life in the Universe at the SETI (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California. Hubbard had worked at Ames since 1987, serving as Director since 2002, and had previously served on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board and as the first Director of the NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA appointed William W. Parsons Jr., Director of Stennis since 2005, as Deputy Director of KSC. Parsonss tenure at NASA had spanned 16 years. As Space Shuttle Program Manager after the Columbia accident, he had directed NASAs return-to-flight efforts, which had culminated, in the summer of 2005, in the successful flight of Discovery in STS-114. Parsons had also led NASAs recovery efforts after Hurricane Katrina. NASA appointed Richard J. Gilbrech, who had worked at Stennis since 1991, as Director of SSC. He had served as Deputy Director of LaRC in Virginia, as Deputy Director of NASAs Engineering Safety Center, and had worked at various NASA flight centers.(NASA, NASA Announces Senior Management Changes, news release 06-031, 23 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06031_personnel_changes.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Picayune Item (MS), NASA Announces Management Changes at Stennis Space Center, 25 January 2006.)
GAO released a report stating that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) needed to correct its unrealistic cost estimates for its major space acquisition programs. Analyzing six of the U.S. Air Forces ongoing space programs, GAO had found that the programs estimated costs had increased by US$12.2 billion, 44 percent over initial cost estimates. The report attributed this cost growth to the DODs practice of commencing programs before determining whether sufficient financial resources would be available to complete them. GAO suggested that this practice had developed because of pressures on the DOD to secure program funding. The report also stated that the DODs unrealistic cost estimates had exacerbated its problems with acquisitions for the Air Forces programs. For example, the DOD had frequently had to move funds between programs to cover the costs of poorly performing programs. This had led to inefficiencies in meeting programs costs and schedules. The DOD agreed with the reports findings and outlined specific steps it planned to take to make the Air Forces cost estimates more accurate.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Space Acquisitions: DOD Needs To Take More Action To Address Unrealistic Cost Estimates of Space Systems (report no. GAO-07-96, Washington, DC, 17 November 2006), 16, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0796.pdf (accessed 29 April 2010).)
NASA and the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos announced the crew members for Expedition 15, the next expedition to the ISS: American astronauts Clayton C. Anderson and Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonauts Oleg V. Kotov and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. The ISS partners had scheduled Kotov and Yurchikhin to fly to the ISS in March 2007; Anderson would travel to the ISS in June 2007, and Tani would go in August 2007. Yurchikhin would command Expedition 15, and the remaining three crew members would serve as flight engineers.(NASA, NASA Announced New International Space Station Crew, news release 06-337, 18 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06337_new_station_crew.html (accessed 20 April 2010).)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force signed an agreement to create an aeronautics research partnership. According to the MOU, which NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Secretary of the U.S. Air Force Michael W. Wynne signed, the two organizations would freely exchange research information, strive to reduce the duplication of research, and enhance their long-term research planning. The agreement covered several areas of aeronautics research, including advanced aircraft design, aviation safety, materials development, and propulsion management.(NASA, NASA, Air Force Agree To Aeronautics Cooperation, news release 06-289, 7 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06289_air_force.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
GAO released a report criticizing NASAs plans to acquire rockets and spacecraft for the Vision for Space Exploration program and recommending that the U. S. Congress restrict some of its funding until NASA had completed its review of the program. NASA expected to finish the review during the following year. The report addressed NASAs plans to sign long-term agreements with the contractors for the project in late 2006. NASA planned for the contractors to design, develop, and produce both the CEVthe the crew exploration vehicle, which would replace the Space Shuttleand the rocket that would launch it. The report stated that NASA had not completed the first phase of its ongoing design and cost estimates for these projects, and that signing the contracts would place the projects at risk for cost, performance, and schedule problems. GAO recommended postponing the contracts until after NASA had completed its preliminary design reviews for those projects. NASA expected to complete the final phase of the ongoing review by March 2008. The report specifically recommended that Congress restrict NASAs appropriations and obligations for the CEV, providing only the funds needed to complete the preliminary review.(Mark Carreau, GAO Warns NASA of Problems with Moon, Mars Strategy, Houston Chronicle, 27 July 2006; U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASA: Long-Term Commitment To and Investment in Space Exploration Program Requires More Knowledge (report no. GAO-06-817R, Washington, DC, 17 July 2006): 19, http://www. gao.gov/new.items/d06817r.pdf (accessed 22 January 2010).)
NASA launched the first three microsatellites in the Space Technology 5 (ST 5) mission, aboard a Pegasus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, at 9:04 a.m. (EST). The ST 5 mission was part of NASAs New Millennium Program, created to identify, develop, build, and test innovative technologies and concepts for use in future missions. NASA launched the three satellites to a near-Earth polar elliptical orbit that would enable them to travel from approximately 300 kilometers (190 miles) to approximately 4,500 kilometers (2,800 miles) above Earth. Once in orbit, the satellites would form a row, with each satellite approximately 40 to 200 kilometers (25 to 125 miles) away from the others. Miniature boom-mounted magnetometers on each satellite would collect data enabling coordinated multi-point measurements of Earths magnetic field. This type of measurement would be useful in future missions studying the effect of solar activity on Earths magnetosphere, the bubble that protects Earth from harmful space radiation. The satellites would remain operational for approximately 90 days.(NASA, NASAs Space Technology 5 Satellites Soar into Space, news release 06-104, 22 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06104_ST5_Successful_Launch.html (accessed 14 September 2009); NASA, Space Technology 5: Mission Overview, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/st-5/main/index. html (accessed 4 January 2010).)
The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos launched a Soyuz TMA-9 passenger craft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 04:08 (UT). The spacecraft carried two ISS crew members, American astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin. Accompanying the two astronauts was the first female space tourist to the ISS, Anousheh Ansari, an Iranian-American entrepreneur who had paid US$20 million for the voyage. Ansari would perform blood and muscular experiments for ESA aboard the ISS.(Marc Kaufman, As Shuttle Heads Home, NASA Lauds Mission, Washington Post, 18 September 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 635, 1 October 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx635.html (accessed 17 March 2010).)
NASA announced the appointment of retired U.S. Air Force Brigadier General Simon P. Pete Worden as Director of NASAs ARC in California. Worden, a research professor of astronomy at the University of Arizona, Tucson, had served as Director and Deputy Director at the U.S. Air Force Space Command and had specialized in advanced satellite and launch concepts. He had also served as second deputy for technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, where he had received NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal for directing the 1994 Clementine lunar probe mission.(NASA, NASA Names Worden New Ames Director, news release 06-193, http://www.nasa.govhome/hqnews/ 2006/apr/HQ_06193_Worden_named_director.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Warren Ferster, Worden Named Director of NASA Ames, Space.com, 21 April 2006.)
The crew of ISS Expedition 12, American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 7:48 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The two men had spent nearly 190 days in space, conducting two spacewalks and using every Russian docking port on the complex. They were the first ISS crew to dock at all the Russian ports. Accompanying McArthur and Tokarev on their return was Brazils first astronaut Marcos C. Pontes, who had spent eight days on the ISS conducting scientific experiments, under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report: SS06-016, 8 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/ 2006/apr/HQ_SS06016_ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 25 September 2009).)
79Juliet Eilperin, Study Confirms Past Few Decades Warmest on Record, Washington Post, 23 June 2006; National Academies Office of News and Public Information,  High Confidence That Planet Is Warmest in 400 Years; Less Confidence in Temperature Reconstructions Prior to 1600, press release, 22 June 2006, http://www8. nationalacademies.org/onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=11676 (accessed 9 August 2010); Andrew C. Revkin, Panel Supports a Controversial Report on Global Warming, New York Times, 23 June 2006; see also National Research Council Committee, Surface Temperature Reconstructions for the Last 2,000 Years (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), http://www.nap.edu/catalog/11676.html (accessed 1 October 2010). over the next few months to assess the satellites performance. The mission also demonstrated an innovative communications technology that used miniature spacecraft-radio transponders, coupled with antennas, for space-to-ground communications and tracking.(NASA, NASAs Micro-Satellites Complete Technology Validation Mission, news release 06-254, 29 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_06254_microsatellites.html (accessed 22 February 2010).)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Minotaur rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 9:40 p.m. (EDT), carrying six Taiwanese-American weather microsatellites. The launch of the weather satellites was part of a US$100 million mission known in the United States as COSMIC (Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, and Climate) and as FORMOSAT 3 in Taiwan. Taiwans National Science Council and National Space Organization had provided primary funding for the project, with contributions from the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and its partners, including NASA. After an initial orbit approximately 300 miles (500 kilometers) above Earth, the satellites would achieve their final circular orbits 13 months later, orbiting between 435 and 500 miles (700 and 800 kilometers) above Earth. The principal instrument on each of the 155-pound (62-kilogram) satellites would be a GPS receiver, originally developed by NASAs JPL. Working together with other on-board instruments, GPS antennas would track the extent to which the GPS signals bend when they pass through (are occulted by) the Earths atmosphere. Measuring the degree to which the signals bend would enable scientists to evaluate atmospheric conditions, such as air density, temperature, moisture, and electron density. According to Jay S. Fein, Program Director in the NSFs Division of Atmospheric Sciences, the satellites would obtain new information that would have a tremendous impact on geosciences research and weather prediction, and would be an important contribution to global Earth observations.(Leonard David, COSMIC Constellation To Study Atmosphere, MSNBC.com, 14 April 2006; Tariq Malik, Minotaur Rocket Orbits COSMIC Constellation To Scan Earths Atmosphere, Space.com, 14 April 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060414_ cosmic_mino_ launch.html (accessed 24 June 2010); Justin Ray, Mission Status Center, Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2006.)
The American company Space Adventures Limited announced that, in conjunction with the Russian space agency Roskosmos, it would offer spacewalks outside of the ISS for US$35 million. The fee included US$20 million for a space tourist to take a 10-day round-trip to the ISS on a Soyuz spacecraft and US$15 million for the traveler to make a spacewalk wearing a Russian spacesuit. Space Adventures Limited had previously sent three customers to the ISS, including Dennis A. Tito, who had become the first space tourist in 2001. The announcement was controversial because the approval of all 15 international partners in the ISS is required for plans of this type. A NASA spokesperson stated that Roskosmos had not yet informed NASA of its intent to sell spacewalks at the ISS.(John Schwartz, Walk in Space for $15 Million (Plus Airfare), New York Times, 21 July 2006.)
years of U.S. civil aeronautics research and technology should provide a foundation for achieving six strategic objectives, including improved safety and reliability and increased capacity, efficiency and performance. The report provided a list of 51 high-priority aeronautics research and technology challenges for NASA. To achieve the goals outlined in the report, the committee recommended that NASA cooperate more with public and private organizations, to share facilities and tools for key projects, and with other federal agencies that support aeronautics research, such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).(National Academies Office of News and Public Information, U.S. Should Strengthen Foundation for Future of Air Transportation, press release, 5 June 2006, http://www8.nationalacademies.org/onpinews/newsitem.aspx? RecordID=11664 (accessed 15 September 2010); see also National Research Council, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), http://www.nap.edu/ catalog/11664 (accessed 16 September 2010).)
A privately funded experimental spacecraft called Genesis I launched from Russias Ural Mountains at 12:53 (UT). The launch was the first for Bigelow Aerospace, a United Statesbased company founded by American Robert T. Bigelow. The company had designed Genesis I as an inflatable spacecraft. Bigelow Aerospace planned to launch similar spacecraft and to connect them to Genesis I to form an expandable space station. The company reportedly planned to use the completed structure as a hotel, scientific laboratory, or sports arena, providing services for a commercial spaceflight business.(Alicia Chang, Private Spacecraft Takes Off, Houston Chronicle, 13 July 2006.)
Researchers announced at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) that, using NASAs Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had been able for the first time to observe directly the close companion star to Polaris (the North Star). The newly observed star, one of two in the near vicinity of Polaris, is approximately 3.2 billion kilometers (2 billion miles) from Polaris and hundreds of times fainter. Polaris is Earths nearest example of a Cepheid variable star. Scientists use the variations in the brightness of Cepheid stars to judge the distances of galaxies and the expansion rate of the universe. Imaging its companion star had enabled scientists to estimate Polariss mass at 4.3 times that of the Sun, but future measurements of the companion stars motion during its 30-year orbit would enable scientists to make a more accurate determination of Polariss mass. Knowledge of mass size is critical to understanding the composition and evolution of Cepheids.(NASA, Theres More to the North Star Than Meets the Eye, news release 06-004, 9 January 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/ja/HQ_06004_hubble.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Maggie McKee, Hubble Reveals Pole Stars Closest Companion, New Scientist, 10 January 2006.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing to address the results of the statutorily mandated Nunn-McCurdy review of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS). NOAA, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) jointly managed NPOESS, which would provide data and imagery to help weather forecasters, climatologists, and the military map and monitor changes in weather, climate, the oceans, and the environment. The Nunn-McCurdy amendment to the Defense Authorization Act of 1983 (10 U.S.C. 2433) provided that Congress must review any DOD-funded program that was more than 25 percent over budget, to determine whether and in what manner it should continue. In January 2006, the Secretary of the Air Force had notified Congress that the NPOESS program would exceed the 25 percent Nunn-McCurdy threshold. The three NPOESS managing agencies had reviewed the program and determined that it should continue. However, NPOESS must reduce the number of its satellites from six to four and eliminate five sensors, including three for climate research. The agencies would postpone the first NPOESS satellite launch until 2013 and discontinue work on the key weather sensor known as Conically Scanning Microwave Image/Sounder (CMIS). The United States would temporarily rely on Europe for the data that CMIS would have collected, including ocean wind speeds. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified regarding NASAs compliance with the mandates of the Nunn-McCurdy recertified NPOESS program, emphasizing that NASA would continue to provide cost-effective technologies for two key components of this programthe NPOESS Preparatory Project (NPP) and the continuity of long-term climate measurements.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NPOESS: Results of the Nunn-McCurdy Review of NOAAs Weather Satellite Program, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 June 2006, 36, 2225, http://www.gpo.gov/ fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG- 109hhrg27970&packageId=CHRG-109hhrg27970&fromBrowse=true (accessed 20 December 2010); NOAA, Center for Satellite Applications and Research (STAR), STAR Acronyms, http://www.star.nesdis.noaa.gov/star/ acronyms.php (accessed 5 October 2010).)
GAO released a report examining federal government agencies progress toward implementing a government panels recommendations to obviate anticipated problems in the U.S. aerospace industry. In 2002 the Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry had stated that the nations aerospace industry could face various economic and security problems unless federal agencies performed several innovations. These included the creation of new aerospace technologies and the development of a space policy incorporating public-private partnerships. GAO stated that federal agencies had made preliminary efforts to implement some of the Commissions recommendations but had taken little action on others, such as the creation of a government-wide management structure for aerospace activities. The report noted that NASA had created a directorate to implement the Vision for Space Exploration. However, some aerospace experts believed that NASAs efforts to implement the Vision might have a negative effect on existing space exploration programs with demonstrated benefits.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, U.S. Aerospace Industry: Progress in Implementing Aerospace Commission Recommendations, and Remaining Challenges (report no. GAO-06-920, Washington, DC, 13 September 2006), 15, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06920.pdf (accessed 17 March 2010).)
NASA announced the crew for International Space Station (ISS) Expedition 13, scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in March 2006. Russian cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov would command the mission, and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams would serve as Flight Engineer and NASA Science Officer. Expedition 13 would also include the first Brazilian astronaut to fly in space, Marcos Cesar Pontes, who would engage in scientific experiments aboard the ISS for approximately one week. Williams had flown aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-101 as Mission Specialist in May 2000, performing a spacewalk that lasted almost 7 hours. As Flight Engineer for the 1997 mission to the Russian Mir space station, Vinogradov had completed five spacewalks. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 13: American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Fyodor N. Yurchikhin.(NASA, NASA Announces Next International Space Station Crew, news release 06-002, 5 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06002_Expedition_13_crew.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Tariq Malik, NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew, Space.com, 5 January 2006, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/060105_exp13_crew_announcement.html (accessed 28 June 2010).)
GAO released a report recommending that the U.S. Congress and the FAA reconsider the FAAs roles and responsibilities regarding the burgeoning commercial space tourism industry. In 2004 Congress had made the FAA responsible for regulations to ensure the safety of space tourists. However, Congress had also limited the FAAs ability to regulate crew and passenger safety until 2012, so that safety regulations would not stifle the budding space tourism industry. The GAO report noted that, although the FAA had performed well in its efforts to ensure that the space tourism industry followed safe procedures, the industrys rapid growth required the FAA to take a greater role than anticipated in creating safety regulations to for the period before 2012. The report suggested that, to accomplish its goal, the FAA would need additional funds and personnel, including staff with sufficient expertise to evaluate complex launch technologies. Furthermore, the report recommended that Congress reconsider the FAAs dual role in both regulating and promoting the industry, warning that this dual role presented a potential conflict of interest. The FAA and the Department of Transportation agreed with the reports findings and recommendations.(Mike Toner, FAA Put on Guard for Space Tourism, Atlanta Journal-Constitution (GA), 30 October 2006; U.S. Government Accountability Office, Commercial Space Launches: FAA Needs Continued Planning and Monitoring To Oversee the Safety of the Emerging Space Tourism Industry (report no. GAO-07-16, Washington, DC, 20 October 2006), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0716.pdf (accessed 20 April 2010).)
NASAs Associate Administrator of the Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, Lisa J. Porter, announced a comprehensive restructuring of NASAs aeronautics research programs. Speaking at an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference, Porter stated, NASA is returning to long-term investment in cutting-edge fundamental research in traditional aeronautics disciplines. We are investing in research for the long term in areas that are appropriate to NASAs unique capabilities and meeting our charter of addressing national needs and benefiting the public good. The four major programs restructured were fundamental aeronautics, aviation safety, airspace systems, and the aeronautics test program. Research in fundamental aeronautics was concentrated in four areas: hypersonics, supersonics, subsonic fixed wing, and subsonic rotary wing. The goal for research in fundamental aeronautics would be to produce knowledge, data, and capabilities for both civilian and military applications, and design tools to benefit a broad range of air vehicles. Research in the aviation safety program would address four areas: aircraft aging and durability, integrated vehicle health management, and integrated resilient aircraft control. The primary research responsibility of the airspace system program would be the development of concepts, capabilities, and technologies for high-capacity, efficient, and safe airspace and airport systems. The aeronautics test program would focus on the strategic use, operations, and maintenance of NASAs wind-tunnel and air-breathing propulsion test facilities at Ames Research Center (ARC), Glenn Research Center (GRC), and Langley Research Center (LaRC).(NASA, NASA Restructures Aeronautics Research, news release 06-008, 12 January 2006, http://www.m\nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06008_ARMD_Restructuring.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Lisa J. Porter, Reshaping NASAs Aeronautics Program (conference presentation, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reno, Nevada, 12 January 2006).)
Associate Administrator for NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missionsSTS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASAs efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitzs resignation, praising the former astronauts tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASAs decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttles reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA, news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, Scott J. Doc Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former), http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, NASAs Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family, Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
NASA issued a statement in support of astronaut Daniel M. Tani and his family. Tani, stationed at the ISS, had lost his mother on 19 December when she died in an automobile accident. NASA spokesperson Eileen M. Hawley remarked that NASA believed this was the first time an American astronaut had lost a family member while on a mission in space. The statement indicated that NASA intended to provide Tani and his family with any assistance they needed. Hawley explained that NASA did not have a prescribed policy for emergencies such as this and would respond according to Tanis wishes.(NASA, NASA Statement on the Death of Astronaut Dan Tanis Mother, news release 07-282, 20 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07282_Mike_Coays_Statement.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Mark Carreau and Carol Christian, Space Station Astronauts Mom Dies in Car Wreck, Houston Chronicle, 20 December 2007.)
The U.S. Missile Defense Agency successfully launched a Minotaur-1 rocket from the Mid- Atlantic Regional Spaceport launchpad on Wallops Island, Virginia, at 2:47 a.m. (EST). The rocket carried the Near Field Infrared Experiment (NFIRE), which was part of a study to improve the interception of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and to assess the viability of a laser communication system for missile-defense applications. During the mission, an infrared tracking sensor on board NFIRE would collect exhaust-plume data from two disarmed Minutemen ICBMs, which the agency would launch later in 2007 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch of Minotaur 1 was the second launch from the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport. Operated by a consortium including Old Dominion University and the states of Maryland and Virginia, the spaceport was one of six federally licensed spaceports in the United States.(Stephen Furness, Wallops Spaceports 2:47 a.m. Launch a Success, Chincoteague Beacon (VA), 24 April 2007; Jon W. Glass, Rocket Launched Successfully from Eastern Shore Spaceport, Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 25 April 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Qall CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)were technology demonstrators, including twoCalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSatCAPE 1with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
NASAs Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate and the American Helicopter Society (AHS) selected Eric Greenwood IIa graduate student at the University of Maryland, who was studying aerospace engineering with a specialty in rotorcraft acousticsas the first winner of the
NASA announced an agreement with the U.S. Air Force to support abort-flight-test requirements for the Orion Project. Under a contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chandler, Arizona, the U.S. Air Force Space Development and Test Wing at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, had scheduled flight tests of abort-test boosters. The purpose of the tests, which would begin in 2009 at White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) in New Mexico and would last through 2011, was to support certification of the Orion CEVs launch-abort system. The system included a small escape rocket designed to ensure the safety of the crew in the event of a launch-vehicle malfunction while on the launchpad or during ascent to orbit. Of the six tests planned, two would simulate a situation involving an abort from the launchpad and would require no booster; the remainder would use abort-test boosters to simulate aborts at three stressing conditions along the Ares launch-vehicle trajectory.(NASA, NASA Buys Abort Test Boosters for Orion Flight Tests, news release 07-86, 16 April 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07086_Orion_ATB_purchase.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASAs JPL announced that, after entering the Victoria Crater on 13 September, Opportunity had reached its first destination inside the crater, driving 7.45 meters (24 feet) on 18 September and 2.47 meters (8 feet) further on 22 September. On 25 September, the rover had descended 2.25 meters (7.38 feet) down the inner slope of the 800-meter-wide (2,625-foot-wide) crater to a band of relatively bright bedrock, positioning itself to examine a selected slab of rock composed of three distinct layers. After the science team had conducted safety checks, Opportunity would examine the rock, using the tools at the end of its robotic arm. Safety checks were necessary because Opportunity was sitting on the slope at a 25 tilt. Victoria was the largest crater that Opportunity had visited during its nearly four Earth years of Mars exploration. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, the Rover Science Principal Investigator, explained that, through the several planned stops along the band of rock, scientists hoped to 141 figure out the processes that had led to Victorias formation and to its distinctive appearance.
NASA celebrated the 80 anniversary of Charles A. Lindberghs solo transatlantic flight with Lindberghs grandson Erik Lindbergh, himself an aviator, who had recreated his grandfathers historic flight in 2002. Erik Lindbergh joined NASA in its rededication of a unique astronomy craft, a 747 airliner, which Pan American Airways had christened Clipper Lindbergh in 1977. NASA had modified the aircraft, enabling it to carry a 45,000-pound (22.5-ton or 20.4 tonnes) infrared telescope system. Designed to fly at more than 40,000 feet (12,192 meters), the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) would operate at an altitude above nearly 99 percent of Earths atmospheric water vapor, greatly enhancing the observatorys ability to study the cosmos. The German Aerospace Center had provided the telescope, and NASA had modified the craft.(NASA, NASAs SOFIA To Be Rededicated on Historic Lindbergh Anniversary, media advisory M07-52, 11 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_M07052_SOFIA_event.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Aero-News Network, Erik Lindbergh Dedicates NASAs Sofia in Honor of Grandfather, 22 May 2007. 71 NASA, Mars Rover Spirit Unearths Surprise Evidence of Wetter Past, news release 07-118, 21 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07118_Spirit_discovers_wet_Mars.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Space.com, NASA Rover Finds Surprising Evidence for Mars Watery Past, 21 May 2007, http://www. space.com/scienceastronomy/070521_rover_wetterpast.html (accessed 6 April 2010).)
NASA launched its Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) mission from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 6:01 p.m. (EST), marking the first time NASA had launched a five-satellite constellation aboard a single rocket. NASA had designed the mission to uncover the catalyst of geomagnetic substorms, the atmospheric events visible in the Northern Hemisphere as a sudden brightening of the aurora borealis. Scientists hoped that the missions findings would help protect humans and commercial satellites in space from the effects of particle radiation. NASA had planned the mission to last two years, during which time the five identical satellites would collect data, attempting to achieve what no previous single-satellite mission had been able to doto pinpoint when and where substorms begin.(NASA, NASAs THEMIS Mission Launches To Study Geomagnetic Substorms, news release 07-47, 17 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0747_THEMIS_Postlaunch.html (accessed 14 October 2007).)
IBM announced that NASA had selected, for its James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), IBMs Rational Rose Real-time software, which used unified modeling language (UML). The choice marked a change in NASAs strategy for software development and management of its space- based telescopes. Because a number of organizations had used proprietary software to build components and instruments for the HST, the software had lacked a UML, preventing the software codes of the various programs from relating to one another. Furthermore, the contractors who had built the scientific instruments had not maintained them after the launch of the craft. Instead, NASA staff had assumed that responsibility. Glenn Cammarata, leader of NASAs Integrated Science Instrument Module (ISIM) flight-software development team at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), explained that the management of telescopes with instruments containing incompatible software was a nightmare. Resolving problems in the HST software had often required NASA to locate the person who wrote the code in the original software, whereas IBMs UML would allow any programmer to examine JWST software and to understand its system architecture. Additionally, the UML would allow close collaboration among the various developers working on individual components of the JWST.(IBM, NASA Eyes Open Standard Software for Next-Generation James Webb Space Telescope, press release, 19 January 2007, http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/20901.wss (accessed 30 October 2009); Jon Brodkin, The Software Plan for NASAs New Space Telescope, Infoworld, 23 January 2007.)
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronautsa Russian, an American, and a Malaysianto the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysias first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station, 11 October 2007.)
The U.S. Air Force granted SpaceX a five-year license to launch satellites from Space Launch Complex 40 (SLC 40) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Commander of the U.S. Air Force Space Command Kevin P. Chilton remarked that such agreements encourage entrepreneurial space achievement, which could benefit DOD and the commercial space industry. Under the agreement, SpaceX would pay for all improvements, construction, and maintenance related to operations at the site. Before receiving the license, SpaceX had operated from a launch complex on Omelek Island, in the Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. Elon Musk of SpaceX highlighted the importance of access to the Cape Canaveral launch complex, stating that SLC 40 was the only launchpad capable of supporting activities involving SpaceXs Falcon 9 Heavy. The license allowed the government to retain the right to let other competitors share use of the launch site.(Associated Press, Air Force OKs License for SpaceX, 27 April 2007; Brian Berger, U.S. Air Force Licenses SpaceX To Launch from Cape Canaveral, Space.com, 26 April 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070426_spacex_ capecanaveral.html (accessed 9 June 2010).)
NASA successfully launched its Dawn spacecraft aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 7:34 a.m. (EDT). Mission Controllers at NASAs JPL in Pasadena, California, received telemetry data on schedule at 9:44 a.m. (EDT). The data indicated that Dawn had achieved proper orientation in space and that its solar array had succeeded in generating power from the Sun. Dawns mission was to travel 1.7 billion miles (2.7 billion kilometers) to explore two asteroids located in orbit between Mars and JupiterVesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015. The International Astronomical Union had reclassified Ceres as a dwarf planet in 2006. In their search for new information about the collection of rocky materials remaining from the formation of the planets, NASA scientists hoped that the US$474 million mission would provide insight into how size, water, and gravity had influenced the development of Earth and its planetary neighbors. NASA scientists intended to use Dawns instrument suite to measure the asteroids elemental and mineral composition, shape, surface topography, and tectonic history, as well as to search for water-bearing minerals. While studying how Dawn orbits the asteroids, scientists also planned to measure the masses and gravity fields of Vesta and Ceres. Engineers had designed Dawn to use ion propulsion, a unique hyperefficient system using solar power to ionize xenon, generating thrust. Although this method provided less power than conventional engines, ion propulsion could maintain thrust for months at a time.(NASA, NASAs Dawn Spacecraft Enroute To Shed Light on Asteroid Belt, news release 07-213, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07213_Dawn_Final_Release.html (accessed 4 August 2010); NASA, Dawn Spacecraft Successfully Launched, news release 07-212, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07212_Dawn_launched.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Mark K. Matthews, NASAs Dawn To Cast Light on Asteroids Frozen in Time, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 September 2007; Mark Carreau, NASAs Launch Starts 3-Billion-Mile Trip to Asteroids, Houston Chronicle, 28 September 2007.)
NASA submitted to the U.S. Congress a report that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005 (Pub. L. No. 109-155) had mandated, NASA Report to Congress Regarding a Plan for the International Space Station National Laboratory. The Act required NASA to designate the U.S. portion of the ISS as a national laboratory and to make it available to public and private entities for basic and applied research not applicable to NASAs mission. In the report, NASA affirmed its support of the concept and summarized steps taken during 2006 to make the ISS national laboratory a reality. NASA reported that a number of organizations had expressed interest in using the ISS for research in the fields of education, human health, and defense sciences. The report highlighted the projects scheduled milestones, identified its constraints, explained NASAs strategy and tactical initiatives for achieving the goal, and offered NASAs preliminary findings on the projects feasibility. After outlining progress to date, NASA described the preliminary operations plan. According to this plan, NASA would first address workforce needs and the requisite ground-based assets and management structures. NASAs report concluded that, based on the demonstrated interest of parties outside of NASA, the odds of successfully realizing the goal set forth by Congress appeared promising. However, the report also noted that, because of the challenge of completing the ISS by 2010 and the need to demonstrate the capabilities of next-generation, commercial space-transportation services by the end of 2010, the financial risk to non-NASA entities remained high.(NASA, NASA Report to Congress Regarding a Plan for the International Space Station National Laboratory (NASA technical report no. PB2008-1005533, Washington, DC, May 2007), http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/ casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20090010198_2008045339.pdf (accessed 24 May 2010); Jeff M. Bingham, The Significance of NASAs ISS National Laboratory Report, NASASpaceflight.com, 4 June 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/ 2007/06/the-significance-of-nasas-iss-national-laboratory-report/ (accessed 20 June 2010).)
Europes Ariane-5ECA rocket launched a two-satellite payload, weighing 9.4 tonnes (10.4 tons), from Europes launch center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:29 (GMT), setting a new benchmark for a commercial launch. The heavy-lift rocket carried Galaxy 17, an American geostationary communications satellite, and Astra 1L, a European geostationary communications satellite. Galaxy 1 would provide telephone and television services for South America, North America, and Europe; Astra 1L would provide direct-to-home video and voice links throughout Europe. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin attended the launch to observe the Ariane- 5ECA rocket, which would begin launching payloads to the ISS later in 2007.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643, 1 June 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx643.html (accessed 26 March 2010); BBC News, European Rocket Powers To Record, 4 May 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/ 6621297.stm (accessed 10 June 2010).)
Scientists from MIT and researchers from the U.S. Air Force published a paper in the journal Science explaining their development of oil-repellant materials with aerospace applications. The scientists had used fibers from polymers, combined with a special class of molecules called fluoroPOSS, to create oil-repellant, or superoleophobic, surfaces. The scientists explained that engineers would be able to use the fluoroPOSS-polymer blend to protect parts of airplanes and rockets, such as rubber gaskets and O-rings, which are vulnerable to damage resulting from saturation in fuel.
The Boeing Company announced that, on 20 July, the X-48B flight-test vehicle, a Blended Wing Body (BWB) experimental aircraft, had made its first test flight. Boeing Phantom Works had developed the BWB in cooperation with NASA and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory. The remotely controlled X-48B had taken off from NASAs Edwards Air Force Base in California, climbing to an altitude of 7,500 feet (2,286 meters) and landing 31 minutes after takeoff. Boeing had developed two X-48B research vehicles to gather detailed information about the stability and flight-control characteristics of the BWB design, particularly during takeoff and landing. Previously, Boeing had used Ship 2, the test-flight vehicle, for ground and taxi testing. Ship 1, which had completed extensive testing in 2006 at the Old Dominion Universitys NASA Langley Full-Scale Wind Tunnel in Virginia, was the backup vehicle for the flight-test program. The BWB design resembled a flying wing, but the wing blended smoothly into a wide, flat, tailless fuselage, helping the craft gain additional lift with less drag than a circular fuselage. NASAs DFRC had provided engineering and technical support for the BWB, based on its years of operating cutting-edge, remotely controlled aircraft. NASA had focused on developing fundamental flight dynamics and structural concepts for the BWB, as well as helping to validate and verify its hardware and software and to integrate and test the aircrafts systems and the pilots ground-control station. NASAs range group had provided critical command and control communications and telemetry during the test flight.
NASA announced the names of the committee members tasked with conducting a comprehensive review of the health care systems and medical policies that NASA provided for the benefit of astronauts, as well as the standards and certification NASA required of astronauts. The review included an examination of behavioral health care services available to astronauts. To chair the group of external experts, NASA named Richard E. Bachmann Jr. of the U.S. Air Force, an expert in aerospace medicine with experience providing medical support to people conducting operations in extreme environments. NASA appointed James M. Duncan, NASA Chief of Space Medicine, and Wayne R. Frazier, an executive from the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, to serve on the committee in an ex officio capacity. The arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February had prompted the review.(NASA, NASA Announces Medical Review Team Members, news release 07-75, 26 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07075_Medical_Review_Members.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Jeanna Bryner, NASA Sets Team To Review Astronaut Mental Healthcare, Space.com, 26 March 2007, http://www.space. com/news/070326_nasa_healthcare.html (accessed 27 January 2010).)
Over the course of 10 hours, NASAs Mission Control remotely unfurled the S3/S4 solar arrays located on the new truss segment. Tip to tip the solar arrays spanned a distance of 240 feet (73 meters). With the solar arrays added to the left and right sides of the new power module, the ISS achieved an unprecedented symmetry in its appearance. In the midst of the solar-array- deployment operation, a fire alarm sounded in the Russian sector of the ISS, but crew and mission managers quickly determined that a computer malfunction was the cause. Russian computers, working in conjunction with American computers, had failed, and attempts to reboot the Russian computers had triggered the false fire alarm. However, because of the computer failure, the small maneuvering jets on Atlantis had assumed control of the ISSs attitude, placing the stations solar panels in a poor position for gathering sunlight and causing power levels to drop. Mission Control ordered the crew to turn off some nonessential equipment until the ISS regained attitude control. Thereafter, engineers successfully reestablished gyroscope control, and the left-side array began tracking the Sun properly.(Houston Chronicle, New Solar Array, 13 June 2007; John Schwartz, Glitch Blamed for Fire Alarm on Orbiter, New York Times, 13 June 2007; William Harwood, Computer Glitches Impact Station Attitude Control, Spaceflight Now, 12 June 2007.)
for a new module scheduled to arrive later in the year. ISS Expedition 15 Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineers Oleg V. Kotov and Clayton C. Anderson worked from inside the space station to move the Pressurized Mating Adapter-3 (PMA-3) from its port-side perch on NASAs Unity module to a berth facing Earth. The crew had delayed the relocation process by approximately 1 hour, because three of the sixteen bolts securing the PMA had returned intermittent fault messages. However, Mission Control determined that the error messages would not affect the relocation or the installation of the Harmony node later in the year. Kotov assisted Anderson in operating the ISSs robotic arm, while Yurchkhin oversaw the bolt-latching systems, alternately freeing and securing the module during its relocation. PMA-3 detached from Unity at 8:23 a.m. (EDT) and, at 9:07 a.m. (EDT), the crew successfully reattached the port to its new berth. NASAs lead Expedition 15 Flight Director Robert C. Dempsey acknowledged the cooperation between the Russian and American crew members. Dempsey remarked that Expedition 15s crew was one of the first truly integrated crews that he had seen, noting that the mission marked the first time that Russian cosmonauts had operated NASA-controlled components, such as the Canadian-built robotic arm.(Tariq Malik, Space Station Crew Clears Port for New Module, Space.com, 30 August 2007, http://www.space. com/missionlaunches/070830_exp15_pma3move.html (accessed 30 June 2010).)
NASA announced that one of its STEREO satellites had recorded images of an April 2007 collision between a comet and a solar hurricane, marking the first time that scientists had observed such an event. Enckes comet, traveling in the orbit of Mercury, had encountered a CME. NASA had designed STEREO to observe this type of solar event. As the CME swept by, the comets tail had brightened and then had disconnected, as the front of the ejection carried it away. Scientists had known that a comets plasma tail could disconnect from the comet, but the conditions necessary for this to occur had remained a mystery. Preliminary analysis of the images, which NASA researchers had combined into a movie, indicated that a phenomenon called magnetic reconnection had caused the tail to detach. In a magnetic reconnection event, the magnetic fields in a CME crunch together the oppositely directed magnetic fields around a comet, causing the comet fields to link together suddenly. This sudden reconnection releases a burst of energy that detaches the comets tail. Angelos Vourlidas of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, was lead author of an article about the event, published in the 10 October 2007 issue of Astrophysical Journal Letters. Remarking on the researchers sense of awe when they viewed the images, Vourlidas described their surprise at seeing the disconnection of the tail, calling the event the icing on the cake.(NASA, NASA Satellite Sees Solar Hurricane Detach Comet Tail, news release 07-214, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07214_Comet_Collision.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Andrea Thompson, Solar Storm Rips Tail Off Comet, Space.com, 1 October 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/071001_hurr_comet.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
An Atlas-5 rocket launched six satellites from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Two of the satellites were part of the Orbital Express Experiment and four would measure the chemical makeup of the atmosphere and the signal turbulence of satellites. The primary goal of Orbital Express, a joint effort of NASA, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), was to develop a system allowing spacecraft to act independently and smarter. Fred G. Kennedy of the U.S. Air Force, DARPA Program Manager for Orbital Express, explained that the Orbital Express missions goal was to enable satellites autonomously to refuel, repair, and upgradea feat that would radically change satellite design. In April 2005, NASA had launched two satellites that were supposed to rendezvous autonomously, but a collision of the two craft during the docking attempt had destroyed them. Because the satellites were preprogrammed, ground controllers had been unable to transmit commands to the satellites computers. To avoid such an event in the future, DARPA had designed the Orbital Express satellites to accept guidance from ground controllers.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641, 1 April 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx641.html (accessed 25 January 2010); Todd Halvorson, Atlas 5 Launches Satellites, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2007; Shelby G. Spires, 2 Satellites To Test Auto Docking Technology, Huntsville Times (AL), 9 March 2007.)
NASA released images of the Sun, captured by the X-ray Telescope aboard the international spacecraft Hinode, formerly known as Solar B. The images showed that the Suns magnetic field is much more turbulent and dynamic than previously known. Richard R. Fisher of the Heliophysics Division of NASAs Science Mission Directorate remarked that, for the first time, scientists could detect tiny granules of hot gas rising and falling in the Suns magnetized atmosphere. Alan M. Title of Lockheed Martin, also a professor of physics at Stanford University, added that Hinode images revealed irrefutable evidence of the presence of turbulence-driven processes that bring magnetic fields to the Suns surface, resulting in an extremely dynamic gaseous envelope around the Sun. A collaborative mission, led by JAXA and including ESA and Britains Particle Physics Astronomy Research Council, Hinode had launched on 23 September 2006. Hinode carried three primary instrumentsthe Solar Optical Telescope, the X-ray Telescope, and the Extreme Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrometerto study the Suns magnetic field and how its explosive energy propagates through the various layers of the solar atmosphere.(NASA, International Spacecraft Reveals Detailed Processes on the Sun, news release 07-72, 21 March 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07072_Hinode_Images_of_Sun.html (accessed 14 October 2009);)
Alvin Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. Dave Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffes backup during NASAs teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavours payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavours 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavours time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavours heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, NASAs Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station, news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, STS-118: Endeavour, NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter, NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off, New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
Engineers successfully tested the main parachute for NASAs Constellation Program rockets during a drop test at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Ground, validating the results of a test conducted in September. NASA had designed the parachute system to allow recovery and reuse of Ares-1 and Ares-5 first-stage boosters. A U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 16,500 feet (5,029 meters) dropped the main parachute, which measured 150 feet (46 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms). NASA had outfitted the main parachute with a 42,000-pound (19,051-kilogram) weight that simulated the load of the rockets first stage. The parachute and all supporting hardware functioned properly and landed safely 3 minutes after the drop.(NASA, NASA Conducts Second Test of Main Parachute for Ares Rockets, news release 07-254, 15 November 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/nov/HQ_07254_Ares_Yuma_Parachute_ Test.html (accessed 20 October 2010).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California after weather concerns prevented the crew from landing at NASAs KSC in Florida. Sunita L. Williams returned home with the STS-117 crew, having surpassed Shannon W. Lucids 1996 record of 188 days and 4 hours. Williams had set a new 195-day record for the longest spaceflight by a woman. U.S. astronaut Clayton C. Anderson remained at the ISS, scheduled to return home aboard Discovery in October. The STS-117 mission had successfully increased the power capability of the ISS, preparing the station for the future delivery of European and Japanese laboratories. Although Atlantis had sustained some damage soon after launch on 8 June, several inspections in orbit had revealed no critical damage, and Mission Control had declared the Shuttles thermal protection system safe for reentry on flight day 13. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to last 11 days, but had added extra days to allow time in case of the necessity of repairs to the thermal protection system. Olivas had stapled a thermal blanket back into place during the unscheduled fourth spacewalk on 17 June.(NASA, Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission, news release 07-142, 22 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07142_Atlantis_landing.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, Space Shuttle Lands in California, 25 June 2007.)
Florida police released on bail Lisa M. Nowak, a NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy captain. The police had arrested Nowak the day before, after she threatened Colleen M. Shipman, a captain in the U.S. Air Force. Nowak had perceived Shipman as a romantic rival. NASA placed Nowak on 30-day leave and removed her from her mission duties. Nowak had flown her only mission as a crew member on STS-121 in July 2006, aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. NASA spokesperson Nicole Cloutier-Lemasters explained that, according to its past policy, NASA had screened crew members assigned to the ISS, before, during, and after missions, but had not screened Shuttle crews flying for two-week stints. Although Cloutier-Lemasters said that NASA did not plan to conduct an investigation of Nowak, NASAs Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that NASA had begun a review of its screening policy. NASA hoped to determine whether it had overlooked indications for concern in Nowaks case. Dale explained that NASA intended the review process to reveal whether or not astronauts were receiving adequate psychological and medical care and attention.(Mike Schneider and Erin McClam, Astronaut Charged with Attempted Murder, Associated Press, 7 February 2007; John Schwartz, Astronauts Arrest Spurs Review of NASA Testing, New York Times, 8 February 2007.)
NASA launched its Aeronomy of Ice in Mesosphere (AIM) satellite aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket dropped from a Stargazer-L-1011 aircraft. The Stargazer launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 21:26 (UT). NASA had designed AIM to study noctilucent clouds (NLCs) in the polar mesosphere. Observers can only see NLCs at night. Shortly before the mission, these clouds had appeared more often and had grown brighter. Observers had first seen NLCs in the 1880s, soon after the massive volcanic eruption on the Indonesian island of Krakatoa. Space- based satellites had periodically observed the clouds since the 1980s. AIM was the first spacecraft devoted to the study of NLCs. Scientists hoped to answer basic questions about why the clouds form and whether human-caused global warming was responsible for the recent changes. AIM carried three instruments: the Solar Occultation for Ice Experiment (SOFIE) would remotely sense the gases that condense to NLCs; the Cosmic Dust Experiment (CDE) would serve as an in situ sampler of the cosmic dust over the NLCs; and the Cloud Imaging and Particle Size (CIPS) experiment, a panoramic ultraviolet (UV) imager of the NLCs operating in the 265-nanometer-wavelength band, would provide the morphology of the clouds in both hemispheres.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642; NASA, NASAs AIM Mission Soars to the Edge of Space, news release 07-92, 25 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07092_AIM_launch.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Associated Press, NASA Launches Satellite To Study Clouds, 26 April 2007.)
NASA announced the official appointment of William W. Parsons Jr. as Director of NASAs Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Parsons became KSCs ninth director, succeeding James W. Kennedy, who was retiring from NASA. Parsons had served as KSCs Deputy Director since February 2006. After the Columbia tragedy in 2003, Parsons had led NASAs Return to Flight effort as Space Shuttle Program Manager at KSC and had contributed to the success of STS-114 in 2005. Parsons had also served as Director of NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi and as Deputy Director of NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin remarked that Parsons experience as a program manager and center director, in addition to his knowledge of NASAs human spaceflight community, made him the right person to take Kennedy Space Center through the end of the Shuttle era and into the era of lunar exploration.(NASA, Parsons Assumes Role as NASAs Kennedy Space Center Director, news release 07-01, 4 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_0701_Parsons_KSC.html#at (accessed 14 October 2009); Aero- News Network, Upgraded: Parsons Tapped as Kennedy Space Center Director, 8 January 2007.)
NASA released the findings of two reviews examining the medical and behavioral health assessment of astronauts. Following the arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February 2007, NASA had requested that an independent external committee conduct a comprehensive review of the health services available to astronauts. Commander of the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine Richard E. Bachmann Jr. had chaired the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee, composed of representatives from eight federal agencies. The Review Committee suggested that NASA examine the structure of the Astronaut Office. In addition, the
NASA announced that it had signed a MOU with the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), entering into an agreement that would enable American scientists to access the ISS to pursue research about human health and disease. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and NIH Director Elias A. Zerhouni stated that the partnership could pave the way for research advances in cancer, Alzheimers disease, osteoporosis, and other medical conditions. The MOU marked the first time that NASA had formed a partnership with another agency to use the U.S. segment of the ISS as a national laboratory.(NASA, NASA and NIH Partner for Health Research in Space, news release 07-190, 12 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07190_NASA_NIH_MOU.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Michelle Mittelstadt, NIH, NASA Finish Deal for Research Lab in Space, Houston Chronicle, 13 September 2007. 135 X Prize Foundation, Google Sponsors Lunar X Prize To Create a Space Race for a New Generation, news release, 13 September 2007, http://www.googlelunarxprize.org/lunar/press-release/google-sponsors-lunar-x-prize- to-create-a-space-race-for-a-new-generation (accessed 9 August 2010); John Schwartz, $25 Million in Prizes Is Offered for Trip to Moon, New York Times, 14 September 2007.)
Harrison Jack H. Schmitt, a scientist, former astronaut, and former U.S. Senator, announced that he was resigning as Chair of the NASA Advisory Council. The NASA Advisory Council, a panel of experts in various fields, advised the NASA Administrator on major policy. Since becoming Chair in November 2005, Schmitt had led the Advisory Council in submitting over 100 recommendations to the NASA Administrator. He had been the primary advocate behind a February 2007 workshop that produced 35 scientific recommendations related to NASAs return to the Moon and had led the Advisory Councils efforts to build relationships fostering the use of the ISS as a national laboratory. NASA named Kenneth M. Ford as the new Advisory Council Chair. Ford had served on the Exploration Committee of the Advisory Council since June 2007. He was the founder and Director of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition. Ford had developed and directed NASAs Center of Excellence in Information Technology at NASAs ARC. He had also served as both Director and Associate Director of NASAs ARC. A recipient of NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal and the Robert S. Englemore Memorial Award, Ford had served on the U.S. Air Force Science Advisory Board and the National Science Board. He was also a fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.(NASA, Schmitt Completes NASA Advisory Council service; Ford Named Chairman, news release 08-262, 16 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-261_Scmitt_Leaves_NAC.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
NASA successfully launched its Gamma-Ray Large Area Telescope (GLAST) aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 16:05 (UT). GLAST could survey the entire sky every 3 hours, searching for gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). Scientists hoped to study GRBs to further their understanding of black holes, dark matter, and the laws of physics. GLAST consisted of two elements: the Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor (GBM) and the Large Area Telescope (LAT). The GBM was able to detect gamma-ray bursts and to orient the LAT to observe them more closely. NASA, the U.S. Department of Energy, and 37 other research institutions worldwide were collaborating on the US$690 million spacecraft.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 656, 1 July 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx656.html (accessed 24 April 2011); NASA, NASAs GLAST Launch Successful, news release 08-141, 11 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08141_GLAST_Launch.html (accessed 21 April 2011); Dennis Overbye, NASA Launches an Orbiting Mystery-Solver, New York Times, 12 June 2008.)
NASA announced that the International Mineralogical Association had confirmed the identification of a new mineralmanganese silicidethat scientists believed had originated in a comet. Keiko Nakamura-Messenger of NASAs JSC had led the research, with contributions from scientists in Germany, Japan, and the United States. The researchers had named the mineral Brownleeite, in honor of University of Washington professor Donald E. Brownlee, who had originated the study of interplanetary dust particles (IDPs). Scientists examine IDPs because these tiny grains of space sand are composed of the original building blocks of the solar system. NASA had found the Brownleeite on an IDP collected in 2003 by an ER-2 high-altitude aircraft flown out of NASAs DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base. The aircraft had collected dust from the stream of the comet 26P/Grigg-Skjellerup. NASAs JSC had analyzed the tiny IDP, which measured only 0.0001 inches (0.000254 centimeters), using a transmission electron microscope.(NASA, NASA Finds New Type of Comet Dust Mineral, news release 08-143, 12 June 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08143_comet_dust.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
A Russian Soyuz spacecraft landed in Kazakhstan at 10:37 p.m. (CDT), returning space tourist Richard A. Garriott and cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko from the ISS. Garriott, who had been the sixth tourist to visit the ISS, had lifted off for the ISS with two American astronauts on 12 October 2008. Commander Volkov and Flight Engineer Kononenko had served 197 days aboard the ISS on the Expedition 17 mission, performing two spacewalks. During their mission, NASAs Space Shuttle had visited the ISS to deliver a Japanese laboratory. The Expedition 18 crew, American Commander E. Michael Fincke and Russian Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, had replaced Volkov and Kononenko on the ISS.(Tariq Malik, New Space Station Crew Takes Charge, Space.com, 22 October 2008, http://www.space.com/ 6011-space-station-crew-takes-charge.html (accessed 11 August 2011); NASA, Expedition 17 Crew Returns from International Space Station, news release 08-269, 23 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/ HQ_08-269_Expedition_17_landing.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
The National Aeronautic Association awarded its prestigious Robert J. Collier trophy to a team of researchers that included staff from NASAs ARC and NASAs LaRC. The team, named Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B), had developed a system for air traffic control using GPS satellite technology. The system was able to provide air traffic controllers and pilots with highly accurate air traffic data in real-time updated displays. It also gave pilots weather, terrain, and flight-information services. The National Aeronautic Association had been awarding the Collier Trophy since 1911, to researchers with significant achievements in American aeronautics or astronautics.
The Ocean Surface Topography Mission/Jason-2 satellite launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Delta-2 rocket at 07:46 (UT). The 510-kilogram (1,124.36-pound) craft was a joint mission of the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT); the French space agency (Centre National dEtudes SpatialesCNES); the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA); and NASA. EUMETSATs aim was to continue the data-collection mission that NASA and CNES had begun in 1992 with their ocean topography experiment, the TOPEX/Poseidon mission, and had continued with the 2001 launch of Jason 1. Jason 2 had five instrumentsimproved versions of those aboard Jason 1 that could chart the topography of the oceans surface, the speed and direction of the oceans current, and the amount of solar energy the ocean stores. Scientists hoped to use these measurements to track global climate change, to hone their predictions of hurricane intensity, and to improve their understanding of currents, eddies, and tides. The project partners had scheduled Jason 2 to fly in tandem with Jason 1 for approximately six months, while engineers calibrated Jason 2s instruments. Afterwards, the two spacecraft would travel in separate orbits, doubling the global satellite coverage.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 656, 1 July 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx656.html (accessed 24 April 2011); NASA, NASA Launches Ocean Satellite To Keep a Weather, Climate Eye Open, news release 08-154, 20 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08154_OSTM-Jason-2_Launch.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
John S. Bull, a member of NASAs original class of 19 astronauts, died at the age of 73. He had never flown in space. Bull had begun to train as an astronaut in 1966. In early 1967, NASA had chosen him as a member of the crew of LTA-8, a thermal-vacuum test of the Moon lander. However, sinus problems had prevented him from participating in the mission. In November 1967, NASA had selected Bull for the support crew of the Apollo 8 mission. However, he had resigned from the astronaut corps in July 1968 because he had a rare pulmonary disorder. Bull had obtained a Masters degree and a PhD from Stanford University, returning to NASA in 1973. He had performed flight-test research at NASAs ARC until 1986 and had then managed NASA- wide research programs in autonomous systems technology for space applications, until his retirement in 1989.(Collectspace.com, John S. Bull, Former NASA Astronaut, Dies, 14 August 2008, http://www.collectspace.com/ news/news-081408a.html (accessed 15 July 2011).)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 110-329, the Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance and Continuing Appropriations Act for 2009, which included language renewing through July 2016 NASAs waiver from the Iran-North Korea-Syria Nonproliferation Act (INKSNA). The terms of INKSNA, as enacted in 2000, barred U.S. government agencies from making extraordinary payments to Russia, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. Under these terms, NASA would be unable to purchase transport on Soyuz spacecraft. In 2005 Congress had enacted legislation granting NASA a waiver from INKSNA through January 2012, allowing NASA to negotiate a US$700 million contract for occasional flights to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. However, that contract would expire in 2011, and Congress needed to renew the waiver before NASA could begin negotiating a new contract. NASA would need to purchase Soyuz vehicles to transport American, Canadian, European and Japanese astronauts to the ISS during the period between the retirement of the Space Shuttle Program (SSP), scheduled for 2010, and the first flights of the Constellation Program, scheduled for 2015.
NASA announced the appointment of N. Wayne Hale Jr. as NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for Strategic Partnerships. Hale had begun his three-decade career with NASA in 1978 in Flight Operations at NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC). Hale had headed the Propulsion Systems Section of Mission Control from 1985 to 1988 and had overseen flight- control teams in Mission Control during all aspects of 40 Space Shuttle missions. He had served as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program (SSP) since 2005. In his new position, Hale would work in the Space Operations Mission Directorate to build alliances across the public and private sectors. John P. Shannon, who had served as Hales deputy since 2005, would succeed him as SSP Manager. Shannon had begun his career with NASA in 1988. When NASA appointed him Space Shuttle Flight Director in 1993, Shannon had become the youngest person in NASAs history to hold that post. After Shannon served as Deputy Director of the Columbia Task Force in 2003, NASA had selected him to create the SSPs Flight Operations and Integration Office.
At a ceremony during the opening of the Spirit of Innovation exhibition at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, NASA recognized the first winners of the Pete Conrad Spirit of Innovation Award, a national competition that challenges high school students to create concepts that advance the personal spaceflight industry. NASAs Innovative Partnership Program sponsored the US$10,000 prize for the Conrad Award. The Spirit of Innovation exhibition would travel nationwide to highlight the students achievements. The X Prize Foundation announced that, in addition, a scroll inscribed with the winners names would travel to the ISS. Michael Hakimi and Talia Nour-Omid had won the Conrad award in October 2007 for the innovation of a device that could effectively monitor all of an astronauts vital signs.(Aero-News Network, NASA, X Prize Foundation Recognize 2007 Pete Conrad Award Winners, 22 January 2008, http://www.aero-news.net/index.cfm?ContentBlockID=c8a0d40b-5081-43b6-afcd-f2b876e7408b (accessed 16 December 2010); NASA, NASA and X Prize Foundation To Recognize Conrad Award Winners, news release M08-010, 16 January 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jan/HQ_M08010_Xprize_HQ_M08010_ Xprize_HQ_M08010_Xprize_Conrad_Award.html (accessed 16 December 2008).)
A Russian Soyuz rocket lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 07:01 (UT), ferrying an American space tourist and two Expedition 18 crew members to the ISS. Tourist Richard A. Garriott was the son of former astronaut Owen K. Garriott, who had been a crew member of Skylab 3 in 1973. Garriott had reached a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos to spend nine days aboard the ISS and to return to Earth with the Expedition 17 crew on 23 October 2008. The Expedition 18 crew, consisting of Commander E. Michael Fincke of NASA and Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, would replace two members of the Expedition 17 crew, Russian cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko. The third crew member, Russian cosmonaut Gregory E. Chamitoff, had arrived at the ISS in June 2008 and planned to stay until November 2008. The main goal of Expedition 17 was to prepare the ISS to accommodate six crew members on long-duration missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, New Crew Blasts Off for International Space Station, news release 08-257, 12 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-257_X18_Launch.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
A Russian Proton-M rocket launched an American AMC-14 communications satellite at 02:18 (MST), from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, but failed to bring it into correct orbit. The Breeze-M booster on the rocket failed 10 minutes after launch, leaving the satellite 8,000 kilometers (4,971 miles) below geostationary orbit. SES Americom owned the satellite, and Lockheed Martin had built it. The failed satellite had featured a new telecommunications technology that allowed changes in coverage while the satellite was in orbit. The satellites design would have enabled it to achieve a higher altitude using its own engine, although this would use up the satellites fuel supply and significantly shorten its lifespan.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 653, 1 April 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx653.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Agence France-Presse, Russian Rocket Fails To Take US Satellite into Planned Orbit, 14 March 2008.)
ESA launched its Galileo In-Orbit Validation Element (GIOVE-B), the second of its Galileo global navigation system satellites, at 22:16 (UT). The 500-kilogram (1,102.31-pound) satellite lifted off aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. GIOVE-B, like its predecessor GIOVE-A, was a test craft for a fleet which would eventually total 30 satellites. Once completed, ESA officials intended for the Galileo program to be interoperable with the American GPS and the Russian Global Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS). Because navigation systems rely on precise timing, GIOVE-B carried two redundant rubidium atomic clocks, which would serve as back up to the Passive Hydrogen Maser (PHM). The PHM was the most accurate clock that had ever been placed in orbit, with a stability of better than 1 nanosecond per day. GIOVE-B also carried a radiation-monitoring payload and a laser retroreflector for high-accuracy laser ranging. Astrium GmbH had built the satellite, with the assistance of Thales Alenia Space.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654, 1 May 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx654.html (accessed 17 February 2011); ESA, ESAs Most Advanced Navigation Satellite Launched Tonight, press release no. 25-2008, 27 April 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM9GD2QGFF_index_0.html (accessed 17 February 2011); BBC News, Europe Launches Sat-Nav Tester, 26 April 2008.)
NASA announced that it had extended the U.S. On-Orbit Segment Acceptance and Vehicle Sustaining Engineering contract awarded to the Boeing Company through 30 September 2010. Originally granted in January 1995, the contract provided engineering support for the ISS. The contractor would complete delivery and on-orbit acceptance of the American section of the ISS, provide end-to-end subsystem management for the majority of the ISSs systems, support American hardware and software provided to international participants in the ISS program, and sustain engineering of the ISSs hardware and software. The contractor would work at NASAs JSC, KSC, and MSFC. The contract was valued at US$350 million.(NASA, NASA Extend International Space Station Contract, news release C08-059, 1 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-059_ISS_Contract.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
Robert C. Seamans Jr., who had served as NASA Deputy Administrator during the Apollo era, died of heart failure at age 89. Seamans had begun his career as a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the 1940s. In 1960 he had accepted a position with NASA as Associate Administrator, and, from 1965 to 1968, he had served as Deputy Administrator. During his tenure, NASA had worked to achieve President John F. Kennedys goal of landing a man on the Moon, and Seamans had been instrumental to the success of that mission. In 1968 Seamans had left his position at NASA to return to MIT, although he remained a consultant to NASAs Administrator. Later that year, he had assisted in making the controversial decision to send Apollo 8 to orbit the Moon, a move that had laid the groundwork for the lunar landing. Seamans had served as Secretary of the U.S. Air Force from 1969 to 1973. In 1974 he had been appointed Administrator of the Energy, Research and Development Administration, a predecessor agency to the Department of Energy. In 1977 Seamans had accepted a position as Dean of the School of Engineering at MIT, where he had continued to teach aeronautics classes even after his formal retirement in 1984.(Peter Schworm, Robert Seamans; Helped Lead NASA During Apollo Missions, Boston Globe, 30 June 2008. 79 NASA, Astronaut James Reilly Leaves NASA, news release 08-162, 30 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08163_Seamans_statement.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
Officials at NASAs LaRC announced that they had completed a series of 11 tests on the Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne SJX61-2 scramjet engine in the 8-Foot High Temperature wind tunnel. The tests had been NASAs contribution to the mission to build the X-51 WaveRider aircraft. The design of the X-51 WaveRider would enable the craft to travel at speeds near Mach 7 for approximately 5 minutes. The U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory and U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had been the main contributors to the US$246 million X-51 project. LaRC had tested a combined cycle, jet-fueled, air-breathing, flight-clearance engine, similar to the engine that the X-51would use. NASA engineers expected that they would complete testing by the end of September 2008.(Brian Berger, NASA Helping U.S. Air Force Gear Up for 2009 X-51 Flights, Space.com, 8 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5804-nasa-helping-air-force-gear-2009-51-flights.html (accessed 27 July 2011); John Croft, X-51A Scramjet Readied for Flight Tests, Flight International, 10 September 2008.)
The Russian Soyuz TMA-11 landed in Kazakhstan at 04:30 (EDT), after a ballistic reentry that deposited the spacecraft approximately 295 miles (474.76 kilometers) from its intended landing location. NASA officials explained that, in a ballistic reentry, a spacecraft reenters Earths atmosphere at an angle steeper than normal, subjecting the astronauts to higher gravitational forces. Russian officials pledged to investigate the cause of the rough landing. The crew members on boardPeggy A. Whitson, Yuri I. Malenchenko, and So-yeon Yidid not report any injuries from the incident. The three crew members were returning to Earth after completing Expedition 16 to the ISS. Yi, South Koreas first astronaut, had been aboard the ISS for 10 days, conducting experiments. Whitson, an American astronaut, had served as the first female commander of the ISS. During this mission, she had set the record for the most cumulative time an American had spent in space. Malenchenko, a Russian cosmonaut, had been Flight Engineer for Expedition 16. During the busy mission, lasting six months, crew members had conducted a wide variety of scientific experiments. During seven spacewalks, they had attached new modules to the ISS, repaired damages to the station, and received three visits from the Shuttle and one visit from ESAs unpiloted cargo ship Jules Verne.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654; Tariq Malik, Space Station Astronauts Land Off-Target, But Safely, Space.com, 19 April 2008, http://www.space.com/5262-space-station-astronauts-land-target-safely.html (accessed 3 March 2011); NASA, Expedition 16 Soyuz Lands Safely in Kazakhstan, news release 08-105, 19 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/apr/HQ_08105_Exp_16_lands.html (accessed 17 February 2011).)
A Russian Soyuz TMA-12 passenger-transport craft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 12:17 (UT), marking the beginning of the ISSs Expedition 17 mission. The Soyuz carried Russian cosmonauts, Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko, and South Korean astronaut So-yeon Yi. Yi, the first South Korean to enter space, would stay on the ISS for only 10 days, conducting experiments. She would then return to Earth with the departing Expedition 16 crew members, aboard a Soyuz TMA-11 that had been docked at the ISS since October 2007. Kononenko was Expedition 17s Flight Engineer, and Volkov was the missions Commander. Volkov was the son of cosmonaut Alexander A. Volkov, making this launch the first occasion of a second-generation cosmonaut or astronaut traveling to space. The third member of the expedition, American astronaut Garrett E. Reisman, was already aboard the ISS. Over the course of six months, the crew of Expedition 17 planned to install the large Japanese Kibo laboratory, supervise the undocking of ESAs Jules Verne ATV, and complete at least one spacewalk.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654, 1 May 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx654.html (accessed 17 February 2011); Clara Moskowitz, New Station Crew, Korean Astronaut Rocket Into Space, Space.com, 8 April 2008, http://www.space.com/5217-station-crew-korean-astronaut-rocket-space.html (accessed 3 March 2011).)
The Mystery Teamthe fifth team to register for the Google Lunar X Prize the team that chose not to reveal its identityannounced its name at a press conference at NASAs ARC: Next Giant Leap. Michael Joyce led Next Giant Leap, an American team comprising members from Aurora Flight Sciences, which specializes in aerial vehicles and space hardware; Busek, which would supply the propulsion system; Draper Laboratory, which would supply the landing technology; and MicroSat Systems, which would be the lead systems integrator. The Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT was an academic partner.(Space.com, Mystery Lunar X Prize Team Revealed, 17 December 2008, http://www.space.com/6234-mystery- lunar-prize-team-revealed.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
NASA announced that Robert D. Strain had accepted the position of Center Director of NASAs GSFC, the Greenbelt, Maryland, facility that develops uncrewed scientific spacecraft and administers NASAs Earth observation, astronomy, and space physics missions. Strain had been serving as the Head of the Space Department at the Johns Hopkins Universitys APL in Laurel, Maryland. He had previously served as the Associate Department Head and Assistant Department Head at APL, and as an executive at Axiom Corporation, Orbital Sciences Corporation, and Fairchild Space and Defense Company. NASA expected that Strain would begin work as Center Director at NASAs GSFC on 4 August 2008.(NASA, NASA Names Strain New Goddard Space Flight Center Director, news release 08-179, 17 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08179_Strain_GSFC_Director.html (accessed 18 May 2011).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 1:25 p.m. (PST), returning seven astronauts from a 16-day mission to the ISS. While aboard the ISS, crew members had unloaded over 7 tons (6.35 tonnes or 6,350.29 kilograms) of cargo from Endeavour; set up a refrigerator, exercise machine, two sleep stations, and a rack for science experiments; and activated a recycling system to turn astronauts urine and perspiration into potable water. The crew of Endeavour brought back samples so that NASA scientists could test the water before NASA approved the system for use. Astronauts Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn- Piper, Stephen G. Bowen, and Robert S. Kimbrough had conducted four spacewalks to repair the
NASA announced that it had exhibited a new robot rover that would be able to drill into the lunar surface to find water and oxygen-dense soil. The rover, Scarab, would not travel to the Moon itself. Instead, NASA had designed Scarab as a research rover, to give scientists an opportunity to study drilling technologies that they could use in the difficult environment of the Moon, noted for its continuous darkness, minimal gravity, and extremely abrasive and dense soil. The rover was a joint effort among many institutions. NASAs ARC had built Scarabs navigation system, the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) had funded a camera; NASAs GRC had been responsible for its power-management system; the Northern Centre for Advanced Technology had built its drill; and Carnegie Mellon University had overseen the rovers design and testing. The Human Robotic Systems and In-Situ Resource Utilization projects at NASAs JSC, part of the Exploration Technology Development Programs that LaRC managed, had collaborated on the project.(NASA, NASA Demonstrates Robot Technology for Moon Exploration, news release 08-067, 27 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08067_lunar_robot.html (accessed 28 December 2010); CBC News, NASA Shows Off Rover Armed with Canadian-Made Drill, 27 February 2008, http://www.cbc.ca/ technology/story/2008/02/27/tech-rover-drill.html (accessed 5 January 2011).)
GAO released a report assessing NASAs challenges in defining the scope and costs of Space Shuttle transition and retirement. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008 (Pub. L. No. 110161), had directed GAO to evaluate NASAs plans and progress in transitioning and retiring the SSPs equipment and facilities. From February 2008 to August 2008, GAO had examined the challenges NASA had faced in defining the scope and costs of retiring the SSP. GAO had noted whether NASA had reflected these costs in its budget requests. The report noted some specific challenges in ascertaining costs, including NASAs need to determine which SSP equipment would be retained for the Constellation Program; the cost of making artifacts from the SSP safe for public display, and how to offset many costs through the exchange or sale of property. The report determined that NASAs 2010 budget request had not accurately reflected the costs of SSP retirement, partly because NASA had not yet assessed those costs, and partly because NASA had not reflected some of the SSPs indirect costs in the SSP budget line. The report directed NASA to include in its budget requests for FY 2010, and for future years, its best estimates of total direct and indirect costs of transition and retirement of the SSP. NASA concurred with GAOs recommendation.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASA: Agency Faces Challenges Defining Scope and Costs of Space Shuttle Transition and Retirement (report no. GAO-08-1096, Washington, DC, September 2008), http://www.gao. gov/new.items/d081096.pdf (accessed 3 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASAs KSC at 21:02 (UT), commencing Mission STS- 124 to the ISS. During liftoff, observers noticed pieces of insulating foam falling from Discoverys external fuel tank; however, NASA officials stated that they were not worried about the foam, since it had fallen after the time when it could have damaged the spacecraft. Seven crew members were aboard the Space Shuttle, including American astronauts, Commander Mark E. Kelly, Pilot Kenneth T. Ham, Gregory E. Chamitoff, Michael E. Fossum, Ronald J. Garan Jr., and Karen L. Nyberg, and Japanese astronaut Akihiko Hoshide. During the mission, the astronauts planned to repair a broken toilet on the ISS and to install on the Japanese Kibo laboratory a new, 16-tonne (16,000-kilogram or 35,273-pound) room, known as the Japanese Pressurized Module (JPM). The astronauts planned three spacewalks. In addition to installing the JPM, they intended to clean a damaged power-supply rotary joint and to perform routine maintenance. NASA planned for the mission to last for 14 days. Garrett E. Reisman, who had been aboard the ISS since March 2008, would return to Earth with the STS-124 crew, and Chamitoff would remain aboard the ISS in his place.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 655; NASA, NASAs Shuttle Discovery Launches with Japanese Laboratory, news release 08-136, 31 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08136_STS-124_launch_release. html (accessed 16 March 2011); John Schwartz, Shuttle Discovery Heads Toward the Space Station, New York Times, 1 June 2008.)
NASA announced the resignation of Robert P. Hopkins as NASAs Chief of Strategic Communications. Hopkins had held positions at NASA as Senior Advisor to Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale and as Assistant Administrator of the Office of Communications Planning. Over the course of his career, he had managed the development of a strategic communications plan that had served as the basis for NASA activities, such as planning NASAs fiftieth anniversary in 2008. Additionally, Hopkins had enacted initiatives, such as a communications portal and a toolkit for implementing the Communications Coordinating Committee, helping to facilitate communication across NASA. He had advanced NASAs outreach through development programs, such as the NASA Future Forums and the NASA Lecture Series. Upon leaving NASA, Hopkins planned to take a position in the private sector. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin named Christopher M. Shank as Acting Chief of Strategic Communications. Shank had joined NASA in 2005, after holding positions in the U.S. Air Force, in the NRO, and, as a staff member on the U.S. House Science and Technology
NASA announced the resignation of S. Alan Stern as Associate Administrator for NASAs SMD. During his career with NASA, Stern had served as Principal Investigator for the New Horizons Mission to Pluto and as a member of the NASA Advisory Council. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin announced that Edward J. Weiler would replace Stern as interim Associate Administrator for NASAs SMD. Before accepting this position, Weiler had served as Director of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC).(NASA, NASA Administrator Announces Science Mission Directorate Leadership Changes, news release 08- 088, 26 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08088_ SMD_AA_change.html (accessed 13 January 2001).)
Warner K. Dahm, the last of Wernher von Brauns German rocket team to retire from NASA, died at age 90 in Huntsville, Alabama. A German aerodynamics expert, Dahm had joined von Brauns program during World War II and had later come to the United States with his colleagues to assist in developing American rocketry. He had worked at NASA first as a member of the team for Operation Paperclip in Texas and later at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Over the years, Dahm had lent his expertise to the design of the V-2 and Wasserfall anti-aircraft rockets, the Redstone rocket, the Jupiter ballistic missile, Saturn 1, Saturn 1B, the Saturn-5 rocket that flew Americas first astronauts to the Moon, Skylab, and the Space Shuttle Transportation System. In 2006, at the age of 89, he had retired from his position as Chief 5 Aerodynamicist at Marshall. Dahm had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal in 2003.
The Spacecraft Crew Survival Integrated Investigation Team, a multidisciplinary team based at NASAs JSC, issued an in-depth study of the safety equipment and safety procedures that the crew of Columbia had used during the Columbia disaster. The study, the first comprehensive report on crew survival in a spaceflight accident, detailed five lethal events that had occurred during the breakup of Columbia. The team determined that, even with better cabin equipment, hypersonic-entry conditions would have prevented crew survival. The report issued 30 recommendations to improve crew safety and vehicle design, covering topics such as crew training, individual safety equipment, procedures, restraints, spacecraft design, and future accident investigations. NASA had already implemented some of the recommendations, and NASA officials were assessing others.(NASA, NASA Report Reviews Crew Safety Measures During Columbia Accident, Recommends Improvements, news release M08-269, 30 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_ M08269_Crew_Safety.html (accessed 22 August 2011); John Schwartz, Report on Columbia Details How Astronauts Died, New York Times, 31 December 2008; see also NASA, Columbia Crew Survival Investigation Report (report no. NASA/SP-2008-565, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, December 2008), http://history.nasa.gov/columbia/columbiacrewsurvival.pdf (accessed 1 September 2011).)
At the American Geophysical Unions Fall Meeting, a team of scientists led by Bethany L. Ehlmann of Brown University announced that they had found carbonate minerals in Martian bedrock. The team had used the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer (CRISM) on NASAs MRO to observe carbonate exposures in the Isidis basin, particularly along the trough system known as Nili Fossae. Carbonates form when carbon dioxide and water interact with calcium, iron, or magnesium in volcanic rocks. Because carbonates dissolve quickly in acid, their presence indicated that Mars had once possessed neutral or alkaline water. A nonacidic environment would have favored ancient life forms. Previous researchers had found carbonates in Martian soil or dust, but the presence of carbonates in bedrock indicated that they might have formed over extended periods during Marss early history. The journal Science planned to publish the studys findings in its 19 December 2008 edition.(NASA, Scientists Find Missing Mineral and Clues to Mars Mysteries, news release 08-331, 18 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-331_Mars_minerals.html; see also Bethany L. Ehlmann et al., Orbital Identification of Carbonate-Bearing Rocks on Mars, Science 322, no. 5909 (19 December 2008): 18281832.)
Atlantis landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at 14:08 (UT) after a 13-day journey to the ISS, successfully completing the Shuttle mission STS-122, to deliver and install ESAs microgravity science laboratory Columbus. The seven-member crew included American astronauts Stephen N. Frick, Alan G. Poindexter, Leland D. Melvin, Rex J. Walheim, and Stanley G. Love, and ESA astronauts Hans W. Schlegel and Leopold Eyharts. The mission had begun with a 19:45 (UT) launch on 7 February 2008 from KSC and had included three spacewalks. Crew members had docked the Columbus laboratory to the Harmony module of the ISS; installed power, data, and cooling cables to the laboratory; replaced a spent nitrogen tank; placed two science experiments on the laboratorys exterior; retrieved a broken gyroscope; installed a solar monitor; and positioned the European Technology Exposure Facility. STS-122 had also exchanged Eyharts for American astronaut Daniel M. Tani, who had been aboard the ISS for almost four months.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 652; NASA, Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission, news release 08-061, 20 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08061_Atlantis_Lands.html (accessed 28 December 2010).)
The X Prize Foundation and Google announced the names of the first 10 teams to qualify to compete in the Google Lunar X Prize competition, which would award US$20 million to the first team to send a rover to the Moon. The winning team must build a rover that would land on the Moon, transmit a data signal back to Earth, travel at least 500 meters (1,640 feet), and then transmit another data signal. The X Prize Foundation would also give US$5 million to the second team to accomplish this goal, as well as offering additional prizes for other lunar achievements, such as the detection of lunar ice. The teams qualifying for the competition were Aeronautics and Cosmonautics Romanian Association (ARCA) of Romania; Astrobotic Technology of the United States; Chandah of the United States; FREDNET, a multinational team; LunaTrex of the Unites States; Micro-Space of the United States; Odyssey Moon of the Isle of Man; Quantum3 of the 22 United States; Southern California Selene Group of the United States; and Team Italia of Italy. The U.S. Navy cruiser Lake Erie fired a missile interceptor that struck down a disabled American spy satellite over the Pacific Ocean. The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) managed the 5,000-pound (2,268-kilgram) satellite, which was orbiting 130 miles (209 kilometers) above Earths surface, at over 17,000 miles per hour (27,359 kilometers per hour), when it was hit at 22:30 (EST). The satellite had been inoperative since shortly after its launch in December 2006. Officials had been concerned that its fuel tank, filled with 1,000 pounds (454 kilograms) of toxic hydrazine, could pose a risk to humans if the satellite fell in a populated area. A heat-seeking missile interceptor, retooled to track the frozen satellite, had accomplished the strike. Military officials had timed the strike to occur after Space Shuttle Atlantiss 20 February 2008 return to Earth, but before 1 March 2008, when the satellites fall into the upper atmosphere would disrupt its orbit, making it more difficult to hit. Officials stated that they believed that the impact had been strong enough to incinerate the fuel tank, although they would not know for 24 hours whether that had actually occurred.(Thom Shanker, Missile Strikes a Spy Satellite Falling From Its Orbit, New York Times, 21 February 2008. 24 NASA, NASA Selects New Deputy Associate Administrator of Strategic Partnerships and Space Program Manager, news release 08-065, 22 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/ HQ_08065_ New_Shuttle_Manage.html (accessed 28 December 2010).)
A team of astronomers led by Peter F. Michelson of Stanford University announced in the online version of the journal Science that NASAs Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope had discovered a pulsar after detecting its gamma-ray beams. Pulsars, which are rapidly spinning collapsed neutron stars, emit radiation from their poles in jets that sweep past Earth. Usually, scientists detect the energy as radio waves and, occasionally, as x rays or visible light. Fermis sighting was the first time that scientists had seen a pulsar that only emits gamma rays. The team speculated that, although the pulsar might emit energy in other wavelengths, only the gamma-ray beam is wide enough for astronomers to detect from Earth. Part of the supernova CTA 1, the pulsar is approximately 4,600 light-years away from Earth, in the constellation Cepheus. Its gamma rays blink past Earth every 316.86 seconds. The team of astronomers believed that Fermi would find more gamma-ray pulsars, allowing scientists to learn more about their magnetic fields and about the rate at which stars explode.(NASA, NASAs Fermis Telescope Discovers First Gamma-Ray-Only Pulsar, news release 08-259, 16 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-259_Fermi_GRP.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Rachel Courtland, First Pulsar Identified by Its Gamma Rays Alone, New Scientist, 17 October 2008, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn14968 (accessed 10 August 2011); see also A. A. Abdo, The Fermi Gamma- Ray Space Telescope Discovers the Pulsar in the Young Galactic Supernova Remnant CTA 1, Science 322, no. 5905 (21 November 2008): 12181221.)
NASA announced the appointment of Michael R. Luther as NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in the Science Mission. Luther had begun his career with NASA in 1981 at NASAs LaRC. In 1987 he had moved to NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, where he had served as Program Manager of the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and as Earth Science Flight Program Director. Luther had received NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal in 2005. As Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs, Luther would supervise the administration, including formulation and development, of the 36 missions of NASAs SMD. Additionally, he would manage the implementation of 54 operation missions. NASAs SMD was responsible for conducting research and for operating scientific programs to explore the solar system and universe, to observe the Earth, and to study space weather.(NASA, NASA Earth Scientist To Head Programs Office in Science Directorate, news release 08-096, 10 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/apr/HQ_08096_Luther_Named_SMD_DAA.html (accessed 17 February 2001).)
NASA announced the selection of Colorado-based United Launch Alliance to launch two payloads for NASAs SMD and two for NASAs Space Operations Mission Directorate, under a NASA Launch Services contract. The US$600 million award stipulated that the four payloads the Radiation Belt Storm Probes (RBSP) mission, the Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) mission, and the Tracking and Data Relay Satellites K and L (TDRS-K and TDRS-L) missions would launch aboard Atlas-V expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) from Launch Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA planned to launch the RBSP mission in 2011, as part of its Living with a Star Program. The RBSP mission would use two nearly identical spacecraft, which would study Earths radiation belts for two years, helping scientists understand how the Suns changing energy flow affects the radiation belts. Planned for 2014, the MMS mission, part of the SMD Heliophysics Division Solar Terrestrial Probes Program, would launch four identical satellites together in a stacked formation. Traveling around Earth in an elliptical orbit, the MMS mission satellites would study the fundamental plasma-physics processes of magnetic reconnection that occur when energy emanating from the Suns solar wind interacts with Earths magnetic field. NASA planned to launch TDRS-K and TDRS-L in 2012 and 2013, to replenish the NASA communications relay network that provides voice, data, video, and telemetry links between the ground and spacecraft below geosynchronous orbit. The ISS and NASAs HST use the NASA communications relay network.(NASA, NASA Awards Launch Services Contract for Four Missions, news release C09-011, 16 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_C09-011_Launch_Services.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, NASA Contracts Science Missions on ULAs Atlas V Rockets, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 March 2009. 40 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 665; Peter B. De Selding, Russian Rocket Lofts ESA Gravity Mapping Satellite, Spacenews.com, 17 March 2009, http://www.spacenews.com/civil/russian-rocket-lofts-esa-gravity-mapping.html (accessed 10 May 2011).)
NASA announced that the MIB led by Arthur F. Rick Obenschain had completed its report about the cause of the unsuccessful 24 February 2009 launch of the OCO and released a summary of its findings and recommendations. The MIB did not make the complete text of the official report public because it contained information protected by U.S. International Traffic in Arms Regulations and company-sensitive proprietary information. The boards report verified that the Taurus launch vehicles fairinga clamshell structure that encapsulated the satellite as it traveled through the atmospherehad failed to separate upon command, preventing the craft from reaching its planned orbit. The craft had crashed into the ocean near Antarctica minutes after launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The board had identified four possible causes of the fairing failurea failure of the frangible-joint subsystem, a failure in the electrical subsystem, a failure in the pneumatic system, or a cord caught on a frangible-joint side- rail nut plate. The board had made recommendations to prevent future problems associated with those four hardware components.(NASA, NASA Releases Orbiting Carbon Observatory Accident Summary, news release 09-163, 17 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-163_OCO.html (accessed 10 August 2011); NASA, Overview of the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) Mishap Investigation Results for Public Release, http://www.nasa.gov/ pdf/369037main_OCOexecutivesummary_71609.pdf (accessed 16 August 2011); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, Hardware Problem Blamed on NASA Satellite Crash, 17 July 2009.)
NASA launched the latest Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) weather satellite, GOES O, from Space Launch Complex 37 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, at 6:51 p.m. (EDT), aboard a Delta-4 rocket. The crafts schedule would place GOES O in its final orbit on 7 July 2009, at which time NASA would rename it GOES 14. Twenty-four hours after launch, Boeing Space and Intelligence Systems would hand engineering control over to NASA; five months later, NASA would transfer operational control of GOES 14 to NOAA. NOAA would perform check-out operations of the craft, store it in orbit, and make it available for activation when one of two operational GOES satellites degraded or exhausted its fuel. GOES O was the second of three of the newest generation of GOES satellites launched. In addition to providing continuous weather monitoring for 60 percent of the planet, these GOES satellites monitored solar flares and tracked climate change.(NASA, NASA and NOAAs GOES-O Satellite Successfully Launched, news release 09-148, 27 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09148_GOES_O_Launch.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Marcia Dunn, Sophisticated Weather Satellite Rockets into Orbit, Associated Press, 29 June 2009; Todd Halvorson, Rocket Launches Weather Satellite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 June 2009.)
NASA announced that a team of NASA and university scientists had achieved the first definitive detection of methane in the Martian atmosphere, confirming that Mars is either biologically or geologically active. Using NASAs Infrared Telescope Facility and the W. M. Keck telescope at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the team had detected three spectral features called absorption linesa definitive signature of methane. Michael J. Mumma of NASAs GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, lead author of an article in Science Express, explained that the Martian atmosphere quickly destroys methane in a number of ways. According to Mumma, the discovery of substantial plumes of methane in the northern hemisphere of Mars in 2003 indicated that an ongoing process was releasing the gas. The plumes had dispersed, covering the entire planet, and had dissipated within three years. Mumma explained further that the research team did not have enough information to determine whether a biological process, a geological process, or a combination of the two was producing the methane.(NASA, Discovery of Methane Reveals Mars Is Not a Dead Planet, news release 09-006, 15 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-006_Mars_Methane.html (accessed 14 January 2011); Dan Vergano, Methane Plumes Spotted on Mars May Be a Sign of Life, USA Today, 16 January 2009.)
NASA launched its Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) aboard a four-stage Taurus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 1:55 am (PST). However, approximately 3 minutes later7 seconds after the ignition of the third stage, the payload fairingthe nose cone protecting the satellite as it rises through the atmospherefailed to separate, dooming the craft. The satellite fell back to Earth, landing in the ocean near Antarctica. Had the launch succeeded, the Observatory would have joined Japans GoSat, in precisely measuring carbon-dioxide levels in the air. GoSat had reached orbit on 23 January. (NASA, NASAs Launch of Carbon-Seeking Satellite Is Unsuccessful, news release 09-039, 24 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-039_OCO_failure.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Kenneth Chang, NASA Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, New York Times, 25 February 2009.)
NASA and Microsoft Corporation announced plans to make planetary images and data available to the public via the Internet under a Space Act Agreement. The project required NASA and Microsoft jointly to develop the technology and infrastructure necessary to enable the public to explore NASA content using the WorldWide Telescope, Microsofts online virtual telescope for exploring the universe. Online since 2008, WorldWide Telescope combined images from ground- and space-based telescopes to simulate the experience of peering into the cosmos. The agreement directed NASAs ARC in Moffett Field, California, to process and host more than 100 terabytes of data, which WorldWide Telescope would incorporate later in 2009. The data would feature imagery from NASAs Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which NASA had launched in 2005 to examine Mars using several instruments, including a high-resolution camera. Since 2006, MRO had returned more data than all other Mars missions combined. NASA planned to launch its Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) in May 2009. After LRO images became publicly available later in 2009, NASA intended to include those images in the WorldWide Telescope project. The agreement built on a prior collaboration with Microsoft, in which NASA had developed three-dimensional, interactive Microsoft Photosynth collections of the Space Shuttle launchpad and other KSC facilities.(NASA, NASA and Microsoft To Make Universe of Data Available to the Public, news release 09-067, 24 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-067_Microsoft_WorldWide_ Telescope.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Agence France-Presse, Microsofts WorldWide Telescope To Focus on Mars, 25 March 2009.)
NASA announced that, together with industry engineers, it had successfully tested the three main parachutes of the Ares-I rocket, which NASA was designing to serve as the booster rocket for the Orion CEV. Engineers had designed the parachutes as the primary element of the rockets deceleration system, which included a pilot parachute and a drogue parachute. The main parachutes would deploy in a cluster, open simultaneously, and provide the necessary drag to slow the descent of the solid-rocket first-stage motor to a soft landing in the ocean, allowing their recovery for use on future flights. NASAs MSFC engineers had conducted the first cluster test at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The flight test was the eighth in an ongoing series supporting the development of the Ares-I recovery system. The research team had dropped the 41,500-pound (18,824-kilogram, or 18.8-tonne) load from a U.S. Air Force C- 17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,058-meters). All parachutes and test hardware had functioned properly and landed safely. The parachutes measured 150 feet (45.72 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonnes), making them the largest rocket parachutes manufactured to date.(NASA, NASA Tests Largest Rocket Parachutes Ever for Ares I, news release 09-113, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-113_AresI_Parachutes_Test.html (accessed 20 June 2011);)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting, members of NASAs MESSENGER mission team and cartographic experts from the U.S. Geological Survey released the first global map of Mercury. The team had built the map from 917 images that NASAs MESSENGER spacecraft had collected as recently as 29 September 2009 and from earlier images that Mariner 10 had captured in the 1970s. Scientists planned to use the map as a critical tool to help identify Mercurys craters, faults, and other features. MESSENGER would use this information in its observations, when the craft entered Mercurys orbit in 2011. MESSENGER Principal Investigator Sean C. Solomon remarked that, beyond its use as a planning tool, the global map signified that MESSENGER was no longer a flyby mission. Instead, MESSENGER would soon become an in-depth, nonstop global observatory of the solar systems innermost planet.(Alexis Madrigal, First Global Map of Mercury, Wired, 16 December 2009; Nancy Atkinson, MESSENGER Team Releases First Global Map of Mercury, Universe Today, 16 December 2009.)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), an independent group of experts that had evaluated NASAs safety performance since 1968, released its 2008 annual report. ASAP agreed that continuing to operate the Shuttle fleet would minimize the gap between Shuttle retirement and the first Orion flights, but the panel did not favor that approach because of NASAs diminished Shuttle manufacturing and support capabilities. NASA had been closing out contracts with Shuttle component manufacturers and supporting vendors since 2004. According to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), operating the fleet beyond 2010 would require NASA to recertify the entire Shuttle system and to draw funds from the Constellation Program, thereby impeding its effort to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. ASAP saw little likelihood that NASA could field Ares-I rockets and Orion spacecraft before March 2015, even if Congress provided additional funding. ASAP had concluded that no evidence indicated that the commercial sector could develop cargo and crew transport services in time, or that commercial spacecraft were appropriate to transport NASA personnel, or that commercial spacecraft could safely dock with the ISS. In addition to ASAPs annual report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) had released a report analyzing budget scenarios for fulfilling President George W. Bushs 2004 space exploration plan. Each scenario predicted schedule slips requiring additional congressional funding. The CBO had found that, at current funding levels, NASA must delay development of Ares Is and Orions initial operating capabilities until late 2016, delay the return of humans to the Moon for three years, and delay 15 out of 79 science missions beyond 2025.(NASA, Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel Releases Annual Report, media advisory M09-061, 16 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_M09-061_ASAP_Annual_Report.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Todd Halvorson, Independent Safety Experts Call for Shuttle Shutdown, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009; Eun Kyung Kim, Report: NASA Needs Extra Billons To Maintain Schedule, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009. See also U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, The Budgetary Implications of NASAs Current Plans for Space Exploration (report, Washington, DC, April 2009), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/ doc10051/04 -15-NASA.pdf.)
NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 9:09 a.m. (EST). Approximately 52 minutes into the flight, the rocket placed the 1,485-pound (673-kilogram) WISE craft into polar orbit 326 miles (525 kilometers) above Earth. From that point, the craft would carry out its mission to map all objects in the sky in infrared lightnear-Earth asteroids, stars, planet-forming discs, and distant galaxies. Approximately 3 minutes after separating from the rocket, WISE reoriented itself toward the Sun, enabling it to use its solar panels to generate its own power. Approximately 17 minutes later, valves opened on the crafts cryostat, a chamber of super-cold hydrogen ice designed to maintain WISE at colder temperatures than the objects the craft would observe. WISEs primary mission would expire once the frozen hydrogen was depleted, approximately 10 months after launch. Scientists expected the resulting WISE atlas to contain hundreds of millions of objects, which would provide astronomers and space mission designers with a long-lasting infrared roadmap.(NASA, NASAs WISE Eye on the Universe Begins All-Sky Survey Mission, news release 09-286, 14 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09-286_WISE_launch.html (accessed 16 December 2011); John Johnson Jr., NASA Launches New Mapping Spacecraft, Los Angeles Times, 15 December 2009.)
NASA launched its National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellite, NOAA 19, or NOAA-N Prime, aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 2:22 a.m. (PST). The successful launch occurred following two scrubs resulting from technical problems. The Lockheed Martinbuilt NOAA-N Prime was the latest and final spacecraft in the Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) satellite series. Lockheed Martin had been designing and building for NASA and NOAA since the first Television and Infrared Observational Satellite (TIROS) weather satellite, which had launched in April 1960. Replacing NOAA 18, NOAA-N Prime would become the primary afternoon spacecraft, a designation based upon the time a spacecrafts orbit crosses the equator. NOAA-N Prime was carrying the same primary instruments that NOAA 18 had on board, with the addition of an Advanced Data Collection System (ADCS) and an improved Search and Rescue Processor. Frances national space agency, Centre National dEtudes Spatiales (CNES) had provided the ADCS, a system designed to measure environmental factors such as atmospheric temperature and pressure, as well as the velocity and direction of ocean and wind currents. CNES had also provided the Search and Rescue Processor, designed to detect distress calls from emergency beacons on board aircraft and boats, as well as to locate people carrying devices in remote areas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664; NASA Spaceflight, ULA Delta II Launches on Third Attempt with NASAs NOAA- N Prime, 6 February 2009.)
NASA successfully launched its PharmaSat nanosatellite at 7:55 p.m. (EDT) from its Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) aboard a four-stage U.S. Air Force Minotaur-1 rocket. The rocket also carried the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratorys TacSat-3 satellite, which was the primary payload, and other NASA CubeSat Technology Demonstration experimentsAerocube 3, CP 6, and Hawksat 1three 4-inch, cubed satellites developed by universities and industry to measure electron collection, radiation testing, and guidance and control systems. PharmaSats mission was to investigate the effects of antifungal agents on the growth of yeast in microgravity, to help scientists better understand how microbes might become resistant to drugs used to treat sick astronauts on long-duration flights. PharmaSat separated from the rocket approximately 20 minutes after launch and entered low Earth orbit at an altitude of 285 miles (458.7 kilometers). Following the checkout period, ground controllers planned to command PharmaSat to initiate its biological experiment, scheduled to last 96 hours. The satellite would transmit radio signals to Ground Control stations at two California locations and would send mission data to the NASA Mission Management Team at ARC. The satellite could continue to transmit this data for as long as six months.(NASA, NASA Flight Facility Successfully Launches Nanosatellite, news release 09-114, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-114_PharmaSat_Launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667; Matthew Jones, Rocket May Launch a Promising Future for Wallops Island, Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 20 May 2009.)
NASA announced a partnership with the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory to develop a technology roadmap study for the commercial reusable launch vehicle (RLV) industry. Led by NASAs Innovative Partnerships Program, the study would identify technologies and assess their potential use, in an effort to accelerate the development of commercial RLVs. The study would also recommend to the U.S. government technology tasks and milestones for various vehicle categories. NASA had defined the categories as 1) reusable, suborbital vehicles; 2) expendable and partially reusable, orbital vehicles; 3) reusable, two-stage orbital vehicles; and 4) advanced vehicle concepts, such as single-stage-to-orbit, air-breathing systems, in-flight refueling, and tethered upper-stage vehicles. NASA and the U.S. Air Force planned to evaluate all types of flight systemsfrom space entry, descent, and recovery systems, to avionics, communications, and flight control. The study would commence in 2009, at the Commercial and Government Responsive Access to Space Technology Exchange in Dayton, Ohio (2629 October 2009). Representatives from NASA, the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory, and the FAAs Office of Commercial Space Transportation would meet with representatives from the commercial RLV industry, soliciting feedback about long-range growth plans and the necessary technology to implement those plans successfully.(NASA, NASA Announces Commercial RLV Technology Roadmap Project, news release 09-238, 13 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-238_RLV_Study.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Michael Cooney, NASA Partners with US Air Force To Develop Commercial Space Roadmap, Network World, 14 October 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of the members of the mishap board tasked with investigating the unsuccessful launch of the OCO, which had failed to reach orbit after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on 24 February 2009. NASA charged the board to identify the causes and contributing factors of the launch failure and to recommend measures that NASA should take to prevent a similar incident in future missions. NASA had named Arthur F. Rick Obenschain, Deputy Director at NASAs GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the investigation, and now named four other voting members: Jose A. Caraballo, Safety Manager at NASAs Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia; Patricia M. Jones, Acting Chief of the Human Systems Integration Division in the Exploration Technology Directorate at NASAs ARC in Moffett Field, California; Richard J. Lynch of Aerospace Systems Engineering at NASAs GSFC; and David R. Sollberger, Deputy Chief Engineer of the NASA Launch Services Program at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. NASA named Ruth D. Jones, the Safety and Mission Assurance Manager at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), as the boards ex officio member, charged with assuring that board activity conformed to NASA procedural requirements.
NASA successfully launched its Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) aboard an Atlas-V rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 5:32 p.m. (EDT). Also on board, with a companion mission, was LRO, which safely separated from LCROSS 45 minutes after launch. The mission planned for the 1,290-pound (585-kilogram) LCROSS and the 5,216-pound (2,366-kilogram) Centaur upper stage was to perform approximately three long, looping polar orbits around the Earth and the Moon, before colliding separately with the Moon on 9 October 2009. NASA had tentatively targeted an impact site at the Moons south pole near the Cabeus region, but refused to identify the exact target until 30 days before impact, when its scientists would have had time to study the information collected by LRO, other spacecraft orbiting the Moon, and observatories on Earth.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches Lunar Impactor, news release 09-143, 18 June 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-143_LCROSS_Launch_Success.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
GAO published a report finding that the development schedules of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital Sciences Corporation had recently fallen behind, despite steady progress. SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation, NASAs commercial partners, were working on transportation technologies for space cargo, according to Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) agreements. Both companies had experienced schedule slips that would delay demonstration launches scheduled for 2010 and 2011. Having successfully completed its initial 14 developmental milestones on time, SpaceX was in the process of testing, fabricating, and assembling key components. However, a schedule slip in the development of its launch vehicle had contributed to anticipated delays of two to four months in most of SpaceXs remaining milestones, including demonstration missions. Orbital had successfully completed seven of 19 developmental milestones but had experienced delays in the development of its launch vehicle. The delays were partly because NASA and Orbital had amended their agreement, which now required Orbital to demonstrate a different cargo-transport capability than originally planned. This change had delayed the demonstration mission date from December 2010 to March 2011. GAO pointed out that the delays would cause NASA to experience a cargo-resupply shortfall for the ISS, once the SSP had concluded in 2010. NASA estimates showed that NASA would need to have 82.7 tonnes (91 tons) of dry cargo delivered to the ISS between 2010 and 2015. To deliver approximately half the total amount of dry cargo, NASA planned to use ISS partners vehiclesthree Russian Progress vehicles in 2010 and 2011, six Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2015, and four European Automated Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2013. Based on these projections, GAO concluded that NASA would face a cargo-resupply shortfall of approximately 40 tonnes (44 tons) between 2010 and 2015. If commercial partners were to experience further delays or to become unable to provide cargo- resupply services when anticipated, NASA would be unable to make as full a use of the ISS as it had intended.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Commercial Partners Are Making Progress, But Face Aggressive Schedules To Demonstrate Critical Space Station Cargo Transport Capabilities (report no. GAO-09-618, Washington, DC, June 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09618.pdf (accessed 5 August 2011); Network World Fusion, Can Commercial Space Technology Get Off the Ground? NASAs Commercial Space Technology Is Seemingly at a Crossroads, 17 June 2009; Mark Matthews, GAO Gives COTS Companies a Passing Grade, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 June 2009.)
Richard E. Halpern, a senior NASA official who had served as Science Manager on Spacelab, the ISS, and other human spaceflight and robotic NASA projects, died of heart ailments at the age of 78. Halpern had served in the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s and had held a fellowship at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University in 1968 and 1969. Before joining NASA in 1963, he had worked at the Naval Ordnance Laboratory. After joining NASA, Halpern had become Director of its High Energy Astrophysics Program during the early planning stages for the ISS. In the late 1970s, he had served as Program Manager for three launches of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory. He had served as Director of the ISS utilities and operations division from 1986 until his retirement in 1989. NASA had awarded Halpern its Exceptional Service Medal in 1978 and its highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, in 1980.(Matt Schudel, Obituaries: Richard E. Halpern NASA Official, Washington Post, 7 December 2009.)
Pursuant to a 2008 congressional mandate, NASA was required to provide a research management plan for the ISS National Laboratory. The GAO report, International Space Station: Significant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research, evaluated how NASA was currently using the ISS for research and how NASA expected to use the ISS once it was completed. The report also identified challenges to maximizing ISS research, as well as examining common management practices at other national laboratories and large science programs, practices that could apply to the management of the ISS.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, International Space Station: Significant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research (report no. GAO-10-9, Washington, DC, November 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d109.pdf (accessed 21 December 2011).)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of STS-127 at the ISS, focusing on odd jobs and unfinished tasks, which they completed in 4 hours and 54 minutes. The duo rewired power cables for the ISSs American- built attitude-control system; secured loose insulation on a Canadian-built maintenance robot; and added to JEF a pair of television cameras, which would provide good views of Japans new unpiloted cargo ship, the H-2 Transfer Vehicle, scheduled to make its maiden flight in September 2009. The only task that the astronauts left unfinished was the installation of a cargo attachment system, a task that Mission Control had decided would require too much time. Instead, Mission Control instructed Cassidy and Marshburn to tend to some get-ahead tasksattaching wire ties to external cables and installing new handrails and work-site attachments on the Kibo laboratory. The five spacewalks tied the record for the most EVAs (extravehicular activities) performed on the ISS while a Space Shuttle was docked at the station.(Tariq Malik, Spacewalkers Wrap Up Space Station Service Call, Space.com, 27 July 2009, http://www.space. com/7059-spacewalkers-wrap-space-station-service-call.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
At NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the field of space transportation. The agreement would allow the two space agencies to exchange technical information and personnel, providing NASA with assistance in several key areas. These key areas included composite material technology, development of payload shrouds, and management of propellants in spacecraft propulsion systems used for transit to and from lunar orbit. Bolden reflected on NASAs long history of participating with ESA in human spaceflight activities, remarking that the agreement underscored NASAs intention to continue building that relationship. Dordain added that the exchange of technical information enabled under the terms of the agreement would benefit both agencies, facilitating work toward future launch systems, human spaceflight, and exploration missions.(NASA, U.S. and Europe Agree on Civil Space Transportation Cooperation, news release 09-208, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-208_NASA_ESA_MOU.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
GAO published a report finding that NASA had continued to experience cost overruns and delays in implementing large-scale projects or those budgeted at US$250 million or more. GAO had audited 18 NASA projects, with a combined life-cycle cost of more than US$50 billion. Of those 18 projects, 13 had entered the implementation phase. Ten of the 13 had experienced significant cost growth or schedule growth or both. Development costs had increased by an average of 13 percent from baseline cost estimates, and projects had an average launch delay of 11 months. GAO reported that many projects had faced challenges in developing new technologies or retrofitting older technologies, as well as difficulty managing contractors. However, GAO found that, despite these problems, NASA had improved its ability to manage and to estimate the cost of major projects. Nevertheless, GAO suggested that NASA needed to make additional improvements. The report noted that, although NASAs budget represented less than 2 percent of the federal governments discretionary budget, NASA was increasingly receiving requests to expand its portfolio to support important scientific missions, such as the study of climate change. GAO found that, to meet these increased demands, NASA would need to work even harder to manage its resources as effectively and efficiently as possible.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASA: Assessments of Selected Large-Scale Projects (report no. GAO-09-306SP, Washington, DC, 2 March 2009), http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-306SP (accessed 11 May 2011); Mark Matthews, GAO: NASAs Big Projects Take Too Long, Cost Too Much, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 March 2009.)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with American Tank and Vessel of Mobile, Alabama, for the installation of a test-cell diffuser and associated systems in the A-3 test stand at NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. NASA planned to test the J-2X engine for its Constellation Program at the A-3 test stand. Construction had begun in 2007, and NASA had scheduled the first test to take place in 2012. The contract with American Tank and Vessel had a maximum value of US$45 million.(NASA, NASA Awards Construction Contract for Rocket Engine Testing, news release C09-006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-006_SSC_A-3_Test_Stand.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA conducted its first test flight of the 327-foot-tall (99.67-meter-tall) Ares I-X rocket, which would launch the Shuttles successor craft. The Shuttles successor would carry humans to the ISS, the Moon, and beyond. NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate in Washington, DC, and the Constellation Programs Ares I-X mission management office at NASAs JSC in Houston led the Ares I-X efforts. The prototype launched at 11:30 a.m. (EDT) from the newly modified Launch Complex 39B, a former Shuttle launchpad. The first launch of a new type of rocket from NASAs KSC since 1981, the launch occurred 48 years and 1 day after the inaugural launch of the Saturn rocket. The test vehicle produced 2.6 million pounds (1.18 million kilograms) of thrust, accelerating the rocket to nearly 3 Gs (G-forces) and Mach 4.76, just under hypersonic speed. The test flight lasted 2 minutes, the time needed for the first-stage solid-fuel booster to burn out and separate from the mock upper stage at a suborbital altitude of 150,000 feet (45,720 meters). Parachutes deployed, and recovery ships collected the booster from the Atlantic Ocean. The rocket carried more than 700 sensors designed to collect data in several areas, including assembly and launch operations, separation of the vehicles first and second stages, controllability and aerodynamics, the reentry and recovery of the first stage, and new techniques of vehicle design. Engineers would analyze the data to validate computer models used to design rockets and to test the safety of steering a tall rocket with a single solid-rocket motor. The mission lasted 6 minutes, from launch to splash down of the rockets booster stage, nearly 150 miles (241.4 kilometers) down range.(NASA, NASAs Ares I-X Rocket Completes Successful Flight Test, news release 09-252, 28 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-252_Ares_I-X_Success.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASAs New Moon Rocket Makes First Test Flight, 29 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, NASA Rocket Takes Off as Clouds Break, New York Times, 29 October 2009; Robert Block, Ares I-X FliesBut Will Program: Ares I-X Lifts Off from Kennedy Space Center on Short Test Flight, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 October 2009.)
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASAs MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttles main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicles Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSCs propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASAs MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFCs Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, Lightfoot Named Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center, news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at 8:39 a.m. (PDT) at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending a successful 13-day mission to HST. Weather conditions had prevented Atlantis from landing at KSC. Astronauts had performed five spacewalks to repair, replace, and upgrade the instruments and computers on HST. These repairs and upgrades had not only restored the telescope, but had also expanded its capabilities. NASA considered the unprecedented mission historic, because of the complexity of the repairs and because the mission had been the last time human beings would go to space to repair an orbiting scientific instrument. NASA had placed HST in low Earth orbit at 600 kilometers (373 miles) to facilitate repair missions, but the location was suboptimal for space telescopes. NASA had planned to place HSTs successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) away from Earth, at L2, and, therefore, had designed JWST to function without repairs or upgrades. In addition to making HST repairs, astronauts had performed a commercial drug experiment aimed at finding a vaccine against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and other microbes.(NASA, NASAs Space Shuttle Returns to Earth After Hubble Mission, news release 09-120, 24 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-120_STS-125_Landing_Edwards.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Houston Chronicle, This Is Why We Fly: Hubble Repair Mission Showcases the Value of the Manned Space Program, 26 May 2009; Daniel Holz, The Last Fix, Discover Magazine, 26 May 2009, http://blogs. discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2009/05/25/the-last-fix/ (accessed 21 July 2011); Frank Morring Jr., Drug Experiment Performed on Atlantis, Aviation Week, 20 May 2009.)
NASAs Kepler astronomy probe, named for Johannes Kepler, who had published the laws of planetary motion in 1609, successfully launched into space from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, aboard a United Launch Alliance Delta 2, at 10:49 p.m. (EST). Keplers mission was to identify the first Earth-size planets orbiting stars at distances that would permit water to pool on the planets surface. Scientists had designed the craft to search for brightness variations in more than 100,000 stars in the Cygnus-Lyra region. Astronomers study brightness variations because, when a planet passes in front of a star, the stars light appears to dim, enabling them to determine the diameter of the transiting object. The Kepler mission would use a photometer to monitor the same star field over approximately three-and-a-half years, allowing multiple observations of transits of exoplanets in orbits of as long as one year. Ideally, the Kepler probe would observe an object at least three times to confirm the measurement of its orbital period. Mission scientists placed the 1,052-kilogram (2,319-pound) craft in a 372.5-day solar orbit to help the probe maintain a stable pointing attitude.(NASA, NASAs Kepler Mission Rockets to Space in Search of Other Earths, news release 09-052, 7 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-052_Kepler_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 665, 1 April 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx665.html (accessed 10 May 2011); Joel Achenbach, Kepler Lifts Off, on Age-Old Quest: Space Telescope Seeks To Find Other Earths on 312- Year Mission, Washington Post, 9 March 2009.)
The U.S. Department of Transportations Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced the finalization of amended certification standards requiring makers of transport category aircraft to have automatically activating icing-protection systems or to provide a method of alerting pilots to turn on the aircrafts icing-protection system. FAA Administrator J. Randolph Randy Babbitt explained that the new rule added another level of safety to prevent the occurrence of a situation in which the pilots of an airplane were unaware of ice accumulation on the craft or did not think ice accumulation on the aircraft was significant enough to warrant activation of ice- protection equipment. The fatal crash of an American Eagle ATR 72 near Roselawn, Indiana, in 1994, had initiated a decade of research by the FAA, NASA, and other entities, leading to the new rule. Ice build-up on the American Eagles wings had caused the crash.(U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, FAA Mandates Timely Activation of Ice Protection Systems for New Designs, FAA news release, 3 August 2009, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 10679 (accessed 12 September 2011); John Croft, FAA Toughens Icing Protection Standards, Air Transport Intelligence, 4 August 2009.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed retired U.S. Marine Corps general and former astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. as NASAs twelfth Administrator, marking the first appointment of an African American as NASAs Administrator. During his 34-year career with the Marine Corps, Bolden had spent 14 years as a member of NASAs Astronaut Office, which he had joined in 1980. As an astronaut, he had traveled to orbit four times aboard the Space Shuttle, between 1986 and 1994. On two of those trips he had served as Commander of the Shuttle. His missions had included the deployment of the HST and the first joint U.S.-Russian Shuttle mission. While he was an astronaut, Bolden had fulfilled many technical assignments, serving as Astronaut Office Safety Officer; Technical Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations; Special Assistant to the Director of JSC; Lead Astronaut for vehicle test and checkout at KSC; Chief of the Safety Division at JSC, where he oversaw safety efforts for the return to flight after the 1986 Challenger accident; and Assistant Deputy Administrator at NASA Headquarters. In May 2006, NASA had inducted Bolden into the Astronaut Hall of Fame. The Senate also confirmed Lori B. Garver as NASAs new Deputy Administrator. Like Bolden, Garver was returning to NASA for a second period of service. Between 1996 and 2001, she had served as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and Senior Policy Analyst for the Office of Policy and Plans, before becoming Associate Administrator of that office.(NASA, Bolden and Garver Confirmed by U.S. Senate, news release 09-165, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-165_Bolden_and_Garver.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Bolden Confirmed as NASA Administrator, 16 July 2009.)
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino, a mechanical and robotics engineer on this third spacewalk, and Michael T. Good, a former U.S. Air Force test pilot on his first space mission, undertook the second of five planned spacewalks to repair the HST. The spacewalk agenda consisted of the most important task of the 11-day missionto replace the gyroscopes that kept the telescope pointed in the correct directionand to replace three batteries. Working from inside the telescope, Good and Massimino had difficulty installing the second set of new gyroscopes and resorted to using a spare that did not initially fit either. The extra work extended the spacewalk to 8 hours1.5 hours longer than scheduledmaking it the tenth longest spacewalk on record.(Dennis Overbye, Astronauts Work on Replacing Hubbles Gyroscopes, New York Times, 16 May 2009.)
Russias Soyuz TMA-17 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:52 p.m. (CST), carrying NASA astronaut Timothy J. Creamer, Russian cosmonaut Oleg V. Kotov, and JAXA astronaut Soichi Noguchi to the ISS. The three crew members, scheduled to remain at the ISS until May 2010, would join Expedition 22 crew members American Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian Maxim V. Suraev aboard the space station, bringing the station crew total to five. The mission was Creamers first. The launch marked the first time a Soyuz craft had launched at night in winter.(NASA, Crew Lifts Off From Kazakhstan To Begin Science and Construction Work Aboard the International Space Station, news release 09-295, 20 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09- 295_Soyuz_launch_ex22.html (accessed 16 December 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, Astronauts Blast Off for Christmas Space Mission, 21 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, New Crew Launches Toward International Space Station, Space.com, 21 December 2009, http://www.space.com/7693-crew-launches- international-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced the designation of three university and industry partners to serve as national hypersonic science centers. The centers task would be to promote research in air-breathing propulsion, materials and structures, and boundary-layer control for aircraft able to travel at Mach 5. NASAs Aeronautics Research Mission in Washington, DC, and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratorys Office of Scientific Research in Arlington, Virginia, had selected the partners from more than 60 contenders. The University of Virginia in Charlottesville would host the National Center for Hypersonic Combined Cycle Propulsion and would lead a team specializing in air-breathing propulsion research; Texas A&M University in College Station would be the National Center for Hypersonic Laminar-Turbulent Transition and would specialize in boundary layercontrol research; and Teledyne Scientific and Imaging LLC in Thousand Oaks, California, would host the National Hypersonic Science Center for Hypersonic Materials and Structures. James L. Pittman, Principal Investigator for the Hypersonics Project of NASAs Fundamental Aeronautics Program at NASAs LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, remarked that NASAs joint investment with the Air Force of US$30 million over five years would support basic science and applied research that improves our understanding of hypersonic flight. Pittman stated that the establishment of the centers signaled a major commitment to advancing foundational hypersonic research and to training the next generation of hypersonic researchers.(NASA, NASA and Air Force Designate National Hypersonic Science Centers, news release 09-050, 5 March 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of four proposals to study the risks of space radiation for humans living in space. NASA selected the proposals of New York University School of Medicine, the University of Texas Medical Branch in Houston, Loma Linda University in California, and Georgetown University in Washington, DC. The four institutions would become NASA Specialized Centers of Research. With the establishment of this program, NASA would invest US$28.4 million in the four institutions over a five-year period. At the centers, researchers would study carcinogenesis and the risks of spaceflight to the central nervous system, helping them to begin to develop effective radiation countermeasures for space travelers.(NASA, NASA Selects Four Proposals To Study Space Radiation Risks, news release 09-126, 2 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-126_Radiation_Risk_Proposals.html (accessed 22 July 2011). 82 Associated Press, Delayed Spacewalk Ends Successfully, 8 June 2009; Clara Moskowitz, Spacewalkers Prime Space Station for New Docking Port, Space.com, 5 June 2009, http://www.space.com/6799-spacewalkers-prime- space-station-docking-port.html (accessed 3 August 2011).)
NASA announced that X-Prize Foundation and NASA would host the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander X-Prize Challenge (NGLLXPC) awards at a ceremony in Washington, DC. Masten Space Systems, led by David Masten, had won a first prize of US$1 million for its Xoie rocket prototype, which had competed in the Level-1 contest. Masten Space Systems had also won a second place award of US$150,000 in the Level-2 contest for its Xombie rocket. Texas-based Armadillo Aerospaces Scorpius rocket had qualified for the Level-1 prize in September but had lost to Xoie in its flight on 30 October in the accuracy category, receiving US $500,000 for second place. Modeled after the US$10 million Ansari X-Prize competition for private-sector spaceflight, NGLLXPC was one of NASAs Centennial Challenges, intended to encourage the development of new rocket technologies for use in future spacecraft. NASA required contestants to build and fly a rocket-powered vehicle simulating the flight of a vehicle to the Moon. The lander had to take off vertically, travel horizontally, and fly a mission profile designed to demonstrate both power and control, before landing accurately at another spot. Then the craft must take off again, travel horizontally back to its original launch point, and land successfully. The lander must complete the entire exercise within 2 hours and 15 minutes. NASA provided the prize money for the Level-1 and Level-2 contests, and the X-Prize Foundation managed the competition, with commercial sponsorship from Northrop Grumman.
NASA announced the successful completion of the second drop test of a drogue parachute for the Ares-I rocket. The drop test had taken place on 28 February 2009 at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The test was the seventh in a series of flight tests supporting the development of the Ares-I parachute-recovery system, which comprised a pilot chute, drogue, and three main parachutes. To test the 68-foot-diameter (20.7-meter-diameter) drogue parachute, researchers had dropped the parachute from a U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 25,000 feet (7.62 kilometers). The drogue had carried a 50,000-pound (22,680-kilogram, or 22.68-tonne) load, to simulate the rockets spent first-stage motor. The parachute and the test hardware had functioned as planned, landing the load safely. NASA engineers had designed the drogue to permit recovery of the rockets reusable first-stage motor. They planned to use the design in future Ares-I flights, including launches associated with NASAs Constellation Program.(NASA, NASA Successfully Tests Parachute for Ares Rocket, news release 09-045, 2 March 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-045_Ares_Drogue_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 5:53 p.m. (PDT), ending a successful 14-day mission to the ISS. Weather prevented the crew from landing at KSC in Florida. STS-128 had delivered to the ISS NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had begun a three-month mission as a resident, replacing Timothy L. Kopra. Kopra had returned home with Discoverys crew. Discovery had also delivered to the ISS 9 tons (8.16 tonnes, or 8,165 kilograms) of supplies, to sustain the six-person crew and to equip the station for more science experiments. The delivery had included two refrigerator-sized science racks for the stationone for conducting experiments on materials such as metals, glass, and ceramics, and the other for studying how fluids react in microgravity. In addition, Discovery had delivered a freezer for samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air-purification system, and a treadmill named for the comedian Stephen Colbert. The crew had undertaken three spacewalks, to replace experiments outside ESAs Columbus laboratory and to empty an ammonia-storage tank.(NASA, Space Shuttle Discovery Returns to Earth After Successful Mission, news release 09-212, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-212_Discovery_Lands.html (accessed 15 September 2011); James Dean, Storms Prevent KSC Landing, Divert Discovery to California, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 September 2009; William Harwood, Shuttle Glides to a California Landing, New York Times, 12 September 2009.)
Astronomer Arthur D. Code died in Madison, Wisconsin, at the age of 85. A designer of space observatories, Code had worked with a team of scientists from NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory in 1968, to send into orbit a bat-shaped satellitethe Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO 2). Although the original OAO craft had failed in its 1966 mission, OAO 2 had succeeded, yielding information about the composition of stars, comets, and galactic gases. Intended to last a year, the OAO-2 mission had remained operational until 1973. OAO 2 had sent back data indicating that young stars in the constellations Scorpius and Orion are far hotter than previously thought and, therefore, are likely aging more quickly than astronomers had previously believed. OAO-2 successor craft included OAO 3 and NASAs HST. Following the OAO-2 mission, Code had taught at the University of Wisconsin, where he had refined his designs and had analyzed data retrieved from subsequent satellites. In 1990 he and a team of students had sent an ultraviolet-detecting telescope to orbit aboard Space Shuttle Columbia; the team had used the device to study polarized ultraviolet light. Code had served as president of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and had been a member of the NAS. NASA had awarded him its Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.(Jeremy Pearce, Arthur Code, Astronomer and Professor, Dies at 85, New York Times, 23 March 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn embarked on the fourth of the five spacewalks scheduled for STS-127. During the spacewalk, they finished replacing batteries, a task that they had begun during the 22 July spacewalk but had been unable to complete. Mission Control had terminated the 22 July spacewalk early because of rising levels of carbon dioxide in Cassidys spacesuit. During todays spacewalk, which lasted 7 hours and 30 minutes, Cassidy and Marshburn successfully replaced the last four of the six batteries storing power generated by the ISSs oldest set of solar arrays. These batteries provided power to the American laboratory Destiny when the station was orbiting in darkness.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Astronauts Install Fresh Batteries on Spacewalk, 24 July 2009; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Duo Keep Station Going and Going, 25 July 2009.)
