The Soyuz spacecraft, carrying space enthusiast Dennis A. Tito, arrived safely at the ISS, having completed a two-day journey from Kazakhstan. The successful docking took place only 14 hours after Shuttle Endeavour left the ISS, with the crew having completed its mission of installing a Canadian-built robotic arm. Tito arrived at the ISS in good health. Appearing through grainy footage provided by the Russian Space Agency, Tito floated into the space station with arms outstretched and proclaimed, “I love space.” The Soyuz mission mandated that the Russian- American crew remain aboard the ISS for six days.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Leaves Space Station After 8 Days,” Houston Chronicle, 30 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Tito’s ‘Taxi’ Drops Fare at Station, ‘I Love Space’, Says the American Cosmonaut, Who Faces Strict NASA Limits,” 30 April 2001.)
Diplomats from 178 nations reached a compromise agreement to enact the Kyoto Protocol, a pact designed to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases, which scientists believed were contributing to global warming. The United States, represented by Undersecretary of State Paula J. Dobriansky, had rejected the final agreement. Calling the agreement “fatally flawed,” President George W. Bush expressed concern over the effect of the treaty on the U.S. economy. Although Russia and Japan had also expressed major reservations, the two countries had eventually signed the Kyoto Protocol when negotiators included language in the final draft delaying the date of compliance. The treaty called for industrialized nations to limit the emissions released by automobiles, plants, and factories, but the mechanisms for enforcement defied easy solutions. However, according to final rules, each nation must reduce its carbon- dioxide emissions or pay fines for violations. Nations throughout the world criticized the United States’ rejection of the treaty. For example, the chief negotiator for the European Union expressed disappointment at the United States’ decision, saying, “Almost every single country stayed in the protocol. There was one that said the Kyoto Protocol was flawed.” Although an international consensus had emerged, the treaty still required the ratification of the 55 nations responsible for 55 percent of the world’s carbon-dioxide emissions in 1990.(Traci Watson, “Compromise Rescues Kyoto Protocol; Nations Hope Global Warming Treaty Will Take Effect in 2002; U.S. Says Pact ‘Is Not Sound Policy’,” USA Today, 24 July 2001; Peter N. Spotts, “Global Climate Treaty Moves Ahead, Without US,” Christian Science Monitor, 24 July 2001.)
