The National Research Council recommended, in its fifth interim report to NASA, additional testing of NASA's new solid rocket motor before resuming Shuttle launches, raising fears that the scheduled June 1988 launch could be postponed. The Council maintained, however, that the planned June 1988 launch date could still be met by concentrating on the more extensive tests and deferring some less critical ones. (B Sun, Nov 24/87; NY Times, Nov 24/87; W Post, Nov 24/87)
The motor section of an MX missile containing nearly 100,000 pounds of rocket propellent exploded at a Morton Thiokol, Inc. plant killing five workers. The explosion at the company's Wasatch Operations plant, 25 miles west of Brigham City, Utah, was the fourth major accident at the plant. The cause of the explosion was not immediately known. Morton Thiokol also was the manufacturer of (#the Space Shuttle's booster rocket. (NY Times, Dec 30/87, 31/87; P Inq, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87)
An AtlasCentaur rocket, launched during a driving thunderstorm from Cape Canaveral, Florida, veered out of control 52 second after liftoff and was blown up by NASA safety officials. The launch was NASA's third major mission in 1987. Investigators trying to determine the cause of the accident said that data radioed to the ground from the rocket seconds before it careened off course indicated a major electrical disturbance aboard. Investigators speculated that lightning, prevalent in the area at the time, may have caused the failure. (W Post, Mar 27/87; W Post, Mar 31/87; W Times, Mar 31/87)
A spokesman for Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) stated that research and an experiment conducted by SDIO demonstrated for the first time that lasers and other highpowered electrical devices can be operated in space without heavy insulation to prevent short circuits. The experiment involved the launching of a 60foot rocket from Wallops Island, Virginia, on December 13, 1987. Extending from the nose cone of the rocket were two probes about 39 inches apart. These probes were alternatively charged with high amounts of electrical power,h)'0*0*0*up to 44,000 volts. Although there was no insulation between them, no arcing of the electrical charge between the two probes occurred, as it would commonly occur on Earth. The experiment confirmed that space is a good insulator in and of itself. (NY Times, Dec 17/87)
Two teams of NASA specialists began an inquiry as to why the testfiring of the reconstructed Shuttle booster rocket on
Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans, Louisiana; Rockwell International Space Transportation Systems Division, Downey, California; and United Technologies Corporation, USBI Booster Production Company, Inc., Huntsville, Alabama; were selected for contracts to perform definition studies for a proposed untended launch vehicle. The new vehicle, called ShuttleC, would supplement the orbiter with an untended cargo element. (NASA Release 87159)
A number of senators expressed reservations that Morton Thiokol, Inc. remained the sole maker of NASA's Shuttle booster rocket. Members of the Senate Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space complained during the hearing that, despite the fact that Congress had instructed NASA to employ other industries to redesign Shuttle rockets, the Agency appeared locked into using rockets designed by Morton Thiokol, Inc. (NY Times, Jan 23/87; WSJ, Jan 23/87)
New Mexico urged NASA to find a second company, in addition to Morton Thiokol, Inc., to build the booster rocket. (B Sun, Dec h)31/87; H Post, Dec 31/87; USA Today, Dec 31/87; W Post, Dec 31/87;h))0*0*0*W Times, Dec 31/87)
A solid rocket motor intended for use in NASA's Delta launch vehicle failed during a test at the Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama. The Castor IVA booster rocket escaped from the test stand five seconds into the test. A review team was established to determine the cause of the failure and to assess the impact on the Delta flight program. (NASA Release 87128)
NASA announced that lightning had destroyed an Orion rocket scheduled for launch. The intense storm at the Wallops Flight Center, Wallops Island, Virginia, also destroyed the scientific experiment payload. (NASA Release 8797; NY Times, June 11/87; W Post, June 11/87; H Chron, June 11/87
