Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, suffered another failure of one of its rockets. Ground controllers blew up the rocket about seven minutes into its flight at Wake Island in the Pacific Ocean, conducted as part of the Pentagon's "Brillinat Pebbles" program. (W Post, Nov 4/92)
The "Brilliant Pebbles" missile-defense system suffered a new setback when the test of an experimental rocket was aborted 55 seconds after launch. It was the second failure in three experimental launches. (W Post, Oct 25/92)
Germany announced that it would go ahead with a celebration to mark the 50th anniversary of the first launch of the V-2 rocket despite British protests. The organizers said the event would celebrate the "first step into space" and did not represent a glorification of a Nazi weapon. (W Post, Sept 28/92;  The Sun, Sept 26/92)
The launch of Consort 5, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments, was scheduled for September 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. A two-stage Starfire solid fuel rocket would carry the payload to an altitude of 200 miles and provide the experiments with seven to eight minutes of microgravity exposure or weightlessness. The rocket and launch services were funded by a grant from NASA's Office of Commercial Programs.(NASA Release 92-133)
Reacting to a wave of international protest and some severe domestic criticism, Germany canceled a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the first successful V-2 rocket launch at the Peenemunde range on the north German coast. The first V-2 rocket was fired on October 3, 1942, under the direction of Werner von Braun, then a young scientist. The date is generally recognized as the birth of the space age. (LA Times, Sept 29/92; W Post, Sept 29/92)
NASA launched a rocket from Puerto Rico's north coast at 7:55 p.m. EDT to study radio waves in the ionosphere. The launch, originally set for May 18 but delayed due to bad weather, was the first time NASA had launched from the Caribbean island since 1967. (USA Today, May 26/92; AP, May 26/92)
The first student managed and built payload flown on a NASA sounding rocket was launched successfully from the NASA flight facility on Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 92-156)
