The Washington Post reported that two separate investigations of a failed Atlas rocket launch last March had concluded that the mishap was caused by the loosening of a tiny screw that helps regulate the flow of liquid oxygen propellent. The completion of the investigations allowed General Dynamics Corporation, the company that built the rocket, to resume launches. (W Post, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; H Chron, June 9/93)
The three main commercial sponsors of the 52-foot Conestoga 1620 rocket scheduled to be launched this spring from Wallops Island, Virginia, were selling ad space on the shell of the rocket. The price: $500,000 for 58 feet of space. The Conestoga launch was part of NASA's Commercial Experiment Transport program. (P Inq, Jan 14/93; USA Today, Jan 13/93; Advertising Age, Jan 11/93; W Post, Jan 26/93)
Loral Corporation's Loral Vought Systems unit announced that Japan had agreed to buy a multiple-launch rocket system. The four-year contract was for $250 million. The agreement included 1,300 tactical and practice rockets, 47 launcher trainer pods, and 36 launchers for the ground-to-ground defense system. (WSJ, Jan 26/93)
A New York Times article reported that a debate is going on over the degree of danger posed by the Space Shuttle's solid-fueled rocket boosters.  Repeatedly this year, the boosters have shown alarming variations in their thrust, prompting a number of quiet NASA investigations and accusations by critics that the problem is a time bomb waiting to go off.  (NY Times, Dec 4/93; Fl Today, Dec 7/93
Launch of the Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET), which was scheduled to lift off March 31, was postponed for at least two months. NASA contributed $85 million toward three launches of the COMET; the spacecraft was to carry ll experiments from NASA's commercial space development centers. COMET was also serving as the first space billboard. Columbia Pictures paid $500,000 to advertize an upcoming Arnold Schwarzenegger movie on the rocket. (Space News, Mar 8-14; AP, 9/93, Mar 10/93)
NASA took action to limit expenditures on the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program.  NASA informed its field installations involved with the ASRM that if the pending appropriations bill becomes law, it would require termination of the ASRM program. (NASA Release 93-189)
The Wall Street Journal reported that technical problems had delayed until August the launch of the unmanned Comet space rocket on which Columbia Pictures had a giant outer-space billboard advertising its major summer movie, "Last Action Hero." (WSJ, May 6/93; W Times, May 7/93; NY Times, May 11/93)
Plans called for the Topaz 2 reactor to be put into an orbit 1,000 feet high; over the span of a year, the spacecraft housing the reactor would be lifted to 19,000 feet by an electric propulsion system powered by the reactor. The mission was projected to cost $l50 million. To stay within this budget, the Pentagon would need to use the planned Delta rocket rather than a more expensive Atlas rocket. (NY Times, Jan 12/93)
Western Europe's second Ariane-5 booster was tested in a jungle clearing in French Guiana, space officials announced. The first Ariane-5 rocket was scheduled for launch in 1996. (RTw, June 25/93)
NASA announced that when the first U.S. commercial rocket lift off in May, its main fuselage and booster rocket were scheduled to carry the logo, "Last Action Hero," the title of a Columbia Pictures summer movie release starring Arnold Schwarzenegger. Columbia paid $50,000 for the ad, which was to be orbiting earth for more than two years. (WSJ, Mar 3/93; B Sun, Mar 3/93; W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93)
Orbital Science Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, announced that it was again planning to launch its Pegasus orbital rocket after scrubbing launches three times in the past two months because of technical problems.
Washington Technology reported that Rich Fleet, president of Herndon/Virginia-based PacAstro, planned to build an inexpensive launch rocket. Using technology from Apollo-era liquid rocket boosters and other reliable time-tested components, Fleeter intended to offer 750-pound, low-earth-orbit access for $5 million a shot. This amount was half of what other mainline smallsat launch firms such as Orbital Sciences and EER were asking. FLeeter also runs PacAstro's sister company AeroAstro, a manufacturer of low-cost smallsats. (Washington Technology, Jan 28/93)
The French National Space Agency announced that Western Europe's first Ariane-5 solid-fuel rocket booster had undergone successful tests at a launch center in French Guiana. (RTw, Mar 6/93)
The Delta Clipper-Experimental (DC-X) rocket's first flight was scheduled for August 18 at White Sands Missile Range in Southern New Mexico. The 42-foot-tall, bullet-shaped DC-X is a one-third scale prototype of single-stage, reusable rocket that would be light enough to reach orbit and return without needing expensive lower stages or boosters that get thrown away on every flight.  It would fire its engines to land vertically. The DC-0X was developed by McDonnell Douglas with funding by the federal Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. (AP, Aug 17/93)
A commercial suborbital rocket carrying seven experiments was scheduled to be launched on February 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space. The Consort rocket and launch services are funded by a grant from the space agency's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-22)
