The government of Sweden announced that it had signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the suborbital-space tourism company Virgin Galactic. The agreement established plans for Virgin’s SpaceShipTwo vehicle to launch from a site in Kiruna, Sweden, during the midsummer and midwinter, so that the craft could fly through the aurora borealis. In preparation for future flights, Swedish Space Corporation authorities planned a March 2008 demonstration launch of a small sounding rocket equipped with cameras. SpaceShipTwo designer Burt Rutan would collect data to determine the possible effect of the aurora borealis on passengers or on electronics aboard the spacecraft. The MOU did not call for any exchange of funds, because the Kiruna facility was the site of suborbital sounding rocket and atmospheric balloon launches. Swedish officials stated that the site had sufficient infrastructure to accommodate Virgin Galactic craft without new investment.(Peter B. de Selding, “Virgin Galactic Strikes Deal with Swedish Government,” Space.com, 28 January 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070128_sweden_virgin.html (accessed 9 November 2009).)
A UP Aerospace–built SpaceLoft SL-2 rocket launched from Spaceport America in New Mexico, carrying small amounts of the cremated remains of approximately 200 people, including Star Trek creator Eugene W. Roddenberry and Star Trek actor James M. Doohan. The event was the first successful launch into space from the commercial spaceport; the company’s first attempt in December 2006 had failed when the SpaceLoft XL rocket corkscrewed out of control seconds after the launch, never reaching space. The SL-2 rocket reached an altitude of almost 73 miles (117 kilometers) before returning to Earth. The payload landed by parachute at WSMR, 33 miles (53 kilometers) east of the launch site. UP Aerospace President Jerry Larson remarked that the launch’s only malfunction was a signal beacon, an equipment failure that prevented WSMR from tracking the launch vehicle during the opening moments of the 13-minute flight.(Jose L. Medina, “Spaceport Launch a Success,” Las Cruces Sun News (NM), 30 April 2007.)
XCOR Aerospace announced that it had successfully completed six short-duration test fires of the prototype engine 5M15, the new 7,500-pound-thrust (3.75-ton-thrust or 3.4-tonne-thrust) rocket engine, using liquid methane and liquid oxygen as propellants. Spokesperson Aleta Jackson explained that XCOR had designed the test fires to determine the appropriate length of the chamber for a flight-weight version of the engine. XCOR had developed the engine as part of a subcontract with Alliant Techsystems (ATK), which was developing liquid-methane rocket engine technology for NASA’s future space applications.(XCOR Aerospace, “XCOR Aerospace Begins Test Firing of Methane Rocket Engine: Successful Test Completed for NASA,” press release, 16 January 2007, http://www.xcor.com/press-releases/2007/07-01-16_XCOR_begins_ methane_engine_testing.html (accessed 9 November 2009).)
New Mexico Spaceport Authority announced the successful launch of a UP Aerospace flight vehicle. The company had launched the flight vehicle to test proprietary advanced launch technologies. At the request of UP Aerospace, the New Mexico Spaceport Authority had not publicized the launch, which was the Connecticut-based company’s third launch attempt. In the company’s first launch attempt in September 2006, the vehicle had failed to reach space. Although the April 2007 second attempt had succeeded, locating the rocket after launch had required weeks of searching. In this third attempt, the launch vehicle had reached its planned altitude of 2,500 feet (762 meters).(New Mexico Spaceport Authority, “UP Aerospace Reports Successful Launch at Spaceport America,” news release, 19 December 2007, http://www.spaceportamerica.com/news/press-releases/104-up-areo-reports-success- launch.html (accessed 19 November 2010); Las Cruces Sun-News (NM), “Unannounced Launch Lifts Off from Spaceport,” 20 December 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket carrying Bigelow Aerospace Corporation’s Genesis-2 inflatable spacecraft launched from ISC Kosmotras Yasny Cosmodrome in Russia’s Orenburg region at 15:02 (UT). Bigelow Aerospace had designed and built the 15-foot-long (4.6-meter-long) technology demonstrator, which was part of the vision for an affordable space tourism market. Genesis 2 would deploy eight solar arrays and expand to a diameter of 8 feet (2.44 meters) from its launch width of 6.2 feet (1.9 meters). The craft’s design—involving the use of flexible material,
