Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: “During the entire spectrum of our second and third decades in space, manned space flight has not merely been emphasized, but has literally cannibalized any hope for major scientific planetary, interplanetary, communications, meteorological, oceanographic (in cooperation with satellites), earth resources satellite programs, etc.! I must conclude . . . that the only valid justification for early development of the [space] shuttle is to supply the newborn 50—100 crew manned space stations and the manned exploration of Mars.” From 1958 to 1969 U.S. had launched approximately 750 spacecraft, Karth said: usaf, 380; NASA, 241; usn, 91; and joint usaf—USN, 37. (Text)
In Washington Post, Victor Cohn said fight for ideas “which once would have been labeled ‘wild’ ” had begun when NASA began congressional committee hearings on its $3.7-billion FY 1970 budget [see March 4]. It had continued with announcement of “dramatic plan for ten more manned expeditions to the moon after the first men land there in July.” Americans had responded to 1 “exciting” Apollo program “with heightened fervor for a man in space.” But new fight for funding would probably be “nasa’s toughest.” Americans were asking, “How about our needs here on earth?” Many scientists felt unmanned instruments could do cheaper and nearly as effective job of space exploration. Congress had been calling nasa’s present spending level “enough.” Still, NASA had succeeded in marshaling “powerful scientific support.” As yet unreleased report of Dr. Charles H. Townes’ space task force appointed by President Nixon urged both vigorous manned space program and development of reusable space shuttle. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, had declared himself for “a really solid, many-faceted program.” NASA officials were optimistic but funds actually appropriated for FY 1970 budget would finance only five more Apollo flights plus first hardware for Apollo Applications program. Public thinking was “just about 50—50 today, and new U.S. consensus has not yet crystallized.” (W Post, 3/16/69, Al)
In speech before New York Society of Security Analysts, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said: “I believe that if we wanted to we could have our space shuttle in operation by 1976. ... To achieve the desired economy, it will be necessary to operate this transportation system in the successful jet transport mode. Our space shuttle will probably take off from major airports with little or no noise. It will not create a sonic boom along the route. It will go into orbit, deposit and take on crew and cargo, and return for a horizontal airport landing.” He foresaw an international demand for reusable space vehicles. (Text)
NASA had put into operation $2.6-million, six-story-high flight simulator for advanced aircraft (fsaa) at arc, arc announced. Largest piloted-aircraft simulator ever built would provide research data on handling characteristics of faster and larger jets to ensure safe control by their pilots. Designed by arc engineers John C. Dusterberry, Maurice D. White, and Shizuo Doiguchi, simulator had motion-generator with 100 ft of lateral motion, 10 ft of vertical motion, and 8 ft of forward and backward motion, combined with pitch, roll, and yaw motions. It was operated by general-purpose, digital-analog computer, which could be programmed with flight characteristics of most aircraft, fsaa could simulate aerodynamics of hypersonic and supersonic flight by reentry vehicle-such as space shuttle, (arc Release 69—13)
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
msc announced appointment of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper as Assistant for Space Shuttle Program in msc’s Flight Crew Operations Directorate. Cooper would be responsible for flight crew training program, astronaut inputs into design and engineering, and directorate’s part in hardware development and testing for Space Shuttle. He would remain on flight status and eligible for space flight, (msc Release 69/67)
Washington Post reported interview with l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director. Space shuttle was samso’s top priority program. New family of spaceships was being roughed out on drawing boards. “From a military standpoint, we need to be aggressive advocates of the capability to take a look at and deal as necessary with space vehicles of another country.” usaf and NASA were dividing labor on space shuttle program, which would cost estimated $1 billion. Pace of program would depend on progress toward development of reusable rocket engine which would not burn itself out as it hurtled into space, LeRoy E. Day, Chief of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, said. (Wilson, W Post, 10/15/69, A3)
In its international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched three foreign satellites—Canadian Isis /, third of series to conduct ionospheric measurement; Boreas (Esro IB) for European Space Research Organization on reimbursable basis; and West German Azur under cooperative project to conduct radiation belt measurements. Agreements for new projects were reached with U.K., Italy, Netherlands, and Canada. U.K. agreement called for 1971 launch of satellite on NASA Scout vehicle to measure ionospheric particles and radio noise and experiment to fly on board NASA’s Nimbus-E in 1972. Italian agreement provided for 1970 launch of San Marco-C satellite on NASA Scout vehicle from Italian San Marco range in Indian Ocean and use of range for launching NASA spacecraft into equatorial orbit. Under Netherlands agreement two Dutch scientists would participate as observers in OAO program. Canadian agreement called for reimbursement launching of Canadian comsat. Project Helios, cooperative endeavor with West German Ministry for Scientific Research to place two solar probes (1974—1975) closer to sun than any other spacecraft, would obtain data on solar processes and earth-sun relationship. Under another agreement with West Germany, Project Aeros, NASA would launch German-developed satellite in 1972 for aeronomy measurements. In agreement with Indian space agency, ATS—F satellite would be made available for experimental educational TV broadcasting directly and by relay to receivers in 5,000 Indian villages. Additional cooperative projects during 1969 included launch of one Italian, two U.K., and two French experiments; continuation of sounding rocket projects with Australia, Brazil, Canada, India, Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Spain, and Sweden; inclusion of Canadian and French experiments on Convair 990 flights to study auroras in northern latitudes; and extension of aeronautical research projects with Canada, France, West Germany, and U.K. Agreement with Spain for NASA Madrid tracking station was extended in June until 1984 and negotiations were begun with Australia for extension of tracking arrangements until same year. Lunar surface material returned by Apollo 11 astronauts was distributed to 39 principal investigators from nine countries—Australia, Belgium, Canada, Finland, West Germany, Japan, South Africa, Switzerland, and U.K. International highlights in 1969 included around-the-world tour of Apollo 11 astronauts to dramatize conviction that successful lunar landing was triumph for all mankind; travels of NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to inform ministerial and space agency officials abroad of U.S. space plans and invite their participation; and participation of foreign experts in NASA conference on space shuttle concepts. Efforts by NASA to develop cooperative programs with U.S.S.R. continued during 1969, but met with limited success. (Pres Rpt 70 [69])
NASA announced establishment of task group on manned space station under Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and of task group on space shuttle under Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Reporting to Dr. Mueller would be LeRoy E. Day, former Director of Apollo Test. His group would develop NASA material for report on space shuttles to President’s Space Task Group by June 15. Frank Borman, former Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc and Apollo 8 commander, would report to Mathews as Field Director for Space Station effort. (NASA Release 69—70)
msfc announced it would manage two recently awarded $300,000 sixmonth contracts, one to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. and one to General Dynamics Corp., for conceptual study of low-cost, manned logistics (space shuttle) system. Similar study contracts awarded to North American Rockwell Corp. and to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. would be managed fiy msc and LaRC. Integral Launch and Reentry Vehicle (ilrv) studies would investigate aspects of reusable transportation system for post-1974 use in support of proposed space stations. msfc also announced $3,288,914 modification to contract with Boeing Co. for continued configuration management support on Saturn V launch vehicle program, including processing of vehicle and ground support equipment configuration changes, configuration accounting, and change integration and tracking, (msfc Releases 69—34, 69—35)
nasa issued RFPs for design and planning studies of 12-man, earth-orbital space station for 1975 with 10-yr operational life, subject to resupply of expendables and crew rotation with logistics vehicles. Work also would include conceptual design of 50-man space base of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s and comparable to scientific and technical research, development, and operations center on earth. Modified Apollo and Gemini spacecraft would be considered as initial logistics systems if space shuttle did not become available in early phase of space station operations. Data from studies would be available for final design of future space station if program were approved for development. Proposals were due June 9. (nasa Release 69—65)
Space shuttle was “first step or keystone to the success and growth of future space flight developments for the exploration and exploitation of space,” LeRoy E. Day and B. G. Noblitt of Space Shuttle Task Group, NASA OMSF, said in paper presented at IEEE EASCON Session on Earth Orbiting Manned Space Station in Washington, D.C. “Large experiment modules and unmanned satellites can be placed into low earth orbit and retrieved as desired. Propulsive stages and payloads . . . destined for higher energy orbits can be placed into low earth orbits.” On-orbit reusable shuttles like space tugs and nuclear stages “become economically advantageous once propellants can be inexpensively delivered to earth orbit. . . . On-orbit maintenance services can be provided for malfunctioning or inoperative satellites. . . . short duration special purpose orbital missions can be conducted by the space shuttle itself to augment or complement space station activities. The design and operational characteristics of the space shuttle will also provide a potential capability to conduct space rescue missions—a capability that is not practical with conventional expendable launch systems,” (Text)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, former Assistant Secretary of Defense, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator. He would advise nasa senior officials on scientific and engineering aspects of agency programs and review and advise on work of President’s Space Task Group and nasa— dod cooperation on space shuttle. Before joining NASA Dr. Fubini had been Vice President and Group Executive at ibm. (nasa Release 69-85)
