Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
msfc announced award of separate $150 000 three-month contracts to three firms to study possible conversion of 12 existing rocket engine test stands for captive firings of propulsion system for new space shuttle engine. New engine, not yet under development, would be used in clusters to power reusable space shuttle which could be flown up to 100 times. Four test positions at msfc would be studied by Aerojet-General Corp.; four at NASA Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif., by nar Rocketdyne Div.; and four at mtf, by United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. (msfc Release 70-27)
MSC announced selection of United Aircraft Corp’s Pratt & Whitney Div. and General Electric Co.’s Direct Energy Conversion Business Section to negotiate parallel cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts for development of fuel-cell technology leading to design, fabrication, and testing of engineering-model fuel-cell system. Contracts, which would run for 13 mos beginning July 1, were valued at $825 000 each. MSC program to provide electrical power for space shuttle was aimed at development of hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell with 5000-hr lifetime, 5000-w power output, and weight of 333 kg (735 lbs) or less. (MSC Release 70-66)
West German government was ready to accept partnership arrangement with U.S. in seven-year space shuttle program, William Hines reported in Washington Sunday Star. Nixon Administration had “gone openly shopping” for foreign assistance in project. There was dispute over how far negotiations had gone, “but the West Germans believe they have been offered a 10 percent piece of the action in exchange for about $570 million in. . .Deutschemarks, payable 300 million marks annually for seven years.” NASA had said discussions had been going on with eight foreign countries. (W Star, 2/15/70)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on President’s space goal message: “President Nixon’s ‘low profile’ space program represents a realistic appraisal of the American temper at this time. Without the Russians nipping at our heels, apparently, there is little public pressure to keep space exploration and development going at better than a jog. It’s worth noting, however, that although Mr. Nixon has accepted implicit funding limitations reflecting both his own anti-inflation drive and public opinion, he hasn’t really slammed any doors.” (P Bull, 3/14/70) The Economist commented: “Nasa’s future plans may not brighten the back of cereal boxes but they are solid, varied and balanced. The dangers from now-on are not likely to be financial but technical: the space shuttle will be hard to make.” (Economist. 3/14/70,53)
msfc announced award of $21 029 756 modification to Boeing Co. contract for work on Saturn V 1st stages and extension of contract performance period through March 31,1973. MSFC also issued rfp on preliminary design of Research and Applications Module (ram) that could be used with space station and space shuttle. Proposals were due Jan. 8, 1971. (MSFC releases 70250,70-251)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at NASA Hq. news conference on future plans he was directing portions of space program to bring operations in line with FY 1971 budget. “We recognize the many important needs and urgent problems we face here on earth. America’s space achievements in the 1960’s have rightly raised hopes that this country and all mankind can do more to overcome pressing problems of society. The space program should inspire bolder solutions and suggest new approaches. It has already provided many direct and indirect benefits and is creating new wealth and capabilities.” Strong space program continued as one of Nation’s major priorities. “However, we recognize that under current fiscal restraints NASA must find new ways to stretch out current programs and reduce our present operational base.” NASA would “press forward in 1971 at a reduced level, but in the right direction with the basic ingredients we need for major achievements in the 1970s and beyond. .. .we will not dissipate the strong teams that sent men to explore the moon and automated spacecraft to observe the planets.” NASA would suspend Saturn V production indefinitely after Saturn V 515 completion, stretch Apollo lunar missions to six-month launch intervals, defer lunar expeditions during aap space station flights in 1972, and postpone Viking/Mars 1973 unmanned lander launch to next Mars opportunity in 1975. Number of employees in nasa program was expected to decline from 190 000 at end of FY 1970 to 140 000 at close of FY 1971. Positive aspects of space program for 1970s included Apollo missions through Apollo 19, use of one Saturn V to launch first experimental aap space station into earth orbit in 1972, Mars orbit by two unmanned spacecraft in 1971, launch of first Jupiter probe in 1972, launch of spacecraft past Venus to Mercury in 1973, and continuation of scientific satellite launches. Design of reusable space shuttle would be started and first experimental space station would be launched, as planned, in 1972. FY 1971 budget would permit proceeding with design of advanced space station as permanent base in earth orbit, continued work on nasa-aec nerva project, practical earth applications of space technology, and advances in applications of space technology in fields such as meteorology and communications. Although “austere,” space program for 1971 was “forward looking” and contained “basic ingredients needed for an effective space program in the 1970s.” It would “extend our space capabilities, expand our scientific knowledge, and make available new applications of benefit to people here on earth.” In response to question, Dr. Paine said he foresaw no shutdown of ksc and had no plans for closing other centers. Intended actions “represent a decision to proceed through the year 1971 and see what our studies turn up. I think it is important to realize these are very advanced, perhaps, and we have a lot to learn about the technological feasibility, the cost, schedules—and I wouldn’t want to say we now have a complete free road into the future. We don’t.” Asked if he thought NASA was close to point where “team started falling to pieces,” Dr. Paine said that “you can carry out space programs for the United States at a large number of different levels. I think the level we have now is a level we can take great pride in and I think the country in the 1970’s will be very proud of the achievements NASA will turn in.” (Transcript)
NASA's HL-JO lifting body ('above right.) reached a lifting-body speed record of tnach 1.S6 and an altitude of 1980(1 meters (65 000 feet) during powered night after air launch from a B-52 aircraft. Experimental vehicles in the joint nasa-usaf Lifting Body Flight Research Program to develop the design of future space shuttle craft also included the X-24A (above left), which made its first supersonic flight Oct. 14, and the M2-F3 (center), which made its first glide flight June 2. research was still too flimsy to risk two-year manned Mars flight. (Krimsky, Long Beach [Calif] Independent, 2/19/70)
msc announced it was negotiating with Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. on $699 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for 18-mo study of space shuttle cryogenic systems. (MSC Release 70-110)
NASA selected McDonnell Douglas Corp. and NR Space Division to negotiate 11-mo, $8-million, fixed-price contracts for parallel definition and preliminary design studies of two-stage reusable space shuttle vehicle to transport crew, passengers, and cargo between earth and near space, msfc would manage McDonnell Douglas work and msc would manage NR work. (NASA Release 70-68)
msc and NR Space Div. announced selection of MesserschmittBoelkow-Blohm of Munich, West Germany, and bac of Bristol, England, to conduct subsystems studies for NASA’s space shuttle. In major step toward international cooperation in space. Messer-schmitt would study attitude-control system and bac would study structures, aerodynamics and flight-test instrumentation, and data handling under contracts financed by their governments. Work would be performed in Downey, Calif, (msc Release 70-98; NR Release NS-59)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), for himself, Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.), Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and Sen. Jacob K.	Javits (R-N.Y.), submitted amendment to H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill which would reduce NASA R&D appropriation by $110 million—amount requested by NASA for design and definition of space shuttle and station. Sen. Mondale said: “This project represents NASA’s next major effort in manned space flight. The $110 million.. .is only the beginning of the story. NASA’s preliminary cost estimates for development of the space shuttle/station total almost $14 billion, and the ultimate cost may run much higher. Furthermore, the shuttle and station are the first essential steps toward a manned Mars landing.. .which could cost anywhere between $50 to $100 billion. I have seen no persuasive justification for embarking upon a project of such staggering costs at a time when many of our citizens are malnourished, when our rivers and lakes are polluted, and when our cities and rural areas are decaying.” (CR, 6/29/70, S10057-8)
Senate passed H.R. 19830, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill, which contained $3.269-billion NASA appropriation. As budgeted by NASA, appropriation allocated $678.7 million for research and program management, $25 million for construction of facilities, and $2,565 billion for R&D. Amendment proposed by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to eliminate funds for space shuttle and station was rejected. Bill was cleared for President’s signature. (CR, 12/7/70, S19521-59; Conf Rpt 91-1345)
NASA issued RFPs for preliminary definition and planning studies for main propulsion system of reusable space shuttle. Preliminary concepts called for cluster of throttleable engines with 1780-kilonewton (400000-lb) thrust each at sea level, nr Rocketdyne Div., United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., Aerojet-General Corp., TRW Inc., Bell Aerospace Systems, and Marquardt Corp. would submit proposals by March 20. Three firms would be awarded fixed-price contracts for 11-mo parallel studies, (nasa Release 70-26)
NASA announced selection of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co., NR Rocketdyne Div., and United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. for final negotiations of $6-million, fixed-price contracts for 11-mo parallel studies for design definition of space shuttle main propulsion system. Contracts would be managed by msfc. (NASA Release 70-64)
msfc announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. and TRW Inc. for final negotiations leading to four contracts (two per company) totaling $1.2 million for space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system definition, (msfc Release 70-103)
U.S. space program problems were described in Washington Post by Thomas O’Toole: U.S. needed to begin development of space shuttle “now, which in a way is the worst possible time for it.” Country was “weary of big new space projects, particularly while the spectacular Apollo project is -still unfolding. . . . Also, the space agency is without an appointed administrator, which means that NASA cannot exercise its full role with Congress or the White House.” NASA managers “go on sailing a skipperless ship. But what they find more disturbing is the feeling that nobody at headquarters cares whether the ship gets a captain or not.” It was no secret that “men who run the space program are deeply disappointed in the Nixon Administration.” They felt “that the White House neither understands nor cares to understand what the space program means or what it can do for the country.” There was feeling Congress had ceased to care, too. House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight had canceled hearings on Apollo future because, “outside of Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, none of the subcommittee members was concerned enough. . . .to agree to the urgency of the hearings.” (WPost, 9/27/70, Bl) September 28:	Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying American Science & Engineering, Inc., experiment to study x-ray spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
MSFC announced issuance of rfps for study of inflight venting of space shuttle vehicles to identify areas of vehicle requiring venting, establish venting schemes, outline data requirements for venting analyses, and develop test program to analyze shuttle vehicles during launch and reentry. Proposals were due July 17. (MSFC Release 70-126)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines advocated abandonment of sst program “and substitution of a longer range objective: a hypersonic transport airplane (hst) to become operational around 1990.” R&D for 500-passenger, 8000-km-per-hr (5000-mph) global-range hst was “going to be bought and paid for anyway” as part of NASA’s space shuttle program. This would be a classic case of ‘spinoff’—a byproduct of the space program useful to the civilian economy.” There seemed little doubt “that an aerospace-plane capable of shuttling Earth-to-orbit could be adapted to serve long-range world markets as a pure airplane if travel demands could be shown to justify its construction.” sst was “not a spinoff but a drainoff.” Its “most dubious aspect” was “direct federal subsidy of r&d, which in effect amounts to a $1.5 billion loan to private enterprise at zero interest,” Hines said. (W Star, 1/18/70, C4) During Week of January 18: India successfully test-fired four Rohini rockets at Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station. Additional launches would be conducted following week. (AP, W Post, 1/23/ 70, A21)
MSFC awarded McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. $2-million, oneyear modification to space shuttle study contract. Under new agreement McDonnell Douglas would recommend program to test all structural components of proposed space shuttle’s booster and orbi-ter craft, including verification of design and advanced state-of-the-art testing of materials, wing leading edges, and propellant tanks. MSC, which had companion space shuttle study under way, was negotiating similar amendment with NR. (msfc Release 70-239)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on NASA FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Manned space expenditures for FY 1971 would be about 25% less than in FY 1970 and about half FY 1966 peak. “We are able to make these rapid changes . . . as the result of two fundamental policies .... One of these policies is that the great bulk of the NASA program is carried out under contracts with industry, university laboratories and other institutions in the private sector of our economy. The other ... is that NASA must maintain a civil service staff sufficient in quality and numbers to properly supervise the work performed under contract .... Essentially all the reductions being implemented in the manned space flight programs in Fiscal Year 1971 are in those efforts carried out urtder contract.” In FY 1971 NASA proposed to complete definition of space shuttle and space station and continue studies of systems, missions, and payloads for further economies in future years. In Apollo program, Myers pointed out, scheduled stretchout of manned lunar landings would “add to operational costs of the lunar exploration program, although not to our costs this year.” In Skylab program, design, development, and ground testing of subsystems and assemblies of Saturn Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and atm were well advanced. Fabrication had begun on first flight articles, with delivery scheduled for late 1971. In space shuttle program, shuttle would be “designed so that it can be maintained in a state of launch readiness for lengthy periods and yet be launched within two hours notice into an orbit of any inclination. In the event of an emergency in space, it would be able to carry engineering or repair specialists to overcome the problem or rescue an endangered crew.” (Testimony)
Wall Street Journal editorial said Congressmen were “squabbling” over location of future NASA space shuttle base: “There’s a lot to be learned from the space shuttle, we have no doubt. The scientific results will be greatest, though, if NASA manages to locate the project where it can be managed most efficiently—and not merely where local Congressmen are most adept at gathering spoils.” (WSJ, 12/8/70)
Christian Science Monitorsditorial said nasa had postponed manned Mars mission because of budget cutback but “it is keeping its space shuttle program pretty much on schedule.” Reusable space vehicle was “guarantee that space progress won’t be wholly shunted aside by budget stringencies.” It would “help to keep alive the interest of the big rocket and airframe contractors, and the enthusiasm of the thousands of researchers and scientists who have hoped to make space exploration their life work.” (CSM, 2/12/70)
msc announced establishment of Space Shuttle Program Office and appointment of Robert F. Thompson as Manager. Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Manager for Command and Service Modules, would succeed Thompson as Manager of Apollo Applications Program Office. Clifford E. Charlesworth, a flight director, was appointed to new position of Apollo Applications Program Deputy Manager. (MSC Release 70-25)
NASA announced selection of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. for negotiations leading to eight-month, $250000, fixed-price contract for design study for “versatile upper stage” (vus), high-energy stage that would increase orbital capacity of current launch vehicles and could be used as expendable upper stage with space shuttle. (nasa Release 70-140)
Senate passed, by vote of 69 to 15, H.R. 16516, $3.316-billion NASA FY 1971 authorization, after rejecting amendment by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to delete $110 million for definition and design of space shuttle and space station. Senate requested conference with House. (CR, 5/6/70, S6768-817)
Three of nine USAF volunteers began test at msc to determine man’s physiological tolerance to reentry loads expected on space shuttle missions. Subjects, whose reactions to shuttle reentry profile had been measured after 24 hrs rest Sept. 9-11 would rest in bed seven days before riding centrifuge in “eye balls down” reentry configurations at 2.5-g to 4.5-g levels for up to 6 min 10 secs to determine what effect prolonged “eye balls down” reentry acceleration would have on space shuttle crew members and passengers after long periods of weightlessness. Normal space shuttle reentry mode of MSC straightwing shuttle produced downward through-the-head acceleration as opposed to “eyeballsin” acceleration through the chest. (msc Release 70-94)
FRC announced tests had demonstrated that unpowered approaches and landing maneuvers of space shuttle could be made safely and readily by qualified professional pilots and did not require highly trained test pilots. United Air Line's captains Donald C. McBain and James V. Mitchell had flown landing approaches of four-engine jet transport configured to simulate space shuttle during NASA study of energy-management techniques for proposed shuttle orbiter. (frc Release 18-70)
USAF contract awards: Aerojet-General Corp. was being issued $12 100 000 initial increment to $33 409 607 fixed-price-incentive contract for procurement of Titan IIIB, C, and D stage 1 and 2 liquid-rocket engine systems. TRW Inc. was being issued $351 000 initial increment to $4 669 800 contract for advanced development of electronic propulsion system for space satellites. General Dynamics Corp. was receiving $250 000 initial increment to $2 585 000 contract for development, assembly, test, and launch support of integrated unmanned spacecraft for space flight-testing of dod experiments. (dod Release 544-70) During June: Hypersonic aircraft technology and applications were discussed in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy; Richard H. Petersen, Senior Research Scientist in arc Mission Analysis Div.; and Nathaniel B. Cohen, special assistant in NASA policy research program. Because of long-life requirements of its structure, it was unlikely that hypersonic transport would be developed until operational experience was available on some other hypersonic aircraft. Therefore, hypersonic transport would benefit not only from technology developed for space-shuttle vehicle, but very probably from experience gained during shuttle operation. Operating experience with high-temperature structures would help immensely in developing longer life structures for hypersonic transport and gain considerable new knowledge of hypersonic aerodynamics. In contrast to situation in aerodynamics and structures, technology program being planned by NASA to support development of rocket propulsion for shuttle would not contribute significantly to hypersonic airbreathing-propulsion-system technology. Current generalized scramjet research program had amply demonstrated feasibility of such engines. Developing airbreathing propulsion for either hypersonic transport or secondgeneration airbreathing 1st stage for space shuttle would require applied program focused specifically on scramjet. (A&A, 6/70, 30-41)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced H.R. 15695, $3.333-billion FY 1971 NASA authorization bill. (Text) Design baselines at start of Phase B studies of shuttle included 1.6 million kg (3.5 million lbs) at liftoff and payload compartment volume of 4.6-m (15-ft) dia by 18.3 m (60 ft) long. Pan American World Airways President Najeeb E. Halaby said NASA reusable space shuttle was logical step toward ship for commercial travel to orbit and back and for point-to-point earth transportation. (Mathews Text; upi, W Star, 2/6/70, A10)
Point-to-point second-generation space shuttle was possibility and could be “transportation system of the future as opposed to the hypersonic aircraft,” Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech before Aero Club in Washington, D.C. (Text)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified before Subcommittee on Economy in Government of Joint Economic Committee on changing national priorities: “If we eliminate the space shuttle and the space station, then the NASA budget can be trimmed to a level below $3 billion per year throughout the rest of this decade. Such a decision will shift NASA’s priorities from sensational manned space ventures to space science and its applications. If the U.S. space program is restructured to this new pattern and the Apollo manned lunar program is allowed to run out, it should be possible to effect further economies in the NASA budget___” When nasa shifted to science base “it would be desirable that the scientific community give some expression of its sense of priorities for space science with respect to the rest of science. The quest for new knowledge of the solar system must be reckoned as pure or basic or fundamental research. As such, it should be related to the federal support of all other basic research.” (Testimony)
msc awarded ltv Aerospace Corp. Missiles and Space Div. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. $215 000, fixed-price contracts to conduct six-month parallel development studies of radiative nonmetallics for high-temperature heat protection on space shuttle, (msc Release 70-95)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Grumman Aerospace Corp., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and Chrysler Corp. for 11-mo Phase A (feasibility) contracts to study space shuttle concepts. Boeing Co. would be major subcontractor to Grumman on $4-million contract for three shuttle concepts: stage-and-a-half shuttle of reusable manned spacecraft with onboard propulsion system and droppable tanks for supplementary propellants; reusable orbiter with expendable booster; and reusable 1st stage using existing J-2S engine technology, solid-propellant auxiliary boosters, and reusable 2nd-stage orbital shuttle with J-2 engine. Lockheed’s $l-million fixed-price contract would define alternate stage-and-a-half shuttle system including high and low cross-range designs. Chrysler Corp. would study reusable vehicle capable of placing payload into earth orbit with single stage, under $750 000 contract. (nasa Release 70-97)
samso, Aerospace Corp., and NR Space Div. had completed study of solution to in-space emergencies involving near-orbiting spacecraft and space shuttle vehicles, AFSC announced. Study was based on requirements that space escape vehicle (sev) must perform all functions required for crew safety from decision to abandon spacecraft until successful recovery. In delayed return, ground station would supply data to aid selection of recovery site; sufficient oxygen and water to last 24 hrs after departure from spacecraft would be available. In “quick return,” life support would be provided for only six hours, sev would become autonomous following issue of “May Day” signal and would splash down without ground-based advice. Crew would plot recovery course using wristwatches and information indicating orbital paths for 24 hrs. Study recommended three kinds of escape vehicle: spherical heat shield, rigid vehicle thermally protected by ablative heat shield; rib-stiffened expandable vehicle which would function like umbrella; and two-man conical reentry vehicle like rubber raft, inflatable and made of double-wall fabric connected by woven drop threads, (afsc Release 137.70)
At NASA Hq. industry briefing on space program for 1970s and beyond, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “I think that when we talk about reducing the overall aerospace program by 12 percent, we have to look at the other side of the point too.. .we will still be spending $3.3 billion in the 71 budget, and I think by any possible measure that puts the space program very, very high in the nation’s priorities.” Major reduction would be in manned spaceflight “from a little over $2 billion in FY 70 to $1,474,000,000 in 71.” With “the manned lunar landing behind us, with almost all the initial buy of 15 vehicles now completed, we are able to take a major reduction in the Apollo account as that program reaches a logical termination. We had hoped to continue the Saturn V at limited production of several a year. The decision was made under these austere conditions that we would terminate that production and take the savings.” Peak NASA expenditure of $6 billion in 1965 included outlay for buildup of total NASA base. Fact “that we are now down between the three and four billion mark by no means means that we will be operating at a substantially lower space activity than we had at the peak. It reflects more the fact that the base is now completed; we can put a much higher percentage of our expenditures into program.” However, FY 1971 budget would delay Apollo Applications flight until end of 1972; stretch Apollo lunar flights to two a year, with Apollo 16 occurring before aa program launch in 1972-1973 and Apollo 17 and 18 after aa program missions; delay ATS-F and ats-G by one year, and Viking-Mars lander from 1973 to 1975; and reduce NASA operational base by shutting down erc and possibly mothballing Mississippi Test Facility. Dr. Paine said NASA aeronautics effort would increase. “We feel that much of the work that will be going forward in the shuttle program will probably have some spin-off into the aeronautics area.” Emphasis would be placed on v/STOL and quiet engines. Orbiting Solar Observatory launch recommended by Space Task Group for 1975 would be delayed to 1976. Interplanetary Monitoring Probes originally scheduled for 1971 and 1972 would be launched in 1972 and 1973 and ISIS would be moved from 1970 and 1972 to 1971 and 1973. Synchronous Meteorological Satellites each would slip one year, to 1972 and 1973, and Applications Technology Satellites, one year, to 1973 and 1975. lunar roving vehicle would be carried on Apollo 16,17, 18, and 19. Decision on whether to fund two or three space shuttle definition studies would be made after proposals were received. In space station area experimental requirements would be emphasized. Two Phase-B definition studies were under way. Summer study of utilization of space stations would be international conference “with, we hope, strong participation from the European space research organization.” nerva studies would continue. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told conference that “with the technology we already have in hand” antipollution program could be initiated “to produce a space reflector—maybe it will have to be a mile [1.6 km] in diameter—that can direct the sun’s energy to create holes over our cities which would act as chimneys to evacuate smog.” (Transcript)
NASA announced that Charles J. Donlan, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical), would also become Acting Director of Space Shuttle Task Force, replacing Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Appointment was effective immediately. (NASA Ann, 11/18/70)
NASA successfully launched 134.7-kg (296-lb) ram c-iii (RAM C-C) spacecraft from Wallops Station at 4:06 pm edt by four-stage Scout booster. Spacecraft reached 209.2-km (130-mi) altitude, reentered atmosphere at 7.6 km per sec (25 000 fps), and splashed down in Atlantic 277.8 km (172.6 mi) northeast of Bermuda after eight-mimite flight. Primary objective was to determine relative effectiveness of water and freon in restoring communications during reentry blackout period. Preliminary data, obtained by Langmuir probes on board, indicated all downrange telemetry stations received signals before and after blackout and intermittent signals during blackout. ram c-lll, was third and last mission in NASA’s RAM (Radio Attenuation Measurement) program to study problems of communicating through plasma sheath around reentering spacecraft. Results could be applied to advanced lifting-body vehicles, space shuttle, and other reentering spacecraft, ram c-i had been launched Oct. 19, 1967, and ram c-ll Aug. 22, 1968. (NASA Proj Off; WS Release 70-13)
At NASA Hq. press briefing, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and program officers gave status of programs, plans for 1970s, and studies leading into 1980s. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, announced selection of Hadley-Apennine site for lunar landing of Apollo 15, scheduled for launch July 25, 1971. Site, cut by large gorge along base of mountains, was 3° east of moon’s center and 25° north of lunar equator on edge of Sea of Rains. Apollo 15 crew would collect material from base of Apennine Mountains, examine Hadley Rille area, sample fresh-looking mare and volcanic-like features, and deploy ALSEP. Apollo 16 would be launched in January 1972 and Apollo 17, in June 1972. High-priority landing sites were Copernicus, Davy, Descartes, and Marius Hills. To improve CSM return capability in emergencies after landing on moon, an LM descent battery and third tank would be added to Apollo 14 SM. Additional potable water would be generated and stored on way.tomoon. Douglas R. Lord, Deputy Director of Space Station Task Force, described plans for 12-man space station weighing 49 985-54 400 kg (110 000-120 000 lbs) that could remain in earth orbit for up to 10 yrs. Richard J. Allen of Space Shuttle Task Force said NASA was developing plans for shuttle with 100-mission reusable capability. Myers said dod was “very much involved” with shuttle activities. “We have a joint committee operating with the Air Force. . .for continuous communication and review of requirements.” He saw “possibility of international cooperation on certain flights and [U.S.] military use of the vehicle on others.” Myers said he had discussed with European officials possibility of participation in space shuttle program on three levels: orbit-to-orbit space tug, “cleanly separable and easily interfaced piece of equipment” that would probably be managed by European consortium and financed with European dollars; subcontracts from American companies to European contractors without transfer of American money ; and use of technological contributions from European national space activities and national aircraft establishments. (Transcript; NASA Release 70162)
Oran W. Nicks, NASA Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings: Jet aircraft noise-reduction goals of NASA’s acoustically treated nacelle program had been achieved. McDonnell Douglas design modifying nacelles of DC-8 had reduced noise by 10.5 epndb with estimated 4.2% direct-operating-cost increase. Boeing design for 707 aircraft had reduced noise by 15.5 epndb with estimated 9.2% direct-operating-cost increase. Long-range approach to reducing jet transport noise was under way in quiet engine program, with quietness as design requirement for first time in aviation history. Quiet engine incorporating high bypass ratio, low-noise fan design, and sound attenuating ducts would be built by General Electric Co. Three lifting-body vehicles—USAF X-24A, NASA M2-F3, and NASA HL-10—were investigating low-speed flight problems to be encountered by space shuttle orbiter and booster in future and providing information on subsonic and transonic flying qualities. In human factors program, NASA was preparing life support systems for extended space missions. “Continuous testing of candidate sub-systems integrated into functional life support systems has been accomplished for up to 60 days. The space vehicle simulation.cham-bers employed. . .have accommodated four-man teams. A 90-day test with the four-man simulator will be conducted this year.” Test would include onboard oxygen recovery system with water electrolysis unit—major component in subsystem for oxygen recovery from carbon dioxide. During 90-day run, advanced subsystems for water recovery employing vacuum distillation and vapor pyrolysis with isotope power source and water vapor electrolysis unit for humidity control would be validated. (Testimony) Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified on communications satellites before Committee: “NASA has recently completed negotiations and signed an agreement with the Communications Satellite Corporation (Comsat) for a continuation of satellite services. .. . New contracts have been negotiated for continuing this service with Cable and Wireless, Ltd., England; Australian Overseas Telecommunications Commission; and Compania Telefonica Nacional de Espana, Spain.” (Testimony)
frc announced NASA had assumed operational control of one of two YF-12 aircraft being flown in joint nasa-usaf program to obtain information from sustained cruise flight at mach 3 and altitudes in 23 000-m (75 000-ft) range for use in development and operation of commercial and military supersonic aircraft and proposed space shuttle. Two nasa flight crews, each consisting of pilot and flight test engineer, had been assigned to program. Pilots, Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Donald L. Mallick, were former XB-70 pilots for nasa. (frc Release 9/10)
William J. Normyle commented on July 15-17 Conference on Space Shuttle Technology at LeRC in Aviation Week & Space Technology: “Problems facing the development of the system were far more evident than solutions.” Lack of resolution had led to decision to hold another conference in nine months, by which time NASA “will have produced some key solutions.” It was clear at meeting “that experts in a number of fields differ with their colleagues on selection of such basics as thermal protection, design configuration, materials, integrated avionics, operations and crew systems.” (Av Wk, 7/27/70, 17)	.	.
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
NASA announced award of $380 000 contract to Ralph M. Parsons Co. for engineering services in development of overall plan for space shuttle ground facilities. (NASA Release 70-165)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Key Biscayne press conference following release of President’s space message outlined NASA plans for “Grand Tour” missions in 1970s and space developments for next decade: “A strong effort in exploration, in science and in the practical application of space for the benefit of man here on Earth is laid out, with increasing emphasis on international cooperation.” Space shuttle and space station proposals contained reduction in cost of space activities and increase in man’s capability to travel back and forth and to work in space for long periods. Space shuttle would take off vertically; at 64-km (40-mi) altitude and 11 300 km per hr (7000 mph), 2nd stage would separate and carry 22.5-metric-ton (25-short-ton) payload of men, equipment, and supplies into earth orbit, with 1st stage returning to earth for horizontal landing. After mission of up to two weeks, 2nd stage would reenter atmosphere and land horizontally for reuse. President’s program of planetary exploration would “provide man with a closehand look of every planet in the solar system.” Administration placed “great emphasis. . .on the practical applications of space techniques, not only in communication satellites and weather satellites, but in new areas such as Earth resources satellites.” Dr. Paine saw as “most statesmanlike portion” of President’s statement “increasing recognition of the international participation of other nations in both the exploration and the utilization of space.” It was too early to report specific results of Dr. Paine’s visit to world’s space capitals but “there certainly is a very substantial interest overseas in utilizing more fully the American program as a means of closing the technology gap on the part of other nations and, at the same time, allowing them to participate in both the exploration and the utilization of space in the decades to come.” (Transcript)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Meeting at msfc reviewed parallel studies of proposed chemical interorbital space shuttle by North American Rockwell Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Analyses of modifications required to adapt either 2nd or 3rd stage of Saturn V launch vehicle into interorbital shuttle between earth and lunar orbit were to lead to preliminary designs, determine orbital launch operations and procedures, and gather data on preliminary costs, logistics, and facilities. Discussions included results of analyses to date, definition of systems requirements, necessary system and subsystem trade-offs, and selection of preliminary configurations. (MSFC Release 70-262)
NASA decision to search nationwide for suitable site for launching $6billion space shuttle had stirred “anguished complaints from Florida politicians and other proponents of Cape Kennedy,” Wall Street Journal said. But NASA experts had insisted shuttle’s unique characteristics and estimated $200-million to $400-million cost of complex ground equipment made search essential. While Cape Kennedy was “leading launch-site candidate,” other possibilities included FRC, wsmr, and Dugway Proving Ground in Utah. Essential requirement was flat area for landing shuttle, with several alternate landing locations in case of emergency. Cape Kennedy was not equipped for shuttle landings and lacked facilities to support plane-like flight through atmosphere. (Spivak, WSJ, 12/3/70, 36)
msfc Advanced Systems Analysis Office was investigating possible uses of space tug, multipurpose vehicle to be developed simultaneously with larger space shuttle, msfc announced. Only space vehicle that would work with and connect all existing and future vehicles and systems, tug would first be used as link between space shuttle and space station to taxi cargo and passengers in earth orbit. Both msfc and msc were working to develop space tug plans, (msfc Release 70-102)
NASA was placing new emphasis on development of profitable manufacturing facilities orbiting in space and operated by private industry, because of budget cuts, New York Times article said. Industry participation could lead to operation and ownership of facilities by organizations like ComSatCorp—“prototype of such a joint undertaking.” NASA would make available facilities like space shuttle transportation system, space workshops, and station at mutually agreeable price. Some manufacturing might be more economical in space because of high vacuum and zero g, but before program could become practical NASA would have to move into “more highly developed operational stage. . .more applicable to research and development and to manufacturing.” (Tomaszewski, NYT, 2/15/70, Cl)
