Award of $112 000 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for visual system definition study leading to development of space shuttle mission simulator was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center, (msc Release 72-92)
Atomic Energy Commission was “encouraging” NASA to examine cost of permanent removal from environment of wastes from atomic plants by “shooting these high-level radioactive wastes into the sun—taking them right out of the world,” Dr. James R. Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, said in interview published by U.S. News & World Report. Method would “depend on development of the space shuttle ... a decade away.” (US News, 2/14/72, 46-51)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract award and issuance of requests for proposals for work on space shuttle. One-year, $99 985, firm-fixed-price contract went to Lowey/Snaith, Inc., to study methods for making space shuttle orbiter interior pleasant environment for working and living. RFPs were for design study for orbiter’s orbital maneuvering system (oms). Firm selected would receive one-year, $250 000 firm-fixed-price contract, (msc Releases 72-29, 72-30)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $175 183 costplusfixedfee contract to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., to conduct simulations of space shuttle orbiter approach and landing. Simulations would enable engineers to establish more accurately aft location of orbiter’s center of gravity and systems for vehicle aerodynamic control. Contract would end July 31. (msc Release 72-31)
New York Times editorial criticized Apollo 17 TV coverage: “One might have thought that the Apollo 17 moonwalks would be thoroughly covered by television as they took place. But the published television schedules indicate that the networks have chosen to dish out their usual commercial fare while giving only minimal live coverage to moonwalks that will make history. It is a poor choice from the point of view of public service.” (NYT, 12/12/72, 46) December 12—13:	Review of plans for space shuttle external tank and solid-fueled rocket booster was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for 350 industry and Government representatives. Attendees heard presentations by NASA and North American Rockwell Dec. 12. NASA officials conducted separate briefings Dec. 13.	(Marshall Star, 12/12/72, 1)
Appointment of Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, Director of Air Force Materials Laboratory, as Director of Science and Technology for Air Force Systems Command was announced by Gen. George S. Brown, afsc Commander. (afsc Release 104.72) September 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for series of 20 water-entry simulation tests with solid-fueled rocket casing assembly. Tests would provide valuable data for assessment of parachute water recovery of space shuttle booster and aid in preliminary solid-fueled rocket motor design. Rocket assembly—representing 77% scale model of shuttle booster—was 30 m (100 ft) long, weighed 39 000 kg (43 tons), and was from previously fired motor, (msfc Release 72—120)
Former scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary continued dialogue with Univ. of Michigan astronomer James A. Loudon [see Jan. 16 and March 28] in letter published by New York Times. “I basically agree with Mr. Loudon’s defense of the human value of communications and other applications satellites, but we do not need enormous shuttles to transport such minuscule payloads. In addition, the shuttle juggernaut is forcing nasa to cancel, postpone or trim much of its space science and applications activity. This is regrettable. We need to take a very careful look at the space shuttle before Congress appropriates billions of dollars and we are irrevocably committed to an apparent boondoggle.” {NYT, 5/16/72, 40)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) in press release called for “full and open debate” on space shuttle development issue, “leading to the rejection of this wasteful program.” It was “typical” that Nixon Administration “can squander $6.5 billion to fly four people into orbit when it refuses to invest less than one-third that amount to provide desperately needed day care and development programs for millions of children.” Space shuttle was “many timbs worse than SST” in “magnitude of its cost, in the folly of its concept and in its damage to the country.” (Text)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract activity: trw Systems Group had received two study contracts totaling $134 160, one for safety criteria study for space shuttle sortie payload and one for payload systems compatibility criteria study, both to be concluded by May 18, 1973. Grumman Aerospace Corp. had received $248 500 contract to study and develop test samples of closed pore insulation for possible thermal use on space shuttle orbiter. (msc Releases 72-124, 72-125)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of $82 000 fixed-fee contract to Howard, Needles, Tammen and Bergendorff for preliminary survey of Launch Complex 39 as proposed site for Space Shuttle Landing Facility, (ksc Release 150-72)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress 26th annual report on U.S. participation in work of United Nations. He noted in transmission message that 26th U.N. General Assembly had endorsed two treaties sponsored by U.S., Convention on the International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects and Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. International Civil Aviation Organization conference had adopted Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation. {PD, 9/11/72, 1351-2) September 8—9:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of NASA Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., celebration included open house and Sept. 8 ceremony honoring original 14 employees who had participated with Air Force in successful 1947—1951 X-l rocket aircraft program to exceed speed of sound in level flight. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented plaques to seven original employees who attended. Since creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, predecessor of NASA, frc had participated in advanced aircraft research programs that had extended boundaries of manned aeronautical flight from subsonic speed to 7200 km (4500 mi) per hr achieved by X—15 aircraft between 1959 and 1968. Other frc programs included rocket-powered D-558 II Skyrocket, first aircraft to fly twice the speed of sound; X-5, forerunner of F—111, F—14, and B-l aircraft; lunar landing research vehicle, prototype of Apollo lunar landing trainer; and XB-70 aircraft that had takeoff weight of more than 226 800 kg (500 000 lbs) and mach-3 cruising speed, frc programs were continuing effort to improve safety, utility, and flying qualities of general-aviation aircraft; M2, HL-IO, and X-24A lifting-body flights to validate concepts for future manned spacecraft and aircraft; YF-12 program to acquire inflight data for future supersonic military and commercial aircraft; supercritical wing program to evaluate new NASA-developed wing’s ability to permit modified F-S aircraft to cruise economically at higher speeds; and digital fly-by-wire aircraft program to evaluate use of electronic flight control system to control aircraft completely. Fly-bywire system was being considered for space shuttle use. (NASA Release 72-173; frc Release 15-72; frc X-Press, 9/15/72) September 9:	Tass reported results of Venus 8 probe that had landed capsule on Venus July 22 after four-month flight. Wind had moved descending capsule horizontally in same direction as planet’s rotation on its axis. Wind speed had declined from 48 m (160 ft) per sec at 45-km (28-mi) altitude to 2 m (6 ft) per sec at 11 km (7 mi). Key question during landing was whether sunlight reached Venusian surface or was absorbed completely by atmosphere and clouds. Preliminary data on changes in illumination at different altitudes showed that Venusian atmosphere considerably weakened sunlight but some sunlight did reach surface. Atmosphere consisted of 97% carbon dioxide, less than 2% nitrogen, and less than 0.1% oxygen and contained 0.01-0.1% ammonia at altitudes between 33 and 46 km (20 and 30 mi). Surface in landing area resembled earth granite rock in radioactive composition with 4.0% potassium, 0.0002% uranium, and 0.00065% thorium. (fbis-Sov, 9/13/72, L7)
Among strongest arguments for funding space shuttle was its great military usefulness, D. J. R. Bruckner said in Washington Post column. Argument might persuade Congress, “but do they really need another weapon?” Shuttle’s greatest use would be “as a tool supporting research, including the construction and maintenance ... of a research station on the moon’s surface.” But that was insufficient reason for Congress. “If they cannot convince themselves that it will help destroy something, they won’t put up the money for it.” Apollo program had destroyed nothing. “It only added a cubit to the stature of every American in the eyes of mankind, . . . benefited the understanding, the imagination and the spirit of humanity . . . [and] opened up enormously fruitful areas of knowledge about how the world we live in was formed and how it works.” (W Post, 4/22/72, A14)
William Hines commented on space shuttle decision in Chicago SunTimes: “What the President offered last week was not a completely reusable workhorse aerospace plane at all, but a scaled-down hodgepodge of obsolete, current and avant-garde technology that cannot possibly meet the stated goal of $100-a-pound payloads in 1980. The sad truth is that the original shuttle couldn’t, either, once it became apparent that development costs would approximate $13 billion rather than the $5.2 billion estimated in 1969. As backers of the defunct supersonic transport finally had to admit, when you markedly alter the development cost of a flight system, you alter its economics also.” (C Sun-Times, 1/12/72)
U.S. press commented on safe April 27 return of Apollo 16 astronauts. New York Times: Mission had “reminded us once again that man’s study of the moon is but in its infancy, and that the great bulk of the moon’s territory is still completely unexplored.” Yet, “only one more manned lunar mission is now scheduled.” As Apollo program ended, “its enormous successes underline the opportunities on the moon and compel all men to lift their eyes to the heavens if they would understand whence and how our species, our world and our solar system came into being.” (NYT, 4/28/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution: “These three strong young men are heros in the truest sense of the term. They have pitted their courage, their physical strength and their minds against a multiplicity of awesome forces which singularly or collectively could totally obliterate them. And they did it for the noblest of reasons—the pursuit of knowledge. If mankind has any claim to greatness, surely it is men like this that give it credence.” Editorial also approved space funding: “It is appropriate to note, just when the next-to-last planned Apollo spacecraft is safely home from the moon, that a few days ago the U.S. House voted approval of a $3,4 billion space agency budget bill. Part of the money will go for the development of a space shuttle, the next logical step in the great adventure of exploring space. The technological advances that are part of the space program have already proven themselves of value here on earth. It’s likely that this kind of extra technical dividend will continue to lead to break-through areas not even related to space.” (Atlanta JC, 4/28/72) San Francisco Examiner:	. . Apollo 16 may well turn out to be the most rewarding of all our moon expeditions. All Americans can take pride in a feat so remarkably compounded of scientific precision and human courage.” (SF Exam, 4/28/72) Chicago Daily News: “With experience, the crews and the thousands of technical experts supporting them from the Earth have learned to correct the minor flaws and juggle the entire intricate timetable when necessary. It seems a pity that much of the experience so dearly gained is soon to be put on the shelf. . . . But the lessons of Apollo can be applied at least in part to the portions of the space program that will remain. . . . And if the pioneering aspects of the space program are about over, its benefits will continue—most spectacularly in the weather and communication satellites, but extending also into more mundane improvements in daily living.” (C Daily News, 4/28/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of 18-mo, $238 000, costplus-fixed-fee contract to United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. to design and build prototype waste collection system—usable by both males and females—for space shuttle orbiter. (msc Release 72168) During July:	U.S.S.R. launched Salyut spacecraft which failed to achieve orbit, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Magazine said spacecraft penetrated atmosphere, where it was detected by over-the-horizon radars. One of two 2nd-stage engines stopped firing early; second stopped at end of programmed firing time with fuel remaining. (Av Week, 4/9/73, 21)	_
West German government was preparing blueprint for aerospace development for remainder of decade, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Basic document for government financing and support would establish priorities in military and civil aerospace development and provide government and industry with “idea of how much room remains for maneuver in regard to implementing new projects.” Theme would be “multi-national cooperation.” (Av Wk, 4/24/72, 32-41) April 24-25: American Physical Society held annual spring meeting in New York. Team of Columbia Univ. scientists reported observations made with 1971 rocket experiment to study x-rays from Crab Nebula had supported view that pulsars were hurling high-energy particles, or cosmic rays, into space constantly at close to speed of sound. Experiment had shown that rays were polarized. X-rays from space could not penetrate atmosphere. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/72, 11) project, membership would receive unclassified resume explaining proposed study. If 10 or more members from at least 2 scientific institutions considered project inappropriate, they could present case to NAs’s governing body. Resolution on foreign policy asked President Nixon and . Congress to develop and apply science and technology in industry, agriculture, and health for furtherance of human welfare and called for de-emphasis on reliance on military force, direct or indirect. nas James Craig Watson Medal of Science was presented to Dr. Andre Deprit, NRC postdoctoral resident research associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Citation was for “adaptation of modern computing machinery to algebraic rather than arithmetical operations.” Award consisted of gold medal and $2000 honorarium. (Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/27/72, 27; W Star, 4/23/72, D3) April 25:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved H.R. 14070, $3.420-billion FY 1973 nasa authorization bill after inserting amendment that decreased by $9 million authorization of $3,429 billion passed by House April 20. As approved by Senate Committee, authorization was $41 million above original NASA budget request of $3,379 billion and $12.5 million above amended budget request of $3,420 billion. Bill, reported to Senate May 3, allocated $2,613 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $729.5 million for research and program management. House recommendation of $211.9 million for aeronautical research and technology was reduced to NASA request level of $163.4 million. In Senate report, Committee praised increase in aeronautical R&D motivated by 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation, but said it doubted additional funding of $48.5 million approved by House could profitably be spent during FY 1973. Committee disapproved cancellation of development of 333 600-newton (75 000-lb)-thrust rocket engine in Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (nerva) program and recommended new authorization of $8.5 million as requested by NASA, plus allocation of $16.5 million in unused FY 1972 funds, for engine’s development in FY 1973. Senate bill restored $4 million deleted by House from funds for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and allocated total of $156.6 million—NASA-requested level—for Physics and Astronomy program. Bill added $12.5 million to NASA request of $194.7 million for space applications and stipulated $5 million out of total of $207.2 million be used for small applications technology satellite project. But it disapproved $4 million House had added for Earth Observatory Satellite project. Committee recommended that NASA present space shuttle as separate program item on FY 1973 budget request, restructure manned space flight budget for “better visibility of total effort,” and formulate vigorous program to study development of terrestrial uses of solar energy. (S Rpt 92—779; Com Off)
NASA announced award of 90-day, $9 800 000 letter contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. to begin work on development and production of engine for space shuttle orbiter stage. Rocket-dyne would begin work immediately, while negotiating $450 000 000, cost-plus-award-fee contract with NASA for engine, (nasa Release 72—73)
Space shuttle concept endorsed by President Nixon made it “all but certain” that Kennedy Space Center would be selected for shuttle’s launch site, New York Times said. Space experts seemed to feel that only by “converting the assembly buildings, launching pads and communications center” at ksc “would it be possible to develop a shuttle port for $300 million.” (NYT, 1/7/72, 7)
NASA released official summary of reasons for selection of North American Rockwell Corp. for $2.6-billion prime contract to build space shuttle. Summary said NR had been chosen over competitors—Grumman Aerospace Corp.; Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Inc., Space Systems Div.; and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—because “North American Rockwell attained the highest score from a mission suitability standpoint* because its cost proposal was lowest and credible, and because its approaches to program performance gave high confidence to us, to the [Source Evaluation] Board, and to the Manned Space Flight center directors, that it will indeed produce the Shuttle at the lowest cost.” Summary—signed Sept. 18 by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator—said NR’s “greatest advantages” within mission suitability area were in management, with efficient control of program and best overall top project management team. NR design provided lightest dry weight. NR’s “good understanding of all electrical power subsystems reflected the very thorough studies . . . made following the Apollo 13 accident.” Analysis of maintainability was excellent. Further, NR management techniques “should provide earlier identification of cost problems” and planned constrained buildup of resources in beginning of program lent confidence in ability to control costs. Grumman Corp. had been “very close behind” but its plan to build up its work force to early manpower peak had been seen by NASA as threat of “premature commitment of resources during the course of the program.” Grumman’s greatest strength had been in its technical design; McDonnell Douglas design had strong features but some technical drawbacks; and Lockheed’s proposal had lacked “consistent technical depth.” NASA had originally made summary available only to General Accounting Office and to competing bidders because of potential embarrassment to losers. Agency had later released summary, Wall Street Journal said, “to demonstrate that politics didn’t play any role in the decision and that the most painstaking selection procedures in the agency’s history were observed.” (Text; WSJ, 10/5/72, 12)
nasa Associate Administrator Dale D. Myers—following detailed presentation on space shuttle decision announced by Administrator James C. Fletcher [see above]—moved to testimony on Apollo program, during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. In new Apollo 16 lunar surface experiments, far-ultraviolet camera/spectograph would photograph celestial objects or areas emitting or absorbing energy from atomic hydrogen. Data would provide information on “composition, density, distribution, and motion of interplanetary, interstellar, and intergalactic gas clouds which will . . . enhance our understanding of the structure and evolution of the galaxy.” Data, recorded on film and returned from lunar surface by astronauts, would be “first attempt to evaluate the Moon as a platform from which to make future celestial observations.” Second new experiment, cosmic ray detector, would acquire data on origin and source mechanism of high-velocity cosmic rays and solar particles beyond effects of earth’s atmosphere and magnetic field. (Transcript) March 15:	NASA Associate Administrator jar Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, Administrator James C. Fletcher, and Deputy Administrator George M. Low (left to right) explained space shuttle plans at a press conference following the announcement that the shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rockets. In the artist’s drawing, the rockets are dropping away for recovery. NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 29th flight from Flight Research Center. Purpose of flight was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Fixed rakes and rotating survey probes were checked out and angle-of-attack calibrations were obtained at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude from mach 0.9 to 1.1. (nasa proj off)
NASA issued requests for proposals to industry for development of orbiter vehicle and systems integration for space shuttle orbiter’s external propellant tank, solid-fueled rocket booster, orbiter main engine, and orbiter air-breathing engine [see March 15]. (nasa Space Shuttle Fact Sheet, 5/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of 10-mo, $98 000 contract extension to Martin Marietta Corp. Denver Div. for continued design of crew compartment configured for space shuttle, which would be tested in neutral buoyancy t&nk. Extension brought total value of contract to $173 670. (msc Release 72-161)
President Nixon issued statement on U.S. space program following splashdown of Apollo 17 command module: “The safe return of the command module America marks the end of one of the most significant chapters in the history of human endeavor. In October 1958, this Nation set about sending men into a hostile, unknown environment. We had little idea what lay before us, but there was new knowledge to be gained and there was a heritage of meeting historical challenge— the challenge of greatness—to be sustained. Project Mercury, begun in 1958, taught us that man could survive and work in space. In 1961, President Kennedy voiced the determination of the United States to place a mem on the moon. We gained the understanding and the technology to embark on this great mission through Project Gemini and we accomplished it with the Apollo lunar exploration series. In 1969, for the first time, men from the planet Earth set foot on the moon. “Since the beginning of Apollo, nine manned flights have been made to the moon. Three circled that nearest neighbor in the universe, six landed and explored its surface. We have barely begun to evaluate the vast treasure store of extraterrestrial data and material from these voyages, but we have already learned much and we know that we are probing our very origins. We are taking another long step in man’s ancient search for his own beginnings, pressing beyond knowledge of the means of human existence to find, perhaps, the meaning of human existence. “Nor is this great work ending with the return of Gene Cernan, Jack Schmitt, and Ron Evans from the moon today. Rather it has barely begun. As Sir Isaac Newton attributed his accomplishments to the fact that he stood ‘upon the shoulders of Giants,’ so Newton himself is one of the giants upon whose shoulders we now stand as we reach for the stars. The great mathematician once wrote: ‘I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.’ I believe we have finally moved into the great ocean and we are trying now to understand what surrounds us. “The making of space history will continue, and this Nation means to play a major role in its making. Next spring, the Sky lab will be put into orbit. It will be aimed not at advancing exploration of deep space, but at gaining in space new knowledge for the improvement of life here on earth. It will help develop new methods of learning about the earth’s environment and the earth’s resources, and new methods of evaluating programs aimed at preserving and enhancing the resources of all the world. It will seek new knowledge about our own star, the sun, and about its tremendous influence on our environment. Scientists aboard the Skylab will perform medical experiments aimed at a better knowledge of man’s own physiology. Also, they will perform experiments aimed at developing new industrial processes utilizing the unique capabilities found in space. Skylab will be our first manned space station. It will be in use for the better part of a year, permitting the economy of extended usage, and laying the groundwork for further space stations. “Economy in space will be further served by the Space Shuttle .... It will enable us to ferry space research hardware into orbit without requiring the full expenditure of a launch vehicle as is necessary today. It will permit us to place that hardware in space accurately, and to serve or retrieve it when necessary instead of simply writing it off in the event it malfunctions or fails. In addition, the Shuttle will provide such routine access to space that for the first time personnel other than trained astronauts will be able to participate and contribute in space as will nations once excluded for economic reasons. “The near future will see joint space efforts by this Nation and the Soviet Union in an affirmation of our common belief that the hopes and the needs that unite our people and all people are of greater consequence than the differences in philosophy that divide us. “Finally, we will continue to draw knowledge from the universe through the use of unmanned satellites and probes. “We cannot help but pause today and remember and pay homage to those many men and women—including those who made the ultimate sacrifice—whose hopes, whose energies, skill, and courage enabled the first man to reach the moon and who now have seen with us perhaps the last men in this century leave the moon. But the more we look back the more we are reminded that our thrust has been forward and that our place is among the heavens where our dreams precede us, and where, in time, we shall surely follow. “Though our ancestors would have called the deeds of Apollo miraculous, we do not see our age as an age of miracles. Rather, we deal in facts, we deal in scientific realities, we deal in industrial capacity, and technological expertise, and in the belief that men can do whatever they turn their hands to. For all this, however, can we look at the record of 24 men sent to circle the moon or to stand upon it, and 24 men returned to earth alive and well, and not see God’s hand in it? “Perhaps, in spite of ourselves, we do still live in an Age of Miracles. So if there is self-congratulation, let it be tempered with awe, and our pride with prayer, and as we enter this special time of spiritual significance, let us reserve a moment to wonder at what human beings have done in space and to be grateful.” {PD, 12/25/72, 1788-9)
President Nixon’s “enthusiastic support” of space shuttle had “pumped fresh breath of life” into NASA, “buoyed the spirits of a flagging aerospace industry and lost no friends in politically vital West Coast and southern states,” Robert Gillette said in Science article. Shuttle endorsed by President was “considerably less ambitious, and at least a billion dollars cheaper, than the shuttle NASA has fought for” but “in basic outline it remains unchanged. . . .” Shuttle “and its presidential stamp of approval stand as a tribute to NASA’s deft and persistent salesmanship, a talent marked by careful acquiescence to political and economic realities and by a willingness to bleed other programs, including Apollo, to keep the shuttle alive.” While “some budget bureau officials are said to be unhappy with the magnitude, the design, and the pace of the shuttle project as it now stands,” prospects for “scuttling the shuttle are slim.” Shuttle possessed few of sst’s intrinsic weaknesses. Central moral issue raised by the sst was “the propriety of government subsidy for an essentially commercial enterprise.” Shuttle “has no such commercial overtones, and, by any measure, it is a more truly national enterprise.” Congressional attack on supersonic transport program, while largely based on project’s economics, had drawn strength from “vast and vocal public constituency aroused by alarms ... of environmental damage.” No such catalytic issue seemed likely to arise in shuttle debate. Gillette quoted unidentified Senate aide as saying, “Unless we can pull together the kind of public campaign that brought down the SST, the shuttle is going to get by this year without a thorough examination and without an adversary hearing in Congress.” (Science, 1/28/72, 392-6)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $92 800 firm-fixed-price contract to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. to study effect jet thrusters would have on aerodynamics of space shuttle orbiter during reentry. Study would help in determining best configuration for orbiter’s reaction control system, (msc Release 72—173)
More than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies were using nastran (nasa’s structural analysis computer program) to solve their structural engineering problems, NASA announced. nastran was general-purpose program originally designed to analyze behavior of elastic structures in space program. One major use had been in design of space shuttle. More than 600 engineers had been made familiar with nastran since it was made available to public in November 1970 and program was being used in more than 185 different applications, with at least 55 more planned. Firms using nastran predicted many improvements in product safety, reliability, and quality as direct benefit to their customers, (nasa Release 72^40)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23): “erts gives every sign of being an achievement of enormous potential. It is a demonstration of the value of the U.S. space program in applying technology both to extending the frontiers of knowledge, and in contributing to the improvement of life on earth.” {LA Times, 7/25/72) July 26:	NASA selected North American Rockwell Corp. (NR) Space Div. for negotiation of six-year, $2.6-billion cost-plus-fixed-and-award-fee contract as prime contractor to begin developing space shuttle orbiter. Increment covering first two years was $540 million. NR—selected from four firms submitting proposals—would be responsible for design, development, and production of orbiter vehicle and for integration of all shuttle elements. Shuttle main engine was being developed by NR Rocketdyne Div. under earlier contract. External tank and solid-fueled rocket boosters would be procured by NASA after system engineering for orbiter had progressed sufficiently. Shuttle, first reusable space vehicle, would have delta-winged, airplane-like orbiter able to land on conventional runways. It would have cargo compartment 18 m (60 ft) long and 4.5 m (15 ft) in diameter and would be able to place 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) into 185-km (115mi) due-east orbit. Reusable solid-propellant booster rockets and orbiter high-pressure, liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen main engines would boost orbiter into space and booster rockets would detach at 40-km (25-mi) altitude and splash down in ocean for recovery and reuse. Orbiter, under own power, would continue into low earth orbit. Shuttle would be able to place satellites in orbit, return satellites from orbit, permit in-orbit repair and servicing of satellites, deliver propulsive stages and satellites to low earth orbit, and make short-duration science and applications missions with self-contained experiments in low earth orbit. Shuttle development schedule called for horizontal test flights beginning in 1976 and manned orbital test flights beginning in 1978, with complete system operational by 1980. Employment generated by orbiter development and shuttle integration was expected to reach 15 000 by 1975-1976 and then would gradually decrease, (nasa Release 72153)
North American Rockwell Corp., winner of $2.6-billion NASA space shuttle prime contract, might retain up to 70% of contract money for itself and four principal subcontractors, New York Times reported. Subcontractors were Honeywell, Inc., International Business Machines Corp., General Electric Co., and American Airlines. Acceptance by NASA of 70% figure could be “major blow” to Grumman Aerospace Corp., Times said. Only hope for Grumman, loser in shuttle contract competition, and other aerospace companies to obtain substantial subcontracting on shuttle project would be to enter competition with NR subcontractors for whom NR might already have preference. (Andelman, NYT, 9/5/72, 3)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $407 630 to General Electric Space Div. for development of checkout system for space shuttle software. GE would develop system specifications, computer program compatible with msc system, procedural documents, and demonstration plan; would document results; and would demonstrate system, (msc Release 72-21)
Europe’s dilemma over altered conditions for participation in post-Apollo space program was described by Kenneth W. Gatland in Spaceflight. Europe had been invited to develop research and applications module (ram) for space shuttle, rather than space tug as originally discussed. Elimination from Europe of any shuttle propulsion technology had “left little room for manoeuvre.” Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm would be “denied the opportunity to contribute their Attitude Control Propulsion System (acps) engine” which “is considered to be fully competitive with U.S. equivalents” because NASA had rejected acps as “too advanced and too complex” a European contribution. Space tug— with attributes of both launch vehicle and spacecraft—would have pushed propulsion technique “well beyond what is currently envisaged in Europe.” Tug covered “very extensive range of the basic techniques of interest to the Europeans and might engender solutions to the most classic problems.” Tug’s “far-reaching integration with the shuttle and with the payload during operations would have afforded Europe effective participation in most American missions, i.e., the majority of space activities in the 1980s.” (SF, 9/72, 322-3)
Signing of $125 000 firm-fixed-price contract with Florida Operations of Honeywell, Inc., St. Petersburg, for study of inertial measurement unit program for space shuttle orbiter was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Honeywell would develop alternative approaches to allow NASA to assess feasibility of adapting existing units for space shuttle. (msc Release 72—132)	.
Engine concepts for space applications were described in Air University Review. Government and industry had spent more than $100 million on high-pressure-engine technology since 1961. Air Force XLR-129 engine program had provided strong technical base for space shuttle engine. Shuttle’s orbiter stage would use advanced-concept staged combustion engine “very similar to that of a turbojet equipped with an afterburner; . . . there are two different stages of combustion.” While first turbojet combustion occurred in main chamber, shuttle engine’s first burning occurred in gas generator or preburner. Preferred engine concept for future spacecraft would be “single engine that could operate as a rocket, a ramjet, a scramjet, and a turbofan.” At liftoff, rocket would be firing and “turbofan might also be operating to supply additional air to improve the performance of the rocket. After the vehicle is moving at a greater speed, the ramjet would start operating, and the turbofan would be removed from the airstream. The pure rocket would continue to operate briefly to aid the ramjet. As the vehicle reaches the outer fringes of the atmosphere, the inlets would be closed, and the pure rocket would be used alone for reaching, maneuvering in, and leaving orbit. To return to base after re-entry into the atmosphere, the ramjet and/or the turbofan might be used separately or they might be used like an afterburning turbofan.” To improve spacecraft performance further, “we would like to get away from having to carry an oxidizer for the rocket portion of the flight.” Future space engines would “mate the tremendous energy available from nuclear explosions with the ability of a rocket to operate at high thrust levels.” Performance of nuclear rocket “more than makes up for its being heavier than a normal rocket.” Nuclear rocket’s specific impulse was about twice that of “even the best chemical rocket.” Nuclear stage also would be useful for seeding space with unmanned applications satellites. (Holder, Siuru, Air IJniv Rev, 9/72)
New York Times editorial commented on March 19 visit of its science writer John N. Wilford to U.S.S.R.’s Star City, home of cosmonauts. Visit “implied a major change in Soviet policy toward space cooperation. No Western journalist had previously been permitted inside this key center of Soviet manned space activities.” Wilford’s report had suggested U.S.S.R. might be willing to explore moon jointly with U.S. “If so, the idea catches the United States at an embarrassing point in development of its space program. After the scheduled flights of Apollos 16 and 17 . . . this country plans to focus most of its future activity in space on earth-orbiting space stations and development of a space shuttle.” (NYT, 3/23/72) March 24:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 12:45 pm pst by Thor-Burner II booster. Orbital parameters: 884-km (549-mi) apogee, 802-km (498-mi) perigee, 101.7min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/29/72, 156)
Four companies submitted technical proposals to Manned Spacecraft Center for NASA space shuttle contract: Grumman Aerospace Corp., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div., and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. (nasa Release 72-103; Marshall Star, 5/17/72, 1)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, warned of challenges to U.S. leadership in technology if U.S. did not proceed in space shuttle development. In speech before Advertising Club of Baltimore he said: “The problem is very real. Last year, the United States for the first time had an annual trade deficit, a negative balance of trade, of over $2 billion. But this deficit would have been three times that amount—$6 billion—had it not been for a favorable balance of almost $4 billion achieved in the aerospace field.” Decision to proceed with space shuttle “provides a needed tool for the space program, and it will keep the United States strong in advanced technology.” (Text)
Air Force unveiled F—15 air superiority fighter aircraft in ceremonies at McDonnell Douglas facility in St. Louis, Mo. F-15 was fixed-wing, single-place aircraft in 18 000-kg (40 000-lb) class, with maximum mach 2 speed, (afsc Release 080.72) Organization’s Research and Technology Center, estec had been asked by esro to determine resources required by Europe if European Space Conference decided to develop space shuttle sortie lab [see June 14]. NASA told estec officials Europe should view sortie lab as nearly uniquely European as possible, with dependence on U.S. held to minimum. If U.S. agreed to let Europe build system to U.S. design, U.S. would insist on completely new qualification program to qualify source and system. NASA found esro and estec representatives “eager” to undertake sortie lab program. (NASA omsf, Memo for Record, 9/7/72) June 27:	Eole transponder—radio receiver/transmitter developed for French-built weather satellite Eole (launched by NASA for France Aug. 16, 1971)—had sailed on American yawl Foolscap during Newport Bermuda race, Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Objective was to test its potential for locating lifeboats by satellite. Transponder had sent position data to Eole as satellite passed 800 km (500 mi) over Foolscap. Information, transmitted to tracking station operated by French Center for Space Studies (cnes), was processed and tele-typed to gsfc. Foolscap’s up-to-date location was then plotted and sent on to U.S. Coast Guard in Miami, Florida, and race committee in Bermuda. Test, sponsored by gsfc engineers, had proved highly successful and indicated that small inexpensive transponders might become standard equipment on ship and aircraft lifeboats, (gsfc Release G—10-72; gsfc proj off)
House passed H.R. 10243 to establish Office of Technology Assessment for Congress by vote of 256 to 118. Office would identify and consider impacts of technological application. (CR, 2/8/72, H865—7) February 8—11:	NASA and European Space Conference (esc) Joint Experts Group met in Neuilly, France, to identify potential areas for European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space program. In statement issued Feb. 11 Group said NASA, “noting President Nixon’s approval on Jan. 5, 1972, to proceed with development of the space shuttle,” had encouraged European participation in shuttle development. NASA expected that European participation would be “within the context of a broader program which included multilateral European responsibility for development of a major element such as reusable space tugs to provide access to geosynchronous and other orbits” beyond shuttle’s capability or “shuttle-borne orbital laboratories” for research by U.S. and European scientists. Group recommended calendar for actions to permit governmental decisions consistent with July 1 NASA commencement of shuttle development. (NASA Note to Editors, 2/11/72)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
Article in Soviet space magazine Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika (Aviation and Cosmonautics) had indicated U.S. was not only nation investigating space shuttle development, New York Times reported. Two Soviet space scientists using pseudonyms V. Vasilyev and L. Leonidov had called shuttle “logical continuation of the space exploration effort.” Times said it was “first technical discussion” of the space shuttle concept to appear in Soviet press since President Nixon approved U.S. shuttle development in January. (Shabad, NYT, 7/10/72)	_	_
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Japanese government were discussing production in Japan of twin-engine version of Lockheed TriStar transport aircraft, Wall Street Journal reported. McDonnell Douglas had proposed production in Japan of smaller-version DC-10.	(WSJ, 8/22/72, 8) August 23:	Republican National Platform for science and technology was published by Washington Evening Star and Daily News: “We will place special emphasis on these areas in which break-throughs are needed: Abundant, clean energy sources; safe, fast and pollution-free transportation; improved emergency health care; reduction of loss of life, health, and property in natural disasters; rehabilitation of alcoholics and addicts to dangerous drugs. We will press ahead with the space shuttle program to replace today’s expendable launch vehicles and provide low-cost access to space for a wide variety of missions, including those related to earth resources.” (W Star & News, 8/23/72, A10)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $299250 contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to study and develop program for weld-bonding materials for space shuttle, (msc Release 72-55)
Newspapers continued editorial comment on decision to develop space New York Times: “The space shuttle is far less expensive than the Apollo project, and, fortunately, is not being launched in the atmosphere of Cold War hysteria that attended the birth of the lunar landing effort. On the contrary, NASA has already stated publicly it would welcome cooperation on the space shuttle from other industrially developed nations, including the Soviet Union. The argument that the space shuttle is simply another SST boondoggle has little validity. The potential benefits are far greater, and the space shuttle presents none of the environmental problems that counted so heavily against the supersonic transport.” (NYT, 1/8/72, 28) Detroit News: “It is good that the $24 billion outlay on the Apollo moon program is not to he wasted by the United States dropping out of the space program. Mission Impossible became mission accomplished because there was a national commitment to beat the Russians to the moon. The fact that the race has been won, however, should not blind Americans that it was only the first, tentative step in unlocking the mysteries of space. If we don’t press on, others will.” (D News, 1/8/72)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, issued statement in Washington, D.C., on President Nixon’s Jan. 5 decision to proceed with development of space shuttle. Decision “initiates a program which holds great promise for scientific and technological advances in the interests of the nation and all mankind. We are also interested in its potential as a means for performing our military mission more efficiently and economically. The Air Force role in the program is to provide NASA data to help assure that the Shuttle will be of maximum utility to the dod and we are pleased that the proposed vehicle is configured to meet potential DOD needs. We will continue our close coordination with NASA as their development program proceeds.’-’ (Text)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced three awards for space shuttle work. Textron, Inc., Bell Aerospace Div. received $261 500 firm-fixed-price contract and North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. received $258 000 for constructing and testing thrust chambers for space shuttle engines for in-space maneuvering. Bell Aerospace also received 15-mo, $540 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to study and design hypergolic bipropellant engine for space shuttle orbiter reaction control system. (msc Releases 72-140, 72—142)
Large Space Telescope (lst) status briefing was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for representatives of potential industry participants in program to develop multipurpose telescope for launch by space shuttle in 1980s. lst feasibility studies would end in December. NASA expected to invite industry proposals on preliminary design and definition phase in early 1973. LST would operate from earth orbit to pick up galaxies 100 times fainter than those observed by most powerful ground-based optical telescopes. It would weigh maximum 11 000 kg (25 000 lbs) and have diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter, (msfc Release 72-142)
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $226 256 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study system for handling space shuttle cargo in space. MSC engineers envisioned manipulators to handle payloads in shuttle orbiter as being 9-12 m (30-40 ft) long, electrically powered, and free-moving like human limbs, (msc Release 72-189; Av Wk, 9/18/72, 9)
Col. Daniel D. McKee (usaf, Ret.), manager of Bell Aerosystems in Houston and former Assistant Director of NASA Manned Satellite Programs in NASA Hq., died in Houston at age 53 after apparent heart attack. (msc Hist Off) January 17:	Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), in speech before National Press Club in Washington, D.C., asked, “Shall we spend our dollars on a space shuttle and an SST for the few to fly the heavens, when many here on earth have simple unmet needs like homes and schools and health?” (Text)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial commented on high level of Soviet space activity: “It is fine to talk about devoting activities in space to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind, as the United States has done. But the talk is hollow when the space scorecard shows the Soviets at an all-time high in military launches, and the United States at a low point, with the trend still further downward.” There was urgent need for U.S. “to develop military space weapons capable of neutralizing Soviet supremacy.” (St Louis G-D, 3/27/72) March 27-April 3:	Working Group of NASA and Soviet engineers met at Manned Spacecraft Center to discuss technical details of docking mechanisms. Talks continued U.S.-U.S.S.R. study of compatible rendezvous and docking systems for spacecraft. (NASA Release 72—69; msc pao) March 28:	Space leaders endorsed shuttle in supplement published by Washington Daily News: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said shuttle would “produce substantial flight economies, ease strictures on spacecraft design, lower manufacturing cost, remedy malfunctions in orbit, and afford a built-in versatility that will alter the nature of space planning and operations in major ways.” Editorial writer had described shuttle’s impact on space program as transition from dramatics of a countdown to an airport routine, Dr. Fletcher said. “The dramatics will be fondly remembered by many of us, but nostalgia will not obscure the hard fact that the routine and economic access to space, of which the shuttle is the hinge pin, is the practical and commonsense means by which we shall reap the great harvest of benefits that space holds for mankind.” Supplement interview quoted Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, as eagerly looking forward to shuttle flight. “By the time the first passenger shuttle flies I’ll be 68. I think flying into space in a shuttle will be just like being a passenger in an airliner, only smoother.” Dr. von Braun foresaw use of shuttle for travel to Mars “probably around 1990, or at least before the end of the 20th Century.” Flight probably would begin with Mars spacecraft being hauled, piece by piece, in space shuttle cargo bays, to be assembled in orbit. “I think the only way to fly to Mars is with nuclear power, and because we would never want to ignite a nuclear rock on earth, we’ll have to begin the journey from orbit.” Dr. von Braun saw shuttle preparing way for manned exploration by ferrying small, unmanned spacecraft into orbit and launching them toward Mars in late 1970s and 1980s. Article by Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said shuttle offered opportunity “not only to the United States to advance its own aerospace science and technology, but also to countries which could not finance a complete shuttle system. The advantages will be mutual and conducive to needed international scientific cooperation.” Proper use of shuttle “can help us in our efforts toward the resources management necessary to make this planet fit to house future generations of man.” James J. Harford, Executive Secretary of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said in article that guessing shuttle’s significance was “like trying to predict what the DC—3 would lead to in air transportation six years before its first flight. The space shuttle could be that powerful and more.” If shuttle performed the way NASA intended it to—“and NASA’s Apollo track record has to impress even the cynical”—shuttle would “help to create entire new industries and . . . hundreds of thousands of new jobs.” [W News, 3/28/72, 27, 29)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, described major alterations in “nature of the space effort” to be expected with 1978 introduction of space shuttle, in signed New York Times article. National space program had “turned an important corner in 1972—a year that, in a very real sense, was a year of decision” in choosing to proceed with shuttle. U.S. had “turned from a period of space exploration to a period of space exploitation for practical purposes.” By 1978 it would be “realistic to consider a variety of missions either not practicable at present cost levels or that were beyond the state of the art as it was in the pre-shuttle era.” Missions would include advanced, space-based communications systems that, when used for education, would “have the potential for eliminating illiteracy from the face of the earth.” Shuttle-launched advanced-version Nimbus satellites, combined with weather-modeling ground computers, would permit experiments in weather modification to dampen violent storms. Earth resources program data would provide precise picture of crop and timber conditions and extent of attacks by disease, drought, and fire. By 1980s, pilot space manufacturing operations might be in progress. “Super pure vaccine could thus be produced. Perfectly homogeneous alloys, fiber composites and perfectly round ball bearings are other possibilities.” During 1980s, “program of planetary exploration should record the completion of a close look at all the planets in our solar system as well as a detailed study of Mars, Jupiter and Venus. Large orbiting telescopes will be aimed at the outer reaches of the universe, examining such phenomena as quasars and pulsars.” (NYT, 12/4/72, 50)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on scientific forecasts that earth’s surface would become too hot for habitation in 4 billion yrs: “While we work on problems of more immediate concern, let’s not scrimp on the space shuttle. Down the line a few billion years, they may think well of us for that.” {LA Times, 8/18/72)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in Dept, of Defense, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on dod coordination with NASA on space shuttle development during hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization: “I firmly believe that the U.S. must retain a strong national commitment to scientific and technological progress. The NASA space program is a vital element of this overall effort.” In space area, DOD was “becoming increasingly dependent on space systems, particularly in . . . communications. Other agencies and the public are becoming increasingly dependent on the use of space for communications, weather forecasting, and natural resource exploration. The Department of Defense supports the NASA space shuttle as an important part of the President’s program, which will lead to a greater and more effective use of the space environment in the future.” Dr. Foster discussed Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) for military needs not satisfied economically and reliably by more traditional communications systems. First dscs, currently operational, employed “simple, low-power satellites and ground terminals originally designed for experimental and test programs. To replace the existing satellites ... we are deploying new DSCS satellites that have roughly 10 times the communications capability. . . . We are also developing improved terminals which will supplement the existing dscs terminal complex.” (Transcript)
Newspaper editorials commented on decision to develop space shuttle. Kansas City Star:	“The next great step in space for the United States seems assured. President Nixon has pressed the go-ahead button and apparently it will be largely a matter of adequate funding by Congress. In view of the record of space accomplishments, there is not much doubt that the planned space shuttle program will be fruitful both from the standpoint of technological success and long-range scientific benefits.” (KC Star, 1/7/72)	" St. Louis Globe-Democrat:	“There are so many potentialities for the shuttle that it is bard to envision all of them. But there is no doubt that if it is completed space travel for the average citizen may become a distinct possibility in the 1980s.” (St Louis G-D, 1/7/72) Christian Science Monitor said “space discovery versus human needs argument should not be seen as an either/or issue. This is so even leaving aside the jobs creation or economic return arguments.” Monitor believed that “a space shuttle program, because it is so practically linked to fulfilling man’s age-old vision of mastering the heavens, will unleash more constructive human energy than it will consume. And this excess will make meeting earthside demands the easier.” (CSM, 1/7/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution:	“The program . . . has the almost immediate benefit of employing some 50,000 highly trained aerospace workers who have faced a dismal job picture as the Apollo program has phased out. And, again, the proposal demonstrates that imagination and vision and a willingness to dare are still part of the American way of doing things.” (Atlanta JC, 1/7/72) Milwaukee Journal:	“The shuttle offers the opportunity to make space flight fairly routine, of taking large numbers of people and supplies in and out of space, of manning earth resource space stations continuously, of monitoring and repairing communications and resource satellites. It is a worthwhile program.” (MJ, 1/7/72) Los Angeles Times said military aspect of space shuttle needed clarification. “Most taxpayers welcomed the decision to end the wasteful competition between NASA and the Air Force on the shuttle and orbiting space station.” NASA had not explained how shuttle’s civil and military functions would be kept separate. “No American wants the Soviet Union to tip the balance of power with its own space program. But it might help avert a new confrontation if the military applications were enumerated along with a statement of whether the American government thinks shuttles are bound by the international agreement barring nuclear weapons from outer space.” (LA Times, 1/7/72) Seattle Times:	“The history of warfare shows that victory usually goes to the one who occupies the high ground. Near-earth space is the ‘high ground’ of modern military planning. In approving a full go-ahead for . . . space shuttle program, President Nixon this week served notice that this nation intends to occupy the ‘high ground.’ ” (Seattle Times, 1/7/72)
Washington Daily News editorial urged space shuttle funding by Congress: Shuttle was “gamble worth taking—not just because it will provide 50,000 new jobs in the depressed aerospace industry, but because it offers a window on the universe at a relatively modest cost.” To retreat from space “after so many billions have been spent and so many men have risked their lives” would be “small credit to a nation that prides itself on perseverance, a pioneering spirit and common sense.” (W News, 4/21/72)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $1 323 565 contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to provide liquid hydrogen to East Coast space program users from June 1, 1972, through March 31, 1973. Liquid hydrogen would be distributed to Government agencies and contractors in Saturn V booster and space shuttle activities. Under interagency agreement, NASA contracted for all liquid hydrogen used by NASA and Dept, of Defense in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 72-69)
President Nixon announced decision U.S. should develop space shuttle system. In statement re'eased from San Clemente. Calif., following 45-min meeting with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, President said: “I have decided today that the United States should proceed at once with the development of an entirely new type of space transportation system designed to help transform the space frontier of the 1970’s into familiar territory, easily accessible for human endeavor in the 1980’s and 1990’s. “This system will center on a space vehicle that can shuttle repeatedly from earth to orbit and hack. It will revolutionize transportation into near space, by routinizing it. It will take the astronomical costs out of astronautics. In short, it will go a long way toward delivering the rich benefits of practical space utilization and the valuable spinoffs from space efForts into the daily lives of Americans and all people. “The new year 1972 is a year of conclusion for America’s current series of manned flights to the moon. Much is expected from the two remaining Apollo missions—in fact, their scientific results should exceed the return from all the earlier flights together. Urns they will place a fitting capstone on this vastly successful undertaking. But they also hring us to an important decision point—-a point of assessing what our space horizons are as Apollo ends, and of determining where we go from here. “In the scientific arena, the past decade of experience has taught us that spacecraft are an irreplaceable tool for learning about our near earth space environment, the moon, and the planets, besides being an important aid to our studies of the sun and stars. In utilizing space to meet needs on earth, we have seen the tremendous potential of satellites for intercontinental communications and worldwide weather forecasting. We are gaining the capability to use satellites as tools in global monitoring and management of natural /resources, in agricultural January 5; President Nixon and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher examined a model of the reusable space shuttle at San Clemente, Calif,, following the President’s announcement that the United States would proceed with shuttle development. applications, and in pollution control. We can foresee their use in guiding airliners across the oceans and in bringing televised education to wide areas of the world. “However, all these possibilities, and countless others with direct and dramatic bearing on human betterment, can never be more than fractionally realized so long as every single trip from earth to orbit remains a matter of special effort and staggering expense. This is why commitment to the space shuttle program is the right next step for America to take, in moving out from our present beachhead in the sky to achieve a real working presence in space—because the space shuttle will give us routine access to space by sharply reducing costs in dollars and preparation time.” It was significant, President said, “that this major new national enterprise will engage the best efforts of thousands of highly skilled workers and hundreds of contractor firms over the next several years. The amazing ‘technology explosion’ that has swept this country in the years since we ventured into space should remind us that robust activity in the aerospace industry is healthy for every one—not just in jobs and income, but in the extension of our capabilities in every direction. The continued pre-eminence of America and American industry in the aerospace field will be an important part of the shuttle’s ‘payload.’ ” Shuttle program would “give more people access to the liberating perspectives of space, even as it extends our ability to cope with physical challenges of earth and broadens our opportunities for international cooperation in low-cost, multi-purpose space missions.” President quoted Oliver Wendell Holmes: “We must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it, but we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.” President concluded, “So with man’s epic voyage into space—a voyage the United States of America has led and still shall lead.” (PD, 1/10/72, 27-8; Transcript of Fletcher, Low press conference, 1/5/72)
President Nixon’s decision to support development of space shuttle was expected to stir “some loud opposition in Congress,” New York Times said, “bht probably not enough to sidetrack initial funding. . . .” Opposition was expected “from those who question the President’s decision to hack an expensive new space effort at a time when so many down-to-earth social programs have to wait in line for a share of the Federal dollar.” NASA officials had expressed “confidence that they have sufficient Congressional support for an initial shuttle appropriation.” (Wilford, NYT, 1/6/72, 14)
President Nixon informed Congress of plans for six-month International Exposition on the Environment to be held in Spokane, Wash., in 1974. {PD, 8/21/72, 1237) August 15—16:	Symposium on composite structural materials for space shuttle application, at Marshall Space Flight Center, reviewed progress and facilitated exchange of space shuttle composites information originated by NASA Centers and contractors, (msfc Release 72—107)
Selection of Kennedy Space Center in Florida and Vandenberg Air Force Base in California as launch and landing sites for space shuttle was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in Washington, D.C. ksc site would be used for research and development launches, to begin in 1978, and for all operational flights into easterly orbits. NASA would provide facilities for shuttle users at ksc by modification of existing facilities. Vandenberg afb site would be phased in toward end of decade for shuttle flights requiring high-inclination orbits. Dept, of Defense would provide basic shuttle facilities. NASA Site Review Board studies had shown Kennedy-Vandenberg combination had cost, operational, and safety advantages over all other U.S. sites. Cost of establishing facilities at ksc was estimated at $150 million; at Vandenberg, $500 million. Decision to use KSC was “most gratifying to NASA’s launch organization” and ensured “continued utilization of this base and the supporting Eastern Test Range,” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, said in statement read at KSC press briefing following announcement of shuttle site selection. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, explained at ksc briefing why site construction at Vandenberg AFB would cost more than at ksc : “At Kennedv we can make full use of the Saturn V launch complex—Complex 39. The Shuttle will be brought back in there after flight, . . . refurbished there, . . . mated with its booster ... in the vab [Vehicle Assembly Building], taken on the trawler transporter to the existing launch pad and launched.” ksc modifications would be minor but at Vandenberg “launch facilities . . . are not yet as well suited to the shuttle.” Larger modifications would be required, “and this is where the cost is.” Selection between KSC and Vandenberg for a particular launch would depend on required launch azimuth, Dr. Low said. “If we launched something toward the east . . . then it makes sense to launch it from the east coast, whether it is for the Department of Defense or for NASA or for civilian users. When you launch into a polar orbit, or a high-inclination orbit, then it makes more sense to launch from the west coast so you don’t overfly land.” In response to question, Dr. Low said NASA did not plan to mate Air Force-supplied booster with shuttle, “nasa will develop, or have developed under NASA contract by industry, the full shuttle including the orbiter, its large tanks, and the solid rocket motor.” NASA did have “clear understanding” with dod that it would use shuttle when it became available and if it met requirements. (NASA Release 72-81; Transcript)
LeRoy E. Day, NASA Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, described studies of shuttle’s effect on payload development costs during speech before American Institute of Astronautics and Aeronautics Rocky Mountain Section in Boulder, Colo.: “A number of . . . payloads have been flown and historical design and program cost data were available. We have determined by actual preliminary design, preparation of program plans, and detailed costing analyses, that these payloads could have been redesigned to fly on the shuttle with payload development cost savings ... of 50% of the historical baseline. The studies conclude that the cost of developing payloads (the major portion of space program costs) can be reduced primarily as a result of the shuttle’s ability to retrieve payloads for reuse, refurbishment and updating.” Dichotomy of unmanned and manned space programs should not be perpetuated, Day said. U.S. needed to continue “vigorous and meaningful manned space program” that did not “obscure the automated satellite programs.” Shuttle was “the one mechanism that can effectively support both goals in an optimum way” within national space budget. (Text)
President Nixon sent $246.3-billion FY 1973 budget request to Congress— increase of $9.6 billion over FY 1972. National total included research and development budget of $17.8 billion (increase of $1.4 billion), with $3,740 billion requested for civilian and military space R&D. Total request for NASA new obligational authority (noa) of $3,379 billion (1.3% of total U.S. budget) was $83 million more than FY 1972 NOA of $3,296 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase by $11 million, against decline of $200.9 million in FY 1972. Increase to $3,192 billion reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle engine and airframe. Of budget request, $2.6 billion would go for R&D, $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $701 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $472.5 million, to $128.7 million, reflected completion of Apollo program with Apollo 16 and 17 scheduled for launch during calendar year. Manned space flight operations—including $540.5 million for Skylab, $200 million for space shuttle, and $23 million for orbital systems and experiments—would increase from $682.8 million in FY 1972 to $1,094 billion in FY 1973. Space life sciences would receive $25.5 million and development, test, and mission operations would receive $305.2 million, including funds for detailed design and development of shuttle airframe and engine. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,224 billion, down $61 million from FY 1972. Funding for NASA space science and applications programs would increase $123.7 million, from $740.4 million in FY 1972 to $864.1 million in FY 1973. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for High Energy Astronomy Observatory ($59.6 million in FY 1973) and orbiting explorers ($32 million) ; to lunar and planetary exploration (up $29.7 million, to $321.2 million, with $229.5 million for Viking project, $31.6 million for Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, and $18.7 million for supporting research and technology advanced studies) ; and to launch vehicle procurement. Funding for Pioneer planetary exploration program would decrease from $12.8 million in FY 1972 to $10.2 million. Increase of $7.2 million in applications programs, to $194.7 million in FY 1973, included $48.4 million for earth resources survey, $61.2 million for ATS, and $28.3 million for Nimbus. Total requested for NASA aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $212.8 million in FY 1972 to $249.3 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $110 million in FY 1972 to $163.4 million, including $27.5 million for quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft and $3 million for vertical takeoff and landing (vtol) research/ experimental vehicle programs. Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) development was terminated in favor of reoriented program to define smaller nuclear rocket system. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $4.9 million, to $259.1 million. Dept, of Defense FY 1973 budget of $83.5 billion was all-time high, $6.3 billion above FY 1972 budget authority, 30% of total Federal outlays for FY 1972, and 6.4% of Gross National Product—-but percentage of gnp had dropped from FY 1972’s 7%. dod total included $8.6 billion for research, development, technology, and engineering, $1.1 billion increase over FY 1972. Of requested Rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, continued flight experiment programs, and applied research and technology programs— would receive $454 million (up $49.4 million). Military sciences would receive $572.7 million (up $34.9 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,948 billion (down $36.8 million) and missiles rdt&e $2,383 billion (up $437.8 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for undersea long-range missile system (ulms) to supplement and eventually replace Poseidon-Polaris fleet ($942.2 million, up $802 million), B-l advanced strategic bomber ($444 million, up $74 million), F-15 air superiority fighter ($910 million, up $490 million), airborne defense warning and control system (awAcs) ($470 million, up $331 million), and Safeguard antiballistic missile program ($1,483 billion, up $366 million). Some $299 million was requested for advance procurement of components for new nuclear-powered CVAN-70 aircraft carrier. Increases were also programmed for prototype development of vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft for Navy, stol transports for possible C-130 replacement, Air Force SCAD strategic bomber penetration decoy, and engines for future transport and fighter aircraft. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration FY 1973 budget included $39.9 million for meteorological satellite operations, $6.8 million more than FY 1971 allocation of $33.1 million. Funding would complete financing of fourth satellite in ITOS series, continue financing of fifth and sixth ITOS satellites and one Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes), and initiate procurement of seventh itos. Dept, of Transportation budget request of $8.56 billion was decrease of $91.5 million over FY 1972. dot funding would start 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect atmosphere, and design safer and more productive airport system. Atomic Energy Commission FY 1973 budget request of $2.56 billion, up $247 million over FY 1972, would be used for development of liquid-metal fast-breeder power reactor and for controlled thermonuclear fusion research. National Science Foundation FY 1973 budget request of $653 million would cover basic scientific research, experimental program to test incentives to stimulate non-Federal R&d investment, program to analyze effect of R&D on national economy, continuation of research applied to national needs in advanced technology and environmental problems, program to improve research management at institutions of higher learning, and funding for astronomy to permit development of very large array of antennas for radio astronomy, (omb, Budget of US Govt, FY 1973; omb, US Budget in Brief; omb, Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; dot budget briefing transcript; aiaa Release 72-3; nsf Release 72-106; Kelly, W Star, 1/24/72, A14; Av Wk, 2/14/72, 14)
Bathroom commode system for space shuttle passengers was described by Manned Spacecraft Center engineer A. F. Behrend, Jr., and J. E. Swider, Jr., of United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div, during annual Environmental Control and Life Support System Conference in San Francisco. In space, high-velocity airstreams would compensate for earth’s gravity and would assist water-flush mechanism. Waste would be vacuum dried and chemically treated. System, being built for further testing and evaluation by Hamilton Standard under $238 000 NASA contract, was of type being studied by commercial airlines to reduce maintenance and operating costs, (nasa Release 72-163)
Sophisticated TV systems were being used by some of world’s largest telescopes to record planetary atmospheres, faint galaxies, and quasistellar objects, Science reported. Astronomers had been criticized for being less receptive to new technologies than other physical scientists. “At a time when automation of many stages of data-taking is standard procedure . . . automation of large telescopes is just becoming fashionable.” (Metz, Science, 3/31/72, 1448-9) During March: nasa released Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1971-1973: Annual Report to the National Science Foundation. Report, for inclusion in government-wide survey published by nsf for Congress, White House, Government agencies, and scientific community, showed distribution of nasa funds based on FY 1973 budget estimates. It reflected nasa’s total direct obligations incurred in FY 1971 and budget estimates for FY 1972 and FY 1973. In FY 1973 nasa would fund approximately 19% of Federal Government’s total research and development effort and provide 23% of funds for research, alone. When Dept, of Defense was excluded from computation, nasa was expected to conduct 36% of total civilian R&D effort. Total research in FY 1973 was expected to show 4% increase over FY 1971. For first time since FY 1962 research would represent over 50% of nasa funding for Research and Development. Increase in research resulted in decreased funding for development, with impending completion of Apollo and Sky lab development; decrease was offset to a degree by funds applied to begin space shuttle development. Analysis of funding showed decline in engineering funds of about 7% of total, with increases in physical and life sciences. Reduction in engineering reflected anticipated completion of Apollo. High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program effected increase in astronomy, and Viking program, increase in chemistry and biology. (Text)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of nine-month $140 090 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study operational processing of space shuttle payload carriers at KSC space shuttle launch site. Study would develop objectives, technical information, and recommendations for flexible, cost-effective procedures for shuttle processing, (ksc Release 86-72)
NASA announced signing of definitive contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for development and production of space shuttle main engine. NASA had announced selection of Rocketdyne for negotiation of contract July 13, 1971, but award had been delayed pending outcome of protest by United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. Initial work had been under way for several months under temporary contracts during final negotiations. First increment of cost-plus-award-fee contract for primary development through- Aug. 31, 1975, was estimated at $205 766 000. Second increment of $236 709 000 would be for engine production and remaining development from Sept. 1, 1975, to June 30, 1979. (nasa Release 72-167)
Role of Vandenberg Air Force Base in space shuttle program was doubtful, Frank Macomber said in San Diego Union. California politicians were claiming “partial victory” in NASA’s selection of West Coast site for second shuttle launch and landing site. But “clear-cut win went to Florida’s Cape Kennedy.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had “made it clear it will be another eight years before space shuttle launch base work would begin at Vandenberg.” In eight years “entire U.S. space picture will have changed. There will be a whole new set of American leaders, and a Congress which today would approve a space shuttle program for the West Coast might be so changed by 1980 that it would be voted down.” (Copley News Service, SD Union, 5/14/72, 23)
NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on decrease in research and program management (r&pm) budget in House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on FY 1973 NASA authorization: Requested $700.8 million was decrease of $26.5 million from FY 1972. Ceiling of 26 850 was proposed for Civil Service component of nasa in-house work force, 1500 lower than original 1972 ceiling—bringing total reduction since 1968 peak to 8300 positions, or 25%. NASA had planned to achieve 1973 ceiling by normal attrition, but rate of attrition was running 22% lower than required and Center directors had been instructed to use reduction-in-force procedures as necessary to reach ceilings. Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz testified that under FY 1973 authorization bill all NASA facility projects would be presented for approval and funding under full disclosure concept. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), Director of Facilities in Office of Administration, entered prepared statement detailing $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities and explained $8 million request for facility planning and design within that total. First $3.5 million was for “regular recurrent” requirements and $4.5 million for “special” requirements. Of the $4.5, $3.75 million was for space shuttle facilities, including preliminary engineering reports for larger 1974 and 1975 programs. Second portion was for large aeronautical facility —$750 000 for design of full-scale subsonic wind tunnel that would ultimately cost $150 million to $200 million if approved, with total design cost of $7 million to $10 million. Requested FY 1973 funds would complete design on drive section of tunnel. Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology George W. Cherry described FY 1973 disbursements for aeronautics: Important part dealt with reduction of jet aircraft noise, with $28.5 million requested for research and technology to continue this work. Roughly one half was for research and technology attacking noise generation and noise propagation; $12.4 million'was for programs for near-term relief from jet aircraft noise. Of the $12.4 million, $9 million was requested for engine-modification development program and $3.4 million for development of operational procedures for noise abatement. Cherry presented audiovisual demonstration of effectiveness of engine modifications and operational procedures. (Transcript)
MSFC announced it had extended interim contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for space shuttle main engine design. One-month, $l-million extension was awarded pending completion of review by General Accounting Office of original $500-million contract awarded July 13, 1971. Review had been requested Aug. 3, 1971, by competing contractor United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. (MSFC Release 72-23; A&A 1971)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of requests for proposals for development of concepts, construction of hardware, and testing of thrust chamber for space shuttle orbit maneuver engine (ome). Two firms would be selected, each to receive one-year, $275 000, firm-fixed-price parallel contract, (msc Release 72-33)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced establishment of Sortie Can Task Team to plan project definition phase for sortie can—low-cost, space shuttle payload carrier for manned research and applications studies in earth orbit. Team would be managed by Fred E. Vreuls, with Hans R. Palaora as chief engineer, (msfc Release 72-41) Marshall Space Flight Center announced request for proposals for nine-month space tug operations and payload support study. Contractor selected would define flight operations to be conducted by tug after deployment from space shuttle and define interface between tug and automated payload or satellite that tug was delivering or returning. Proposals were due by April 10. (msfc Release 72-39)
Newspaper editorials commented on President Nixon’s decision to develop space shuttle. Washington Post said arguments for or against shuttle were not “error free” since “major ones rest on projections into the future which are exceedingly difficult to make and others rest on basically undemonstrable assumptions about the quest for knowledge. Part of the difficulty springs from the fact that no one can know what space-based research will discover. Is the key to the hydrogen atom and thus to unlimited energy out there . . .? Will the world some day need to import minerals from space to sustain life here? Will man have to be in space to accomplish things such as these or can machines do them all? Above all, where does this kind of program fit in a national budget that cannot provide for doing all the things at home that ought to be done?” Such questions would make debate over space shuttle “different in character and significance from last year’s debate over the sst.” Standards applied to “project which involves scientific research and military considerations . . . must be somewhat different from those applied to a project, such as the sst, which involved only another way to move people from place to place.” (W Post, 1/14/72, A22) Houston Post: “With the last Apollo moon flight scheduled later this year and the Skylab project to terminate in 1973, the shuttle holds the key to an on-going space program. Our failure to build it would indicate our lagging interest in space research to the possible detriment of future cooperation with the Russians in this field. It is true that we have important social priorities which need attention, but our space research posture in relation to the Soviet Union, whether competitive or cooperative, also carries a high priority.” (H Post, 1/14/72)
New York News editorial commented on space shuttle decision: “We would like to see the U.S. taking on, too, some of the more exciting space challenges that could be achieved with America’s present knowhow. But at least Mr. Nixon has furnished assurance that he will keep the U.S. in the space business. We can be thankful for that at a time when undeserved abuse is being heaped on the whole program by people who prefer to shut out the beckoning glitter of the stars so they can concentrate on the mud at their feet.” (NY News, 1/9/72)
Flying model of winged shuttle orbiter by erno Raumfahrt-technik GmbH of West Germany would be air-launched during year to study subsonic dynamic stability, Spaceflight reported. Program, begun in mid-1960s by Federal German Ministry for Education and Science, had led to development of small pilotless flight model called Bumerang, which made first unguided flight off Heligoland Aug. 12, 1971. Research to date by erno specialists, participating with space shuttle team led by McDonnell Douglas Corp. of TJ.S. had been on winged (nonlifting body) orbiter models at German Research and Test Establishment for Aviation and Spaceflight. (SF, 8/72, 301)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United, States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data Through 1971 and a Forward Look (72-17 SP). Report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—updated Senate Document 92-51 released Jan. 6 and discussed future directions and significant aspects of space programs. Soviet planetary probes Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) were studying temperatures, density, and constituents of Martian ionosphere, atmosphere, and surface. Joint experiment with France on Mars 3 had been studying solar wind. With Soviet start in planetary exploration during 1971, U.S. should continue to feel competition in planetary program until NASA Viking landed on Mars in 1976. nasa future plans gave prominent priority to space shuttle. While Soviet plans for reusable space vehicle had not been divulged, “it is hard to imagine their attainment of announced goals . . . without use of a shuttle.” U.S.S.R. talked of putting up space station in five years. “It may be that the long awaited new large launch vehicle will find use in lifting major components for such a station. Using this vehicle, the U.S.S.R. could put up its equivalent of the U.S. Skylab any time from 1972 on.” U.S.S.R. had recorded “wide variety of commitments ... to conduct wide-ranging program” of solar system exploration and of earth applications. They had discussed possibility of Grand Tour flights and of manned planetary missions. In space cooperation, “although no firm commitment has been made and no real timetable set, the possibility has been opened that some of the surplus Saturn IB and Apollo hardware might be used to send an American crew to dock with a future Soviet space station. Then perhaps later if a remaining Saturn V is used to put up a Skylab 2 ... a Soviet Soyuz might send a crew to dock with it. More joint planning and more funds will be required to accomplish these suggestions.” (Text)
North American Rockwell Corp. released statement that it was awarding $8 million in subcontracts to Grumman Corp. for engineering work on space shuttle. McDonnell Douglas Corp. would receive subcontracting worth $4 million, and $200 million worth of subcontracts would be parceled to companies throughout U.S. early in 1973. Grumman subcontracts would preserve jobs of some 300 top engineers and McDonnell Douglas subcontract, 140, New York Times reported. (NR Release; Andelman, NYT, 9/17/72, 23) Air Force succesfully flight-demonstrated powered balloon system (pobal) that had fly-and-float capability readily adaptable to military use in electronic fields. POBAL—coupling free helium-filled balloon to propulsion system—flew from White Sands Missile Range for three hours after reaching altitude, driven by 11.9-m (39-ft) propeller connected to 9-kw (12-hp) electric motor. Steering rudder, connected to lengthy tail boom, was 2.7 m (9 ft) high and 0.8 m (2.5 ft) wide. System was controlled by radio signals from the ground, pobal would extend station-keeping capabilities by combining free balloon flight with propulsion and autopilot control system, with planned I2-hr flight under power at speed of 15 knots. It would float powerless remainder of time. (AF Release 129.72)
Grumman Corp. officials said layoff of 300 employees, from top engineers to maintenance and security personnel, would begin Aug. 4 as direct result of NASA’s award of space shuttle contract to North American Rockwell Corp. (Andelman, NYT, 8/2/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $365 000 contract supplement to LTV Aerospace Corp. for work on space shuttle orbiter thermal-protection system using reinforced pyrolyzed plastic. Supplement brought total funding for work to be done by April 20, 1973, to $859 000. (msc Release 72-171)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was chosen President of American College of Preventive Medicine at annual meeting in Atlantic City, NJ. (NASA Activities, 12/15/72; NASA Pio) November 14:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, visited Kennedy Space Center for briefings on ksc plans for 1970s. Programs included Apollo 17, Skylab, U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, space shuttle, applications programs, and Viking unmanned Mars missions for 1975 launch. Dr. Fletcher’s visit included Vehicle Assembly Building, to see Saturn V Orbital Workshop and Saturn IB launch vehicle for Skylab. (ksc Release 320-72)
New York Times published response by Univ. of Michigan astronomer James A. Loudon to Jan. 16 letter in which former scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary questioned compatibility of space shuttle with national goals. O’Leary letter had been “strange document from a man who wrote a whole book to complain that scientists don’t have access to space.” Shuttle’s most important aspect, “aside from its economy,” was its ability to carry passengers. “For the first time, scientists will be able to perform experiments in space without spending years in irrelevant pilot training first.” Shuttle’s effect would be “to make space very much more available, with results for a dozen different branches of science that are now incalculable.” (NYT, 3/28/72)	_
Interview with Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Director of Equal Employment Opportunity, was published by Washington Sunday Star. Mrs. Harris had adopted as her philosophy phrase, “We are all fellow astronauts on Spaceship Earth.” She had said, “My position is to make sure the space program is for everybody. We have to get the alienated minorities into every NASA level, especially space exploration.” (Trescott, W Star, 1/9/72, Cl) January 10:	European participation in space shuttle development was discussed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers during press briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. European space officials had released to European industry “fairly extensive study . . . leading to the definition of the tug that the Europeans might build for the shuttle to carry.” Tug was 3rd stage of shuttle transportation system. Myers said NASA had examined three possible areas for European participation: “One would he in elements, physical pieces of the shuttle that would be managed ... as the prime contractor manages a subcontractor. We will expect the prime contractors to Work directly with the European industries in that case.” Europeans would supply money for parts developed by Europe. Second area Was tug. “If the tug were developed, we would expect it to be paid for by the Europeans.” Third area was sortie can, “experimentcarrying device to be carried in the payload compartment,” which would give them “an opportunity to enter into the use of the shuttle very extensively.” European space officials would meet with NASA within two months to respond on interest in participating. Timetable called for selection of industrial contractors in summer 1972, with subsonic and suborbital test flights beginning in 1975, manned orbital tests in 1978, and first fully operational mission by 1980. Site evaluation board would make its next report to NASA within few weeks, and site for shuttle launch and recovery would be selected by spring. One site would be selected initially, with another or others selected later according to program needs. “We don’t see the shuttle as a highly limited operation. And, I think that eventually there will be more than one site.” Location depended on mission. “Today . . . there is a preponderance of due-east missions out of ksc [Kennedy Space Center!, and . . . different azimuths out of the West Coast. We can’t go due east out of the West Coast very well . . . because of the populated areas east . . . and we can’t get as efficient in polar orbits out of Kennedy ... so there is a tendency to ... go to the two coasts. Now whether that really ends up being that way in the shuttle system, we don’t know yet.” (Transcript)
Award of $168 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for design study of low-density ablative materials was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Materials could be used to protect space shuttle orbiter from heat, (msc Release 72-117)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of requests for proposals to 13 aerospace firms to study, design, and test polymer seal materials for storing space shuttle propellants. Firm selected would receive $100 000, firm-fixed-price contract, (msc Release 72-43)
McDonnell Douglas Corp. announced in St. Louis that it was laying off 11 000 employees in next 17 mos, largely because of its failure to win prime contract for space shuttle. President and Chief Executive Officer Sanford N. McDonnell said 260 employees would he laid off immediately and that by year’s end figure would reach 6000. Most of 11 000 layoffs—perhaps 9800—would be from California divisions of company that employed total of 92 000 persons. (Andelman, NYT, 8/3/72, 43)	:
House and Senate conferees submitted conference report on H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that contained $3.408-billion NASA appropriation. Conference recommended $2.601-billion appropriation for NASA research and development, instead of $2,550 billion proposed by House and $2,624 billion proposed by Senate, and included $24 million for aeronautical research in noise abatement and aviation safety as proposed'by Senate. Recommended appropriation for construction of facilities was $77.3 million as proposed by Senate, instead of $69.8 million proposed by House—and included $5.5 million for modification of manufacturing and final assembly facilities for space shuttle as proposed by Senate and $8 million for facility planning and design as proposed by Senate, instead of $6 million proposed by House. Appropriation for research and program management remained unchanged at $729.45 million. (H Rpt 92-1261; NASA Off Administration)
nasa announced organizational changes within Office of Manned Space Flight to fit post-Apollo/Skylab activities. New Mission and Payload Integration Office had been established, Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force, Advanced Missions Office was redesignated Advanced Programs Office, and Apollo Program Office became Apollo/astp Program Office. Functions of Engineering and Operations Directorate in omsf had been reassigned to Advanced Programs Office. Mission and Payload Integration Office would plan and coordinate requirements between payload sponsors and shuttle and sortie lab organizations. Sorties Lab Task Force would manage NASA planning and definition activities to produce manned module for research and applications activities with space shuttle. Current project emphasis was on technical definition and planning for hardware development phase. Parallel definition studies were being made by NASA and European Space Research Organization. If Europe undertook development of sortie lab, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said, NASA Task Force would coordinate NASA and esro activities. Philip E. Culbertson was Director of Mission and Payload Integration Office and Acting Director of Advanced Programs Office. Douglas R. Lord was Director of Sortie Lab Task Force, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone was Director of Apollo/ASTP Project for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. (nasa Release 72-232)
Events leading to President Nixon’s endorsement of space shuttle development were reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology: “The struggle between NASA and omb [Office of Management and Budget] officials reached the point of acrimony when the latter suggested design changes and demanded to know from NASA engineers the dollar savings that would result. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, finally appealed directly to the office of the President with a complaint that omb was attempting to design the U.S. space shuttle rather than merely budget it.” President Nixon had removed omb accountant from conference with NASA and demanded shuttle agreement. “The dispute culminated in Fletcher’s triumphal flight to San Clemente ... to join in the announcement that the space shuttle had been approved by the Administration.” (Av Wk, 1/10/72, 15)
European Space Conference delegation visited U.S. to complete resolutions for July 11 esc conference in Brussels, which would discuss government action on European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space program. Brussels conference later was postponed. During Washington, D.C., meeting NASA and Dept, of State officials told esc delegation that space tug was no longer being considered as item for European development. Possibilities for European participation had been reduced to four structural areas of space shuttle. U.S. urged esc to undertake development of shuttle sortie laboratory. (NASA OMSF; Av Wh, 7/17/72, 19)
After series of meetings in U.S. and abroad, esro decided to develop sortie laboratory to fly with NASA’s space shuttle in 1980s. President Nixon announced new policy making U.S. launch assistance available to interested countries and international organizations for satellites intended for peaceful purposes. Third Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in January was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 17 foreign countries. Participating Soviet scientists consulted with U.S. scientists, examined lunar samples, and helped select Apollo 14 samples to return to U.S.S.R. as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. exchange agreement. Apollo 15 lunar soil samples were exchanged for soil samples collected by U.S.S.R.’s Luna 20. Apollo 16 materials were distributed to scientists in 15 foreign countries, and Apollo 17 samples also would be distributed to other nations for analysis and display. NASA launched 29 sounding rockets in cooperative international program to test weather data systems for France, Japan, and U.S. Program was sponsored by United Nations World Meteorological Organization’s Commission for Instruments and Methods of Observation, Since beginning of international program in 1962 with launch of U.K. satellite Ariel 1 (April 26) and Canadian satellite Alouette 1 (Sept. 29), number of foreign countries and international organizations with which NASA had participated in space activities had reached 134. Total of 55 foreign agreements included cooperative flight projects with 25 countries, earth resources survey with 39, lunar sample analysis with 20, tracking and data acquisition with 22, and reimbursable launchings with 4. Scientists from 85 countries and organizations had worked with NASA—80 in meteorological research, 41 in personnel exchanges, and 52 in other space projects. Total countries and organizations exchanging scientific and technical information with NASA reached 63; total sending visitors to NASA reached 126, and total cooperating in some form with NASA reached 94. (nasa Release, 12/27/72; A&A 1972; Fletcher, NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 2-3; nasa Int Aff)
NASA officials met with 25 national winners in Skylab student project competition at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss design of students’ space experiments and demonstrations. During visit students toured msfc laboratories and Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (nasa Release 72-94; msfc pao) May 9:	Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) said in Washington, D.C., that arguments for space shuttle development had become “classic case of bureaucratic deception and waste.” He would offer amendment to cut off all shuttle funds. (NYT, 5/11/72)
NASA had asked private industry to help assess space shuttle boosterrecovery system, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Large parachutes would lower 90-metric-ton (lOO-U.S.-ton) spent booster stages to ocean. Six proposals for study of parachute deceleration system had been received, (msfc Release 72-70)
Subcommittee on NASA Oversight submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Space Shuttle-—Skylab: Manned Space Flight in the 1970’s, status report prepared by Committee staff at request of Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague, from information from NASA space flight Centers and key industrial contractors. Conclusions on Skylab program were that program was within projected costs; bulk of equipment and systems were meeting design requirements in performance and reliability; and, despite some problems in procuring and integrating experiments, schedules were being met and no flight delays or significant cost increases were anticipated. Serious consideration was recommended for several options: possibility of flying backup Skylab B in 1974-1976 period; possible revisits to Skylab A after first three flights; and use of remaining Saturn IB launch vehicles in earth resources and applications flights after Skylab A program, during 1974-1978 period. Conclusions on space shuttle program were: Sufficient technology existed to undertake development of fully reusable, low-operation-cost, earth-orbital shuttle. Number of design possibilities had been studied, covering range of development costs. Regardless of design chosen, as development costs were reduced, system recurring operating costs increased. In addition to reducing cost of near-space operations by order of magnitude, shuttle offered many opportunities for increased flexibility of earth resource surveys and management, space manufacturing, and short-term rapid-response laboratory facilities. And shuttle could also be used to improve national security position. (Text)
House by vote of 367 to 10 passed H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.349-billion NASA appropriation [see May 18]. House rejected amendment by Rep. Rella S. Abzug (D-N.Y.) to delete $200 million for space shuttle. (CR, 5/23/72, H4896-924)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced renegotiation and extension of thermal protection contract with LTV Aerospace Corp. for advanced development of reinforced pyrolyzed plastics to protect space shuttle orbiter. About $493 500 would be added to previous funding for total study cost of $767 500. (msc Release 72-121)
Representatives of 12 nations at European Space Conference ministerial meeting in Brussels agreed in principle to participate in space shuttle phase of U.S. post-Apollo space program, support French plan to build L-35 launcher, and fuse European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) and European Space Research Organization (esro) into one agency by Jan. 1, 1974. Space programs of individual European countries would he blended into common European program with each country maintaining independent choice of what projects to join. Conference President Theo Lefevre, Belgian Minister of Space, commented at close of meeting, “For the first time I can say I am satisfied with the results of the space conference.” United Kingdom and West Germany, who had agreed to abandon plans for European launcher [see Dec. 8], did not rule out participation (esro Release, 1/19/73; NYT, 12/21/72)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1970, 1971, 1972 (nsf 71-35). Federal obligations for research and development (r&d) in 1970 totaled $15.3 billion excluding plant; slight rise to $15.4 billion was expected for 1971. Figure was decrease of 5% in constant dollars. Basic research obligations were expected to rise from $2.1 billion in 1970 to $2.2 billion for 1971 and $2.4 billion for 1972. Federal support for basic research declined in 1970 but was expected to reach new record highs for 1971 and 1972. Bulk of Federal basic research, 81%, was funded by NASA; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; National Science Foundation; Atomic Energy Commission; and Dept, of Defense. NASA had led in basic research support since 1961, with 29% of total in 1971. Applied research obligations totaled $3.5 billion in 1970 and were expected to rise to $3.8 billion for 1971, increase of 8%. Total was expected to reach $4.2 billion in 1972—all-time high in current dollars. dod, hew, and NASA continued to dominate Federal applied research effort and would account for 78% in 1971. Obligations for development totaled $9.7 billion in 1970 and would decline 3%, to $9.4 billion, in 1971. In 1972, Federal development total was scheduled to rise to $10.0 billion, or 1966 level, dod, nasa, and AEC were most prominent in Federal development effort in 1960-1972, accounting for 92% in 1971. dod funded 63%; nasa share had declined since 1965 to expected 19% for 1971. Although total Federal R&D obligations were expected to increase 9% from 1970 to 1972, nasa and aec decrease continued. NASA estimate for 1972, however, was smallest reduction since downward trend began in 1967. Report noted increases in key programs—Skylab, space shuttle, Viking Mars explorations, and unmanned missions to outer planets—had almost offset decreases in Apollo program. (Text)
Flight Research Center began test series to evaluate method of simulating space shuttle orbiter in flight at subsonic speeds. Tests would be conducted on FRc’s general-purpose airborne simulator (gpas)—converted subsonic jet transport equipped with electronic variable stability and control system. Flights would determine aircraft’s ability to match orbiter’s final approach path in steep descent from 9 km (5.6 mi) down to landing, (frc Release 21-72; frc pao)
Space shuttle was “investment in the future,” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, said in Aerospace article. Controversy over manned versus unmanned space flight had been “negated” by advancing technology that provided “entirely new approach to space operations.” Shuttle combined “advantages of man in the cycle with a degree of economy hitherto unobtainable.” Fundamental reason for shuttle program was “to make available a means of routine access to space, to remove the constraints imposed by an earlier level of technology, to progress from space adolescence to full maturity.” (Aerospace, 4/72, 3-9)
l/g John W. O’Neil, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command since 1969, would retire from Air Force Sept. 1, AFSC Newsreview reported. President Nixon had nominated as successor to Gen. O’Neil, m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who had also been nominated for promotion to grade of lieutenant general, (afsc Newsreview, 7/72, 1) August 1:	Launch of first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, Erts 1, and selection of prime contractor—North American Rockwell Corp.— for space shuttle system demonstrated “how we have begun to turn the space program . . . around, how we are returning to the home seas of space after 12 years of strenuous and highly successful effort to explore the Moon,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in letter to NASA staff. NASA would continue new direction with 1973 Skylab launch, joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, and first orbital flight of space shuttle in 1978. Additionally NASA would explore solar system with improved unmanned spacecraft, build and orbit improved unmanned observatories, and accelerate efforts to develop “basic new technology for the most promising space missions of the Eighties and Nineties. We will . . . maintain a balanced national space effort with our main area of concentration shifted from the Moon to Earth orbit.” (NASA Activities, 8/25/72, 160-1)
General Accounting Office released Cost-Benefit Analysis Used in Support of the Space Shuttle Program (B-173677). Review of analysis prepared for NASA by Mathematica, Inc., and used by NASA to justify shuttle development economics, had been requested by shuttle-foe Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.). GAO said it had “worked with estimates received from Mathematica for two representative configurations of the space shuttle,” solid-fuel and liquid-fuel reusable-booster shuttles; “made computations using NASA’s cost model developed by Mathematica to show the effect of increasing or decreasing selected critical areas within their plausible boundaries”; and “found that the two configurations were economically justified in terms of the 10-percent investment criterion proposed by Mathematica as the hasis for evaluating the Space Shuttle Program.” Investment criterion used was “space transportation system having the lowest total space program cost, considering the time value of money.” Use of criterion required selection of discount rate to consider time value of money. Mathematica had proposed 10% discount rate. (Text)
Final Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearing on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill heard testimony on space shuttle by Dr. Brian O’Brien, physicist and Chairman of nasa Space Program Advisory Council and of National Academy of Sciences’ Advisory Committee to Air Force Systems Command. Committee also heard shuttle testimony from Dr. Courtland D. Perkins, Chairman of Princeton Univ. of Dept, of Aerospace and Mechanical Sciences and Chairman of nasa Space Systems Committee. Dr. O’Brien said he believed shuttle would provide “space transportation system which can be available on short notice to meet unforeseen conditions which may result from world events, and . . . great flexibility in our space operations, whether civil or military.” It “should make possible a drastic reduction in cost of launches and in cost of payloads destined for earth orbit; while providing the opportunity for refurbishing or repairing satellites in orbit, or returning them to earth. In short, it should prove an invaluable tool in keeping us at the forefront in our operations in space.” Dr. Perkins said nothing NASA could do “could have a more profound effect on the total space program in the years ahead.” Shuttle would provide launch capability for nearly all programs, manned and unmanned, permitting elimination of large stable of rocket boosters and large complex of launch sites. Program provided strong signal to young scientists and engineers that U.S. wasn’t “about to throw away our carefully developed competence in space” and it was one of only few new national programs continuing “growth and stretch” in high technology. (Transcript)
Adelbert 0. Tischler, Director of Shuttle Technologies Office in NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), testified on progress of shuttle transportation system before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during NASA FY 1973 authorization hearings: “Methods for rapidly assessing the aero-heating and flight handling characteristics of the shuttle are being developed. A base for applying new design methods and for use of new materials in the sensitive problem of structural mass has been laid. Thermal protection systems, some comprising materials which were virtually unknown at the start of the program, will be brought to . . . technological readiness. The questions of long-lived propulsive and power equipment, suitable for repeated re-use, will be answered.” Computerized index and search procedure for access to all published shuttle technology was nearing completion. “While technology issues remain, the continuing progress of the technology program conducted by . . . NASA centers and industrial contractors is building a technological base that is far deeper and stronger than that which has heretofore underlain new development programs. This base . . . will assure successful Shuttle development.” David S. Gabriel, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office, described NASA-funded electrophysics research program conducted by Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Program was concerned “with understanding and, ultimately, using electrons, nuclei, atoms and molecules. Such work is of central importance to future sciences, for example, to laser beam generation, transmission and conversion; superconductivity; or plasma power devices.” In FY 1972, research had been completed on continuous-flow plasma accelerator to simulate spacecraft reentry conditions accurately, new contributions to understanding plasma turbulence had been made, knowledge of uranium plasma properties had been improved, and carbon monoxide lasers had been demonstrated to be highly efficient. New superconductor made up of thin films of vanadium and silicon had been discovered. For FY 1973 $3.4 million had been requested for programs in plasma dynamics, lasers, superconductivity, and nuclear physics. Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified that “clearly the space shuttle orbiter, a rather sophisticated piece of machinery, is not only a launch vehicle and a spacecraft but also a high speed airplane, with all the attendant considerations of aircraft-type control and landing. It offers NASA an opportunity to apply aerodynamic, structural, and materials technology that has been developing over the past 10 or 15 years for high performance aircraft. Reciprocally the shuttle work offers much to benefit aircraft in the next 10 to 15 years.” NASA had also capitalized on early Air Force technology oriented toward manned high-speed flight in the atmosphere as well as reentry into the atmosphere, such as Dyna-Soar and X-15 projects. Francis J. Sullivan—Director of Guidance, Control, and Information Systems in oast—testified on nuclear electric power system research for spacecraft: Nuclear electric power systems offered “attractive alternatives” to batteries for long-life orbiting systems, “in terms of minimizing structural constraints and the economic considerations of supplying several kilowatts of power. Current research is directed primarily toward two types of nuclear systems, isotope systems for low power levels of about 1 kilowatt, and the intermediate reactor power systems for levels in the range of several kilowatts up to 10-20 kilowatts.” Isotope systems were radioisotope thermoelectric generators (rtgs). Intermediate reactor power system consisted of zirconium hydride reactor to generate heat and thermoelectric power-conversion components to convert this heat into electricity. Program was directed toward reactor test in 1976-1977 period to demonstrate long-life capability. Stable performance had been achieved on thermoelectric converter test modules. Effort in FY 1973 would concentrate on verifying this performance. Conversion system would be developed for testing with the reactor to verify the integrated system performance. (Transcript)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified on space shuttle economics before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Following testimony by Dr. Oskar Morgen-stern, Chairman of Board of Mathematica, Inc., and Dr. Klaus P. Heiss of Mathematica, on corporation’s study of space shuttle economics [see Jan. 31], Dr. Lapp criticized calculations and said entire issue of launch vehicle choices for future should be restudied. He said shuttle payloads would average “10 times more expensive than their weight in solid gold.” Cost would be $5100 per 0,5 kg (1 lb) for launches 1979-1990. Cost projection prepared for NASA had indicated $7-billion saving for shuttle launches in program that would cost $42 billion using current methods, Dr. Lapp said. He added that no such $42-billion program had been authorized for the 1980s. U.S. taxpayers could save $19 billion by not building space shuttle and by using existing rockets for space program. (Transcript)
NASA held separate Headquarters debriefings for three losing aerospace firms in $2.6-billion space shuttle contract competition. North American Rockwell had won contract July 26. Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., told press after Grumman debriefing that his firm was unsuccessful largely because its shuttle design was more “conservative” than that of NR. Gavin said NASA officials had considered “mission suitability” and not management problems as weakness in Grumman bid. Grumman design had more complex swing arms to hold shuttle stationary before launch and lacked “background with large cryogenic tanking” used in shuttle’s fuel supply. Grumman design had also been more expensive than NR version. Spokesmen for other losers, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp., declined to comment after debriefings. [See also Oct. 4.] (Andelitnan, NYT, 8/8/72)
Washington Evening Star editorial supported space shuttle development: “Congress should go along with this proposed investment, knowing that if the country’s highly efficient space organization is killed, it will not easily be revived. There is still much work to be done on those peaceful cosmic frontiers that can spread many benefits and much inspiration on this troubled earth.” (W Star, 1/26/72, A17)
Wall Street Journal article criticized “strange aspects to NASA’s push for the shuttle.” Economic estimates of cost were “troublesome.” Some critics had charged that development costs might be “two to four times the $6 billion estimate of NASA. And the operating cost may not be as cheap as NASA says.” “Strangest” aspect of NASA argument was “agency’s almost total silence on the one space project for which the shuttle makes real sense—the permanent orbiting space station.” It had been assumed space station would be “keystone of any long-range space effort involving men” from beginning of space program. Project had been “shoved aside” in favor of manned lunar landing but “the moment that race was won . . . NASA pulled the space station plans back out.” It was easier to sell public $6-billion research and development program for “useful” space shuttle than $40-billion program for space station. But NASA’s “selling spiel” was “somewhat misleading.” Once $6-billion development program was finished shuttle would go into routine operation. “Plans call for 30 to 40 flights a year for 10 years. At $10.5 million a flight this comes to $30 billion to $40 billion— about the same in time and money as proposed for the space station.” Paper later acknowledged its arithmetical miscalculation and corrected total to “$3 billion to $4 billion,” but said corrected figure also was “misleading.” NASA estimate had projected $35 billion for shuttle program through 1990, including $12 billion for shuttle and $23 billion for payloads. (WSJ, 6/16/72, 10; 6/20/72)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., said he hoped to obtain SI billion worth of subcontracts in space shuttle program. New York Times said later that this was more than three times as much as North American Rockwell, winner of $2.6-billion prime contract, had tentatively allocated to all of New York State. (Witkin, NYT, 7/29/72)
NASA Space Shuttle Technology Conference was held in San Antonio, Tex., in conjunction with 13th Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and Society of Automotive Engineers. Topics discussed included aeroelasticity and loads, structure and liquid interactions, vehicle dynamics test and analysis, thermal protection systems, and structural design. Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was member of panel for high school students that discussed benefits to be derived in space shuttle use. (aiaa Release)
Leesburg, Fla., high school students Dale Delpit and Mike Holloway emerged after 6 days and 16 hrs in capsule built by their science class to simulate spacecraft. They had walked and slept on waterbed to simulate weightlessness and had eaten pre-prepared foods. Both boys, aged 14, emerged with wobbly knees and with charcoal on faces to look like astronauts’ beards. (W Star, 6/12/72, 20) April 12:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other NASA officials testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science-Veterans Appropriations during hearings on NASA FY 1973 appropriation. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, demonstrated model of space shuttle and explained configuration and costs. Dr. Fletcher said that in halving cost of original plans main sacrifice was that “we are not reusing all the parts. We use this expendable gas tank to supply the orbiter. . . . That, however, had an enormous effect on the size. We were able to bring the size of the orbiter down so that we were able to use solid fuel rockets.” Dr. Low added, “We sacrificed nothing in terms of what kinds of satellites, what kinds of payloads we can put into orbit.” Estimates of larger costs by shuttle opponents had been derived by adding in cost of “all the satellites it will carry, the weather satellites, the communications satellites, and all of those things that would be carried anyway, whether there is a Shuttle or not,” Dr. Low said. “And this could be likened to charging to the cost of a freight train the cost also of all of the freight that it is going to carry.” In reply to question on cooperation with U.S.S.R., Dr. Low cited decision to build docking and rendezvous systems compatible between U.S. and U.S.S.R. manned spacecraft. Shuttle “will have a system on it so it can attach to another satellite and we will make that system so it is the same as the Russians will use on their satellites, so that if we need to rescue each other ... or if we want to conduct joint experiments in space, we can do that.” Queried on comparison of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs, Dr. Fletcher said, “It is quite apparent that over the last 3 or 4 years, the Soviet space effort has grown in dollar volume and in number of launches per year, during the period that ours has declined. So that . . . they are spending quite a bit more in space than we are. It is estimated that perhaps 2 percent of their gross national product is spent for space, whereas a half of a percent of our GNP is spent on space. . . . Our number of launches per year has steadily declined from a peak of something [like] almost 80 in 1966, down to . . . the order of 30 or 35 in 1970 and 1971; whereas, the number of their launches has steadily climbed . . . and is now higher than even our peak. In 1971, they launched over 80 spacecraft, whereas our launches were down to less than half that.” (Transcript)
U.S. had withdrawn invitation to 10 European nations to build space tug, Today reported. Paper said European Space Research Organization (esro) and European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) representatives had been told by U.S. that U.S. preferred to build tug (reusable propulsion system to be put into low earth orbit by space shuttle, to deliver and retrieve payloads) [see June 14]. Paper quoted NASA sources as saying European firms lacked funds and advanced technology to construct tug that could be launched from shuttle to send a satellite into synchronous 35 000-km (22 000-mi)-altitude orbit. {Today, 6/22/72)
Senate passed H.R. 14070, $3.444-billion NASA FY 1973 authorization bill, after adopting amendment by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) that increased allocation for aeronautical research and development by $24 million. Increase included $21 million for program to design and demonstrate certifiable modifications to retrofit existing civil aircraft for quieter performance and $3 million for aircraft collision avoidance. Senate rejected, by vote of 61 to 21, amendment by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to delete $228 million requested for space shuttle development. (CR, 5/11/72, S7698-7763)
Space program costs were recounted for press by unidentified NASA spokesman at Manned Spacecraft Center. U.S. had spent more than $26,657 billion on manned space program in past 15 yrs and planned to spend $8.85 billion in next 5 yrs. Apollo series—most expensive program—would cost $25 billion through completion of Apollo 17. Gemini program had cost $1283.4 million and Mercury, $392.1 million. Skylab was expected to cost $2.6 billion, and early estimates for space shuttle program were $6.1 billion. NASA had saved $1.5 billion by eliminating Apollo 18, 19, and 20. (upi, NYT, 12/12/72, 38)
Delivery to Dulles International Airport of arts iii—computerized automated radar terminal system to improve air traffic handling in busy terminal areas—was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. System processed radar beacon signals emitted by airborne transponders giving aircraft identity and altitude and presented information on radar displays for air traffic controllers, (faa Release 72-19) January 30:	First of four lunar eclipses to occur during 1972 was partially visible in portions of North and South America. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory spokesman said later that 37-min eclipse was not seen over Northeastern U.S. because of cloud cover. (NYT, 1/29/72, 19; 1/31/72, 3) January 31—February 23: European Space Research Organization’s 117-kg (257-lb) Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite was launched by NASA from Western Test Range by three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta (DSV-3L) booster at 9:20 am pst. Orbital parameters: 244 011-km (151621.4-mi) apogee, 416-km (258.5-mi) perigee, and 90.2° inclination. All vehicle systems monitored during launch functioned normally. Second burn of 2nd stage and ignition and burnout of 3rd stage occurred over Indian Ocean south of African continent. By Feb. 6 all flight experiments had been turned on and were working properly and all spacecraft systems were still functioning normally Feb. 23. On Feb. 18 NASA officially judged mission successful. Primary NASA objective was to place spacecraft into orbit that would permit successful achievement of esro scientific objectives and provide tracking and telemetry support. Satellite—16-sided cylinder with 70% of its outer surface covered with solar cells—carried seven experiments to investigate strength and direction of magnetic fields, energy distribution of protons and electrons, and nature of solar winds; make very-low-frequency solar observations; and detect micrometeorites. Heos 2 was second heos mission. Heos 1 had been launched Dec. 5, 1968, and was still in orbit. After orbital insertion, spacecraft was controlled from European Space Operations Center (esoc) and tracked by European Space Tracking Stations (estrack). European Space Technology Center (estec) was responsible for project management and would reimburse NASA $6.6 million for booster and prelaunch and launch support services, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-17; GSFC SSR, 1/31/72) January 31:	Mathematica, Inc., published Economic Analysis of the Space Shuttle System. Report of study directed by Klaus P. Heiss and Oskar Morgenstern under nasa contract concluded development of space shuttle system was economically feasible assuming level of space activity equal to average of U.S. unmanned space program of past eight years; thrust-assisted orbiter shuttle (taos) with external hydrogen and oxygen tanks was economically preferred choice among current shuttle configurations; and choice of thrust assist for orbiter shuttle was still open, with pressure-fed boosters and solid-fuel rocket motors, either using parallel burn, as main economic alternatives. Third economic choice was use of series-burn boosters. (Text)
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)
Extension of McDonnell Douglas Corp. contract for design study of space shuttle orbiter auxiliary propulsion systems to include study of earth-storable propellants was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Extension increased contract value to $576 000 and carried it through Oct. 15, 1972. (msc Release 72-101)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., said in interview that 1500 employees might lose jobs because of award of NASA space shuttle contract to competitor, North American Rockwell Corp. [see July 26]. First layoffs at Bethpage, N.Y., plant might come in three weeks, with 200 employees affected. Labor officials later noted that action could affect as many as 8000 workers, including fringe concerns. (Andelman, NYT, 7/28/72)
European Space Research Organization would use preliminary definition study of sortie laboratory for space shuttle application as basis for future negotiations with nasa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Study, to be performed by Dornier, was part of European effort to participate in post-Apollo program. (Av Wk, 10/30/72, 9)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Aerojet-General Corp., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Co., and United Technology Center to receive separate, two-month, $150 000 study contracts to analyze possible use of solid-fuel motors with 305- and 396-cm (120- and 156-in) diameters to power space shuttle booster. (msfc Release 72-4)
Award of $400 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Bell Aerospace Corp. for space shuttle orbiter reaction control system (rcs) was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Bell would supply Air Force Minute-man III post-boost propulsion system technology to rcs requirements. (msc Release 72-109)
U.S. Comptroller General Elmer B. Staats said in letter to NASA Administrator, Dr. James C. Fletcher, that General Accounting Office had determined July 13, 1971, NASA award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. had been fair. “We believe the procurement was conducted in a manner which was consistent with applicable law and regulations and was fair to all proposers.” Award had been challenged by competing firm, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. (Text)
Edward P. Andrews, Manager of Skylab Spacecraft and Sky lab Launch Vehicles at NASA Hq., became Director of Systems Operation in Space Shuttle Program. (NASA Activities, 5/15/72, 105)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other officials testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 NASA authorization hearings. Dr. Fletcher said: “I regard the fiscal year 1973 budget . . . as marking the end of a difficult transition period for NASA. For the past 2 or 3 years, NASA, the executive branch, and the Congress have been grappling with questions on the course the Nation’s space program should take in the 1970’s and beyond. The main goals in science, exploration, and applications, and the advanced system and technology required to achieve these goals, have been identified . . . and generally approved .... But there has remained a basic uncertainty . . . the question of cost. Can the Nation afford the space program of the 1970’s? Will the approval of the Space Shuttle and the other programs . . . commit the Nation to a large increase in future spending levels? “This year we can give clear answers to these questions. We can assure the committee, the Congress, and the public that the program we are proposing does not commit the country to higher budget levels in future years, at least measured in current dollars .... The revised plan is, I believe, more realistic and will give the Nation a good, viable, and balanced program in aeronautics and space at a cost it can afford.” Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, reported substantial progress in two basic cooperative activities with U.S.S.R.—joint work on compatible docking systems and exchanges in scientific areas, including lunar sample exchanges. In response to question, Dr. Low said he thought it likely U.S.S.R. would continue lunar program after U.S. completed Apollo program. “They may even try to land men on the moon in the latter part of this decade. That will be a catching-up process.” To further question, Dr. Fletcher said that in late 1970s U.S.S.R. would be “doing things in the manned space program that are beyond what we would be able to do.” From end of Skylab in 1973 until 1978, “it is likely that they will be carrying on some important activity and we will have no opportunity to respond until 1978” [with space shuttle]. Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, submitted statement on NASA’s work force: “When several reductions are made serially, as they have been in NASA over the past several years, the effects compound, and the healing processes, such as the resumption of hiring of younger people, the filling of vacancies via merit promotion ... do not have an opportunity to function.” NASA was “feeling these disadvantageous effects severely.” Most worrying was “dwindling of the supply of new blood.” It was obvious “trend cannot continue without the health and vigor of the organization being undermined.” NASA needed “to embark upon a period of stability” in work force to “return to normal personnel development practices, heal the damage of the past several years, and be prepared to meet the challenges of the 70’s.” With the “prospect of a period of relative stability in the general level of spending” and “clearer view of the NASA forward mission,” such a policy was indicated. Statement submitted by Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, described NASA Regional Dissemination Centers’ assistance to users “ranging from small businesses to the largest companies in our Nation’s economy— across a broad spectrum of business sectors including manufacturing services, transportation and communications. The Centers also serve university faculty and students; varied national, state, and local organizations; and governmental entities at all levels.” NASA RDCs had served more than 2000 organizations in 1971, of which over 48% of industrial users were small businesses. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), NASA Director of Facilities, submitted statement on facilities. In $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities, $27.9 million was for modifications and additions to facilities for space shuttle, $11.2 million for facilities supporting scientific investigations in space, $12.9 million for facilities supporting aeronautical research and technology, and $25.3 million for smaller supporting activities and planning and design. (Transcript)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of two requests for proposals for space shuttle heating contracts. One request was for design study of ablative materials with low density to protect space shuttle orbiter and one was for design and construction of heating unit to produce high temperatures for testing materials used externally on shuttle, (msc Releases 72-24, 72-25)
Houston Post editorial commented on international aspects of space program: “The history of the world has provided few efforts more conducive to worldwide participation than space exploration. Its benefits are mutual. The space shuttle is emerging as a practical, selfsupporting project and needs wider participation. Meanwhile, space investigations need to be continued. An international space agency would seem to be a practical way to perpetuate what the U.S. and Russia have started.” (H Post, 12/8/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center awarded two parallel, firm-fixed-price contracts for study of aircraft that could simulate subsonic flight characteristics of space shuttle orbiter. Grumman Aerospace Corp. would receive $150 000 and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Georgia Div. would receive $149 000 to provide sufficient data to assure NASA that proposed shuttle training aircraft was technically feasible and acceptable and that recommended design could meet specified requirements, (msc Release 72-147)
NASA test pilot Gary E. Krier flew modified F-8 jet fighter equipped with digital-fly-by-wire control system from Flight Research Center in first flight test of aircraft that was completely dependent on electronic control system. Aircraft had no mechanical backup control system. Purpose of flight, limited to maximum speed of 680 km per hr (425 mph) and maximum altitude of 6000 m (20 000 ft), was to check out aircraft’s primary and secondary flight control system. Fly-by-wire system with digital computer and inertial measuring unit had been developed originally for Apollo lunar module and was designated for future use in space shuttle to ensure smoother flight. (nasa Release 72—112)
NASA achievements in 1972 were reviewed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in letter to staff. NASA had received “great vote of confidence from the President, the Congress, and the country” in assignment to develop space shuttle. Assignment had been “most appropriate” in year when Apollo program would be concluded and was “a new challenge . . . worthy of the one we are about to complete.” Year 1972 had also been one of “great decision” because in NASA FY 1973 budget “we have also won approval for the concept of a well-rounded space program, with funding for significant progress in all major fields of space activity during this decade. We will stress practical benefits from spacecraft in Earth orbit in this decade and the next. But we will also build greatly improved spacecraft to study the universe from Earth orbit and to explore throughout the solar system.” NASA might be “moving faster with a bigger budget, but I don’t see how we could be doing a better job.” (NASA Activities, 11/15/72, 224)
Apparent U.S. decision not to seek European participation in shuttle development was discussed by Nicholas Valery in British publication New Scientist: “By all accounts it seems that just as Britain and her continental partners were deciding whether to accept America’s invitation to join the post-Apollo space programme, Washington has slammed the door smartly in their face. Having used the idea of international participation—ostensibly to ease the burden on the US taxpayer—as a means of winning congressional support for its re-usable space shuttle, NASA is now quietly letting it be known that it has no intention of letting Europe get its hands on anything technologically important.” (New Scientist [London], 7/6/72)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released statement from San Clemente, Calif., following President’s announcement of decision to proceed with development of space shuttle. Decision was consistent with NASA FY 1972 budget and was “a most historic step in the nation’s space program—it will change the nature of what man can do in space. By the end of this decade the nation will have the means of getting men and equipment to and from space routinely, on a moment’s notice if necessary, and at a small fraction of today’s cost. This will be done within the framework of a useful total space program of science, exploration, and applications at approximately the present overall level of the space budget.” Dr. Fletcher described shuttle as “airplane-like orbiter, about the size of a DC—9 . . . capable of carrying into orbit and back again to earth useful payloads up to 15 feet [4.6 metersl in diameter by 60 feet [18 meters] long, and weighing up to 65,000 lbs [29 500 kg]. Fuel for the orb iter’s liquid-hydrogen liquid-oxygen engines will be carried in an external tank that will be jettisoned in orbit.” Orbiter would be launched by unmanned booster and would operate in space for one week, during which crew could launch, service, or recover unmanned spacecraft; would perform experiments; and, in future, would resupply and restaff space modules brought to space by shuttle. He cited reasons “space shuttle is important and is the right step in manned space flight and the U.S. space program.” First, “the shuttle is the only meaningful new manned space program which can be accomplished on a modest budget. Second, the space shuttle is needed to make space operations less complex and less costly. Third, the space shuttle is needed to do useful things. Fourth, the shuttle will encourage greater international participation in space flight.” Dr. Fletcher said NASA and contractors would focus until late February on technical areas, including comparisons of pressure-fed liquid- and solid-fuel rocket-motor options for shuttle’s booster stage, before NASA issued requests for proposals in the spring. “This summer we will place the space shuttle under contract and development work will start.” At press conference in San Clemente following release of shuttle statements, Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Low discussed President’s decision. Dr. Fletcher said President was “particularly anxious that I stress the international aspects of this. This program will be open to all nations of the world, and it is his hope some day that foreign visitors from all over the world will be able to participate by moving to and from space in the space shuttle.” NASA anticipated that “at its peak, the direct employment on the space shuttle will be of the order of 50,000 individuals. Of course, a great many of those will be employed in this area.” Responding to question, Dr. Fletcher said decision on shuttle launch site, “which will be the same as the landing site,” depended on recommendation of launch site selection group. “It is not necessarily Cape Kennedy or any other site at this time.” (Text: Transcript)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on July 26 award of space shuttle contract to North American Rockwell Corp.: Argument over shuttle economics continued but “decision has already been made, as a practical matter, in favor of the shuttle. That is good news for the California economy in general, and aerospace workers in particular. But, more than that, it signals the country’s decision to continue the exploration of space.” (LA Times, 7/28/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract awards for space shuttle work. Three companies had been awarded six-month extensions to contracts for continued development of new surface materials for shuttle orbiter stage. McDonnell Douglas Corp. received $350 000, General Electric Co. Aerospace Group $346 000, and Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. $345 000. Companies would deliver to msc sample tiles of rigidized reusable surface insulation for special testing. cci Aerospace Corp. Marquardt Co. had been awarded $181 846, cost-plus-fixed-fee, research and development contract to study helium regulator systems that could be used by shuttle orbiter. Martin Marietta Corp. had received $130 000, firm-fixed-price, R&D contract to design, build, and test couch to be used by passengers on shuttle, (msc Releases 72-145, 72-146, 72-148)
Senate Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.432-billion NASA appropriation. Senate appropriation was $24 million above budget request of $3,408 billion and increase of $82.4 million over House appropriation of $3,349 billion voted May 23. Senate version raised appropriation for research and development (r&d) $74.9 million above House version, to $2,624 billion. Construction of facilities funds were increased by $7.5 million, to $77.3 million. Research and program management funds remained unchanged. Of r&d appropriation increase, $24 million was for aeronautical research in noise abatement and aviation safety and $50.9 million to restore funds deleted in House bill from other NASA research programs. Construction of facilities increase restored funds deleted in House bill—$5.5 million requested by NASA for modification of space shuttle manufacturing and final assembly facilities and $2 million for planning and design. Shuttle funds would support orbiter assembly and external hydrogen and oxygen tank manufacture, baselined “for estimating purposes” at Michoud Assembly Facility, one of possible sites for either or both of these functions. (S Rpt92-820)
Decision that space shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rocket motors in parallel burn configuration, rather than by pressure-fed liquid-fueled rocket motor, was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Announcement was also released to press during morning and Dr. Fletcher held press conference in afternoon. Dr. Fletcher said both solid- and liquid-fueled boosters had been found technically feasible but “choice was made in favor of the solid parallel burn because of the lower development cost and the lower technical risks. Cost estimate for shuttle development was now $5.15 billion instead of earlier $5.5-billion estimate. Request for proposals would be issued about March 17. nasa expected to select shuttle launch and landing site shortly. At press conference he said: “I think we have made the right decision at the right time. And I think it is the right price.” Dr. Fletcher said it was likely NASA would want to launch and land at same coastal site and possibly from sites on both coasts. Inland sites were unlikely because of requirement for booster recoverability. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at conference there would be eight-week response time to request for proposals to become prime contractor for shuttle development. NASA would evaluate proposals in another eight weeks and would be ready for choice of contractor in early July. Requirements had been developed jointly with Air Force and “we have a shuttle that meets the user’s requirements, both in NASA and in the Air Force.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, estimated breakdown of 580 shuttle flights projected over 12-yr period for newsmen. Out of 100% of missions, 26% would be manned or man-tended, 74% unmanned. Of that 74%, 27% would be for applications (including NASA and other agencies or commercial applications), 25% for science, and 22% for Dept, of Defense missions. (Hearings transcript; Press conference transcript)
Decision to plan large multipurpose optical telescope to be launched and serviced by space shuttle in 1980s was announced by NASA. Large Space Telescope (lst) to study energy processes in galactic nuclei, early stages of stellar and solar system formation, supernova remnants and white dwarfs, and other phenomena relevant to origin of universe would also provide long-term monitoring of atmospheric phenomena on Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Telescope, able to observe galaxies 100 times fainter than those seen by most powerful ground-based optic telescope, would weigh between 9000 and 11000 kg (20 000 and 25 000 lbs) and have length of 12 to 16 m (40 to 52 ft) and diameter of 3.6 to 4 m (12 to 13 ft). It would include diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter. LST project management had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 72—98)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced agreement with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Huntsville Div. to provide facility design and construction support as needed by msfc for space shuttle program, (msfc Release 72-61)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial commented on space shuttle decision: “Man’s ability to perform capably in a prolonged state of weightlessness has yet to be proven and until it is the arguments for a large shuttle program must remain inconclusive. Beyond this, the recent agreements between this country and the Soviet Union to exchange biomedical and other space data and to work toward compatible docking systems would seem to make a full scale shuttle program a prime candidate for a co-operative enterprise.” (St Louis P-D, 1/11/72) January 12:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 471 from Baykonur into orbit with 317-km (197-mi) apogee, 194-km (120.5-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 25 (gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; SBD, 1/13/72, 51)
Astronauts Edgar D. Mitchell and James B. Irwin announced plans to resign from NASA and military. Mitchell, Navy captain, had been lunar module (lm) pilot on Apollo 14 (Jan. 31—Feb. 9, 1971). Irwin, Air Force colonel, had been lm pilot on Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) and was backup pilot for Apollo 17, scheduled for launch in December. Because of Irwin’s plans to retire, new backup crew for Apollo 17 had been named, effective July 1: John W. Young, Stuart A. Roosa, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Original Apollo 17 backup crew was David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and Irwin. Scott, Worden, and Thomas K. Mattingly II had been assigned to Space Shuttle Program in Manned Spacecraft Center Astronaut Office. Mattingly, who recently had become a father, had requested' assignment which would allow him more time with his family during next six months, (nasa Release 72-110)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced three contract awards. Grumman Aerospace Corp. had been awarded 15-mo, $200 000 fixed-price, research and development contract to continue to design, build, and test space shuttle orbiter heating systems. Singer Co. had been awarded $135 530 firm-fixed-price contract to study and define simulator requirements for space shuttle mission simulator. McDonnell Douglas Corp. Astronautics Co. had received $181 000 contract for design study of orbital maneuvering system (oms) to maneuver space shuttle orbiter in space, (msc Releases 72-157, 72-158, 72-159)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp discussed space shuttle economics in letter published in Science. Cost and purpose of shuttle’s projected 900-metric-ton (1000-short-ton) payload over 10 yrs needed careful evaluation “before the nation plunges ahead on a space project whose cost may well eclipse that of the Apollo program.” Assuming NASA could slash payload costs to $2000 per 0.5 kg (1 lb), “then 20 million pounds [9 million kg] in orbit represent a national investment of $40 billion.” Shuttle development cost of $5.5 billion plus deployment and operation of shuttle system would cost from $11 to $16 billion. NASA estimate of less than $100 for lifting 0.5 kg (1 lb) of payload from earth to orbit was “easily disputed.” Estimate of $11 billion for shuttle cost divided by 9 million kg amounted to $550 per 0.5 kg and not much less than the $700 per 0.5 kg that existing NASA launch vehicles had cost. Only “if orbital payloads can be reduced so they cost only several times more per pound than gold, is it meaningful to seek cheaper space transportation. Even then the nation ought to be asking what kind of space program is the space shuttle designed to support.” (Science, 3/3/72, 944)
Senate confirmed nominations of Kenneth Rush as Deputy Secretary of Defense and of Eberhardt Rechtin as Assistant Secretary of Defense (Telecommunications). {CR, 2/3/73; dod Directory, Spring 1973) February 4:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of one-month $l-million interim contract extension to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for space shuttle main engine. Contract was awarded pending completion of General Accounting Office review of original $500-million contract awarded July 13, 1971. Review had been requested by competing contractor, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., on Aug. 3, 1971. (msfc Release 72-9; A&A 1971)
