Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for proposals for space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motor (srm) development to Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and United Technology Center. Technical proposals were due Aug. 27 and cost proposals Aug. 30. The program would include increments for design, development, and test (including production of sufficient hardware for six development flights) ; for production of new and refurbished SRMs for 54 flights; and for delivery of new and refurbished units for 385 flights., (nasa Release 73-133)
Two European space consortiums were in competition to develop the manned spacelab to be flown on the U.S. space shuttle, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Groups led by ERNO—VFW—Fokker and Messerschmitt-Boeklow-Blohm GmbH were in Phase B studies to define Spacelab (sortie lab) costs and configurations. The studies would end in July to allow the European Space Research Organization to decide on supporting Spacelab development. ERNO planned to offer two Spacelab configurations. One would be certain of meeting the established cost criteria. The second would be more expensive but technically more advanced. The MBB system used a common support system of a single module housing all general-purpose subsystems, with separate individual payload systems inserted as needed. Scientific payloads could be prepared independently of launch cycle constraints. One set of payload experiments could return to earth and another set be slid into place within two weeks. (Av Wk, 4/9/73, 22)
A five-week Ames Research Center experiment to determine women’s qualifications for space flight had shown women to be as physically fit for travel in weightlessness as men, NASA announced. The experiment— in which 8 of 12 Air Force flight nurses had two weeks of total bed rest in weightlessness simulation, while 4 acted as ambulatory controls—was one of a series to investigate responses to space flight conditions, looking forward to use of the space shuttle by other than pilot-trained astronauts. NASA emphasized that the test was to determine women’s qualifications for space flight and did not represent a commitment to add women to the astronaut corps. Dr. Harold Sandler, head of the experiment team, said the bedridden nurses were weaker after the experiment and showed a 50% reduction in their tolerance to various stresses. “But the same is true of men astronauts.” (nasa Release 73-218; AP, P Inq, 10/25/73)
An Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation in space shuttle development was signed in Paris by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. The agreement included European funding and development of the Spacelab for the space shuttle. A NASA-European Space Research Organization (esro) Memorandum of Understanding that supplemented the agreement was initialed by NASA and ESRO representatives in Europe. The memorandum would be signed in Washington, D.C., by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Alexander Hocker, esro Director General, Sept. 24. (nasa Release 73-191; nasa Int Aff)
New York Federal Court Judge Edward Wienfeld dismissed the $2-million libel suit brought by Dr. W. Ross Adey, Univ. of California at Los Angeles brain research specialist, against New York-based animal welfare organization United Action for Animals [see Jan. 22]. The organization’s bulletin had criticized Dr. Adey’s treatment of Bonny, the instrumented monkey used to measure life functions under weightlessness during the NASA-Air Force Biosatellite 3 experiment (launched June 28, 1969). Judge Wienfeld said that, as a public official, Dr. Adey “must accept harsh criticism, ofttimes unfair and unjustified.” (upi, W Post, 6/27/73, A10) June 26:	Johnson Space Center’s selection of a United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. TF33—P—‘7 engine for use on the space shuttle orbiter in atmospheric flight was announced by NASA. The engine was similar to those used on the Air Force C-141 Starlifter transport aircraft. The USAF would secure 25 engines for NASA use during horizontal flight-testing of the orbiter and for ferry flight when the shuttle was operational, (nasa Release 73-121)
Selection of 36 scientists, representing 27 organizations and 4 countries, to define experiments for the Large Space Telescope to be launched by the space shuttle in the 1980s was announced by NASA. The instrument evaluation teams had been selected after evaluation of 118 proposals submitted to NASA’s Space Science and Applications Steering Committee. (nasa Release 73-109)
A New York Times editorial praised Skylab 3’s solar observations: “The special value of the observations on the sun arises from that body’s extraordinary behavior this month.” An unexpected burst of tremendous solar activity had occurred. “An unprecedented wealth of data on this startling phenomenon [had] been gathered . . . , which should contribute significantly to helping scientists understand the physics and chemistry of the vast celestial body that is the source of almost all the energy available on earth.” (NYT, 9/23/73) September 24:	A Memorandum of Understanding on international cooperation in NASA’s space shuttle program was signed in Washington, D.C., by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Alexander Hocker, Director General of the European Space Research Organization (esro) . Nine ESRO-member countries would design, develop, manufacture, and deliver a Spacelab flight unit to be carried in the space shuttle orbiter. The Spacelab would comprise a pressurized manned laboratory module and an instrument platform, or pallet, to support telescopes, antennas, and other equipment requiring direct space exposure. The Spacelab would be transported to and from orbit in the orbiter payload bay and would be attached to and supported by the shuttle orbiter throughout 7- to 30-day missions. At the mission’s end, the Spacelab would be removed and prepared for its next mission. The estimated $300-million to $400-million Spacelab cost would be borne by Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland—the European nations that signed, with the U.S., the Intergovernmental Agreement for space shuttle cooperation [see Aug. 14]. The agreement was open for signatures by other nations as well. Under Memorandum of Understanding terms NASA would manage all operational activities, including crew training and flight operations, following delivery of the Spacelab unit in late 1978, about one year before the space shuttle’s scheduled first operational flight. NASA planned to carry a European flight crew member on the first shuttle flight and subsequent European flight crew opportunities would be provided in conjunction with ESRO or ESRO-member-govern-ment projects. NASA would make the shuttle available for Spacelab missions on either cooperative or cost-reimbursable basis. NASA would procure from ESRO any additional Spacelab units needed for U.S. programs and would not develop any further units duplicating the Spacelab’s design and capabilities. Final signature of the Memorandum of Understanding having established the cooperative Spacelab program, NASA had decided to use Spacelab terminology. Steps were instituted to change designations of the Sortie Lab Task Force and Task Team at Marshall Space Flight Center to Spacelab Task Force and Task Team, (nasa Release 73-191; nasa Shuttle Off, omsf; Spacelab Newsletter, 9/26/73)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on cooperation with the Dept, of Defense during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization: nasa and dod were evaluating alternative vehicles to the space tug and development approaches that could provide the capability to transport shutde payloads to and from higher-than-earth orbits, or propel payloads to earth-escape velocity. A joint decision would be made in the fall as to which agency would conduct the development of “this very important propulsive stage.” Air Force personnel had been assigned to the space shuttle program offices, and NASA personnel served in a liaison capacity at the Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso). Civilian and military representatives of DOD served on source evaluation boards and working groups on aerodynamics, structure, propulsion, crew systems, electronics, and operations. dod sponsored special industry and in-house studies such as payload requirements, security, and crew safety, dod also provided results of research in solid rocket technology, lifting bodies, thermal protection, and similar topics. (Transcript)
Kennedy Space Center requested bids from 50 construction firms on the 4600-m (15 000-ft) runway to be built for the space shuttle northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. The runway would be the first facility built in reshaping Launch Complex 39 for its new role in the shuttle program. Bids were to be opened Feb. 22, 1974. (icsc Release 7-74)
NASA announced the selection of Thiokol Corp. for negotiation of a $106million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for design, development, test, and evaluation of the solid-fueled rocket motors for the space shuttle. The six-year contract would run through 1979. (nasa Release 73-258)
NASA’s 15th anniversary year—memorable for advances in earth resources technology, aeronautics progress, expanded international cooperation in space, and increased promise for future manned and unmanned planetary exploration—boosted the U.S. space program from the spectacular orbit of Apollo lunar exploration to a steady program of extended service to science and mankind. Skylab’s triumph heralded the approach of the shuttle era that would weld with the earth the vast regions of near-earth space, extending man’s transportation system into regions beyond land, sea, and air. The newest Pioneer probes began penetration into the mysteries of outer planetary space. Budget restrictions in line with President Nixon’s January 1250-billion target for total Government spending slowed space shuttle manpower buildup, suspended work on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory, and required phase-out of communications satellite work and curtailment of work on nuclear propulsion. But Skylab, the space shuttle, the scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the Viking, the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, and many applications and aeronautics projects were retained in a balanced and productive program. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for the past seven years and member of the NASA staff since October 1958, retired at the end of the year. Dr. Newell had been Science Program Coordinator in the Nation’s first satellite program, the Naval Research Laboratory’s Project Vanguard, before establishment of NASA. Tight funding and the near completion of the Skylab missions brought a net reduction in NASA Civil Service employees of 1646, including retirements, during the calendar year, with a total 25 598 on board Jan. 5, 1974. Headquarters employees dropped by a net change of 80, Kennedy Space Center by 117, Johnson Space Center by 110, Marshall Space Flight Center by 374, Ames Research Center by 49, Flight Research Center by 13, Langley Research Center by 62, Lewis Research Center by 494 (with the phasing down of Plum Brook Station), Goddard Space Flight Center by 289, and Wallops Station by 14. aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office was closed with the end of the nerva program. Further reductions of 628—including 405 at msfc and 200 at LeRC—were scheduled in 1974, to bring the FY 1974 end-of-year total to the required 24 970 ceiling. Aerospace industry employment in the Nation increased to 946 000 in June but declined to 935 000 by the year’s end. Techniques developed for aerospace activities were applied to earthquake prediction, development of residential solar heating, and fuelsaving integrated systems for housing. NASA added 550 technical briefs to its more than 5000 technical innovations already available for U.S, industry use. More than 68 000 U.S. industrial and commercial firms requested additional data on these innovations. Some 3000 firms spent $625 000 for special assistance from nasa’s Regional Dissemination Centers; 1500 firms purchased 1891 computer programs and related documentation for $221 530. NASA liberalized its patent-licensing procedures to speed technology transfer and during 1973 five exclusive patent licenses, the largest number since the program’s inception, were granted. A nasa liaison office was opened in New York City to work directly with city agencies on public safety, drug detection, and fire prevention. A rechargeable heart pacemaker was developed under nasa auspices by the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Electronic components designed for space use were incorporated in the device, which could be recharged at home by the patient, eliminating the need for surgery every two years to replace conventional devices. A new radio transmitter temperature pill allowed doctors to check localized internal body temperature changes. A portable visual testing device permitted early detection of eye disorders. A test hospital room for paralyzed patients used space-developed devices for remote operation of communications systems and appliances. The nasa FY 1974 appropriation of $3,002 billion was $13.9 million below the budget request, $62.4 million below the $3.0645-billion FY 1973 authorization, and $406 million below the FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion. (A&A 1972; A&A 1973; Aerospace, 2/74, 6-11; nasa Off Comptroller; nasa Off of Admin; NASA SP-5119; nasa Release 73281)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced receipt of proposals from five firms for a contract for design, procurement, fabrication, installation, and checkout of a data-acquisition system to support space shuttle structural testing. The firms were Avco Corp., Computer Science Corp., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Systems Engineering Laboratories, and Wyle Laboratories. The contract would be awarded in October, (msfc Release 73—107)
The General Accounting Office released Comptroller General!s Report to the Congress: Analysis of Cost Estimates for the Space Shuttle and Two Alternate Programs. The review, made by GAO at the request of Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), said gao was “not convinced that the choice of a launch system should be based principally on cost comparisons” and “not certain that the Space Shuttle is economically justified (is less costly when the time value of money is considered), even though NASA’s calculations show that it is.” Payload cost was the major element in program cost estimates for both the shuttle and alternate use of existing expendable launch vehicles. NASA had estimated $30.2 billion for the shuttle and $50.1 billion for the expendable systems. The $19.9-billion difference was due to estimated low-cost design of shuttle payloads which could be recovered, refurbished, and reused. GAO recommended that Congress “consider the future space missions used in NASA’s economic analysis ... to determine whether these missions are a reasonable basis for space program planning at this time” and “review the estimates for the Space Shuttle annually, giving due consideration to the appropriateness of the missions used in making those estimates.” {CR, 6/8/73, S10703^1)
The Manned Spacecraft Center had awarded a shuttle contract to Charles S. Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the MSC Roundup reported. The Laboratory had received a $1 375 484 cost-no-fee contract to provide technical support for guidance, navigation, and control subsystems in space shuttle program, (msc Roundup, 2/16/73, 1)
U.S.S.R. sounding rocket launchings, first step in joint Soviet-French meteorological studies, had begun from French Kerguelen Island, Tass reported. The first rocket had studied a vertical cross-section of the atmosphere over the island and reported temperature, pressure, and wind velocity in the upper atmosphere. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/9/73, LI) March 7:	Elements of the space shuttle preliminary bioresearch laboratory simulator had been delivered to Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. Equipment would be installed aboard the payload carrier simulator for testing. The bioresearch laboratory model, the first shuttle-era payload to be delivered for testing and integration at msfc, included a mass-measurement and microscopy unit, preparation unit, centrifuge, cryogenic freezer for storage of tissue, and an instrument for freeze-drying tissue, (msfc Release 73-31)
In its program of international cooperation, NASA launched Anik 2 domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada and Intelsat-IV F—7 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. A significant milestone was the Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation on Spacelab, signed by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. To be funded and developed by nine members of the European Space Research Organization, the Spacelab would be carried into orbit by NASA’s space shuttle orbiter and would accommodate experiments and personnel on missions of 7 to 30 days. Notable progress was made in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, with the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission on schedule for July 1975 launch. Working groups met in both countries and a November Moscow meeting familiarized eight U.S. astronauts with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. Docking system designs were essentially completed and all hardware construction was on schedule. Joint dynamic testing of test units began at Johnson Space Center. Flight crews were selected in both countries. Eighty-three nations entered into Definitive Agreements for intelsat, permanently establishing the global communications satellite system envisioned in the U.S. Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Scientists from other nations cooperated in nasa studies ranging from investigations of the solar system to practical applications of space technology. Erts 1 and Skylab environment and resources data were used throughout the world. Scientists from 37 countries and the United Nations participated in Erts 1 experiments and Brazil and Canada established their own erts data-acquisition facilities. Four foreign experiments were carried on Skylab missions and foreign scientists participated in the Apollo solar telescope program and in correlated astronomy sounding rocket programs. Scientists in 19 countries and the U.N. participated in 40 Skylab data-analysis investigations. German and Australian scientists were coinvestigators for Pioneer 11 experiments and French and U.K. scientists for Mariner 10. Investigators from 40 nations and esro were selected to participate in the Apollo 17 lunar sample program. A joint working group of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and nasa held the third and fourth meetings on space biology and medicine, exchanging information on manned space flight. Parallel communications channels using Intelsat and Molniya comsat systems were planned for 1974 to support the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Direct Communications Link, with construction of earth stations in both countries for access to each other’s satellites. Work went forward for future cooperative satellite projects. Agreement was reached with Italy to fly San Marco C-2 in 1974. Negotiations were underway with West Germany for 1974 launch of the aeros-b aeronomy satellite and work continued on the experimental cts comsat to be launched with Canada, the helios solar probe with Germany, the intasat ionospheric beacon with Spain, the UK—5 stellar x-ray satellite, Canada’s Anik C, and U.K.’s X4 technology spacecraft. Negotiations were also underway on nasa launch services for the French-German Symphonic comsat in 1974 and two ESRO test comsats in 1976 and 1977. The U.S. and esro were about to enter agreement for an air traffic control and navigation satellite system. During the year nasa launched 30 sounding rockets from ranges in other countries, including rockets carrying foreign payloads or cooperative experiments. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, Brazil, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. (Pres Rpt 1974; nasa Release 73-281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74, 2-3) • A burgeoning worldwide energy shortage led President Nixon to propose in June the establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept, of Natural Resources, an Energy Research and Development Administration, and a Nuclear Energy Commission. The shortage reached crisis proportion with the embargo by Arab nations on oil shipments to the U.S. in retaliation for U.S. support to Israel during the October Arab-Israeli war. In a November speech President Nixon noted the U.S. was on the verge of “the most acute shortage of energy since World War II.” He called for reduced use of heat, electricity, and gasoline; announced Federal Government steps to lower energy consumption; asked the Atomic Energy Commission to accelerate licensing and constructing nuclear power plants; and asked for an emergency energy act. Nine energy bills, passed in rapid succession by the first session of the 93rd Congress, included authorizations for mandatory fuel allocation programs, construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, a return to year-round daylight saving time, a speed limit on interstate highways, and the National Emergency Act. Soaring prices of all kinds of fuel, long lines of cars and banned Sunday sales at gas stations, and airline fare increases and schedule cutbacks marked closing months of the year. Economists forecast a possible depression as energy shortages aggravated an already recessed economy. Scientists sought additional sources of fossil fuels and, for the future, new sources of energy to make the U.S. energy-autonomous. The focus turned to NASA and its pioneering expertise in the technologies of solar energy and development of hydrogen as a substitute for gasoline in automobiles and aircraft. At the year’s end pending legislation endorsed NASA cooperation with other appropriate agencies in solving the worldwide energy shortage and in providing the U.S. with future sources of non-fossil-fuel energy. (A&A 1973; Library of Congress, Congr Research Service, Major Legislation of the 93rd Congress; Newsweek, 12/3/73)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. announced the award of a $30million-plus subcontract to ltv Aerospace Corp. Vought Systems Div. to design and develop the leading-edge structural subsystem of the space shuttle orbiter’s thermal protection system. Final details were being negotiated. (ri Release SP—45)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of two study contracts. Florida Institute of Technology would study hypergolic propellant liquid- and vapor-disposal methods for use in space shuttle operations under a $75 000 contract. The Univ. of Florida would receive $25 420 to study the application of remote-sensing devices for temperature evaluation to assist Florida fruit and vegetable growers, (ksc Releases 209-73, 21073)
Johnson Space Center announced it had authorized Rockwell International Corp. to modify a building at Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, Calif., for final assembly, system installations, and checkout stations for two space shuttle orbiters. The modifications would be made under an existing cost-reimbursement-no-fee contract and would bring total contract value to $6 000 000. (jsc Release 73-137)
President Nixon announced the designation of Robert D. Timm Chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board, effective March 2. He would succeed retiring Secor D. Browne. The President also accepted the resignation of the first NASA Administrator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, as U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency. He submitted to the Senate the nomination of Alexander P. Butterfield to be Federal Aviation Administrator. (PD, 2/26/73, 189, 244; 3/5/73, 192) February 26-March 3: The nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine met in Moscow to exchange information on preliminary biomedical results of the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7—9, 1972) and Soviet research in weightlessness modeling. The Group agreed on common procedures to test body negative pressure, to make active orthostatic evaluations, and to make biochemical blood and urine studies, permitting comparison of pre- and postflight data on body functions. The Group also discussed biological experiments in space and countermeasures to weightlessness. The U.S. delegation—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences— visited Soviet medical research facilities and the Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training. They examined spacecraft trainers, medical equipment used for cosmonaut training and evaluation, and medical instrumentation used on Salyut spacecraft. The Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. R. N. Gurovsky. The next meeting would be held in the U.S. in late 1973 or early 1974. (nasa Release 73-79) February 27:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 4567, House version of the $3.016-billion NASA FY 1974 authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said the “historic accomplishments of the Apollo program” were “an open record and an enduring tribute to a basic belief in human progress. The Apollo flights, in three short years, gave us an order of magnitude increase in our knowledge of the solar system. Although the epic Apollo voyages have ended, the results of these missions will provide the scientific, the technical, and medical, and the managerial communities with a rich store of data that will be studied and analyzed for many years to come.” NASA had completed the Apollo program and “moved from the era of learning how to live and work in space to a new plateau, where this Nation can utilize space and its unique capabilities for expanding its horizons in science and in applications, in defense, commercial activities and in international cooperation at reduced costs.” Skylab—scheduled for May launch—would be the “first post-Apollo step into the intensive utilization of space” and toward reorienting manned space activities to earth orbit. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) , scheduled for July 1975 launch, would be “a major step forward in meaningful and beneficial international cooperation in manned space flight” and a significant step in space safety and in reducing costs by cooperation. Later, the space shuttle would provide “ample additional opportunities for meaningful technical and economic cooperation in space.” One opportunity would be to carry sortie, lab being developed by group of European nations using their own funds. Closing out of Apollo activity would include “very careful screening of available production tooling for applicability to future shuttle or other NASA requirements.” Available flight articles included two Saturn V and two Saturn IB launch vehicles, one completed command and service module, two partially assembled csms, and a backup Skylab cluster. This hardware would he placed in storage for potential use. (Transcript)
Military and aerospace expenditures in the laser field were expected to average about $317 million annually in the next five years, according to a study by technological market research organization Frost & Sullivan, Inc., the New York Times reported. The FY 1973 laser market would be about $290 million, more than double earlier estimates. Operational thermal (laser) weapons were probably 10 yrs in the future, but prototype experiments were expected to be made by 1975. Technology had progressed to high-energy, gas-dynamic lasers that produced light beams when their internal gases were heated, expanded, and forced through small nozzles at supersonic speeds. The laser’s most notable military contribution thus far had been bombs directed through the air toward targets illuminated by laser lights. A new system, target-recognition attack (tram), was being developed to spot targets day and night with an infrared detector bore-sighted with a laser range finder to illuminate the target. (Middleton, NYT, 9/13/73, E22) September 13-October 17:	Ames Research Center conducted a five-week experiment to determine the effects of weightlessness and reentry into earth gravity on female space shuttle passengers. The experiment, with 12 Air Force nurse volunteers participating, was a follow-on to similar studies on men made in 1972. Following two weeks of orientation and medical studies, eight of the nurses would simulate weightlessness with absolute bedrest while four acted as ambulatory controls. After two weeks of immobility, the eight would be subjected to g forces expected when the shuttle entered the atmosphere at a mission’s end. The final week would be for recovery and testing, (arc Release 73-107; arc Biomed Research Div)
A New York Times editorial noted that “works aimed at exploring the planets by instruments of the most diverse sort” continued activity after the close of manned exploration of the moon. It commented on the discovery by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists that the Venus equatorial area was dominated by huge craters [see Aug. 5]. (NYT, 8/8/73, 32) Mars 7, which would reach its destination in mid-March 1974, was similar in design and mission to Mars 6. Both spacecraft—intended for exploration of Mars, near-Mars space, and the interplanetary medium— carried Soviet- and French-built scientific equipment. All four Mars probes would carry out research in combination. Tass said Mars 4 would perform experiments using instruments on Mars 6 while Mars 5 would work in conjunction with Mars 7. On Aug. 10, at 4:00 am Baykonur time (7:00 pm edt, Aug. 9), Mars 4 was 6 432 000 km (3 997 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 5, 5 067 000 km (3 148 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 6, 1535 000 km (954 000 mi) from the earth; and Mars 7, 102 000 km (63 000 mi) from the earth. Tass reported that all spacecraft were proceeding according to their programs. A midcourse correction of the Mars 6 trajectory Aug. 13 and of the Mars 7 trajectory Aug. 16 put the flight paths “within the pre-set limits.” Tass said onboard systems of all four probes were functioning normally and measurements were being made of physical characteristics of interplanetary space, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; fbis-Sov, 8/10/73, LI; 8/16/73, LI; 8/17/73, LI; SBD, 8/13/73, 217) August 9:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of identical, parallel, $800 000, 17-mo contracts to Itek Corp. Optical Systems Div. and Perkin-Elmer Corp. for competing preliminary designs and program definition of the Large Space Telescope (lst). The large, multipurpose, orbiting, optical astronomical facility would be launched by the space shuttle, which also would return it to the earth for major maintenance and refurbishment. The LST would use a 3-m (10-ft) primary mirror and—because of its size, quality, and location above the earth’s atmosphere—would be able to resolve objects 10 times smaller and 100 times fainter than those observed by ground telescope, (msfc Release 73—110)
NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Corp. for negotiation of a $ 107-million cost-plus-award-fee contract for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the space shuttle external tank. The development phase would include fabrication of three ground-test tanks and six developmental flight tanks. The contract would run through 1978. (nasa Release 73-163)
Johnson Space Center announced the award of a $1 947 000 costplusfixedfee contract to Chrysler Corp. to distribute and document wind-tunnel data for space shuttle development, (jsc Release 73—50)
Appointment of Dr. Myron S. Malkin, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Technical Evaluation), as Director of the State Shuttle Program in the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight effective April 9, was announced by NASA. Malkin would be responsible for planning and directing the design, development, and test of the space shuttle system. (nasa Release 73-68)
The Air Force announced issuance of a $1 358 695, firm-fixed-price contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for special tooling for F-4 jet fighter aircraft, (dod Release 20-73) January 10—12:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 11th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in Washington, D.C. The Dry-den Research Award winner for 1973, Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Laboratory Space Sciences Div., delivered the Dryden Lecture “High Energy Astronomy.” The lecture, which carried $1000 honorarium, had been named in 1967 in honor of the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first nasa Deputy Administrator, who died in 1965. Dr. Friedman said high-energy astronomy was “almost exclusively the subject of space research.” X-ray astronomy to date had revealed about 125 discrete sources and a “diffuse background which spans the energy range from 100 ev to tens of Mev.” X-ray sources revealed included supernova remnants, pulsars, and binary systems in the galaxy. Extragalactic sources included radio galaxies, quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and clusters of galaxies. Gamma ray astronomy had shown “no evidence for antimatter within the universe.” (Program; Text) A committee established by aiaa to evaluate NASA’s space shuttle program reported its conclusion that a shuttle system, including both manned and unmanned flight, ought to be built. The committee recommended a research and applications module system with interchangeable modules that could be removed in space to become part of an orbiting laboratory. Other nations should be encouraged to participate in shuttle development, the committee said. (Tech Rev, 5/73, 55) Advanced applications of the shuttle were discussed by J. E. Blahnik of Science Applications, Inc., and D. R. Davis of ITT Research Institute. An exploratory study had concluded that use of the shuttle orbiter for advanced, manned, high-energy missions from low earth orbit should be competitive with other proposed concepts, if orbital and refueling requirements were satisfied by using normal shuttle missions to deliver propellant in addition to their payload. (Program) January 10—13:	The American Astronomical Society met in Las Cruces, N. Mex. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. Robert Howard said six-year observations through the 46-m (150-ft) solar telescope at Mt. Wilson Observatory had shown sections of the sun’s outer atmosphere to be in motion with respect to time. Movements had extended to 259 000 sq km (100 000 sq mi) of photosphere—the sun’s gassy surface—and had appeared to be east-west or west-east. Some motions had been calculated at 6257 km per hr (3888 mph) ; others, at 7300 km per hr (4536 mph). Cause and significance of the motion were unknown. At a press interview Dr. John C. Brandt, chief of the Goddard Space Flight Center Solar Physics Laboratory, said Indians in New Mexico, Arizona, and California nine centuries ago might have recorded a star explosion. Drawings on walls and ceilings of a cave at Chaco Canyon National Monument, N. Mex., closely resembled an explosion of July 4, 1054, as recorded by the Chinese. Similar drawings had been found in Arizona and California. (Alexander, LA Times, 1/11/73; AP, W Post, 1/14/73, A13) January 11:	Cosmos 543 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 309-km (192.0-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 24. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; SBD, 1/12/73, 54)
United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. announced a $42million cooperative program with nine electric utility companies to develop a 26 000-kw fuel cell as a new way to generate electricity. The utility companies had provisionally ordered 56 cells for possible delivery by 1978 and had options on 112 more. Orders totaled more than $250 million. The program did not include Government support, but Pratt & Whitney was discussing the program with Federal energy officials and “would welcome government participation,” Pratt & Whitney President Bruce N. Torell told a New York press conference. A fuel ceil produced electrical power directly from fuel through a chemical reaction. It could be an efficient system for generating electrical power with little pollution. Pratt & Whitney had produced small cells for nasa’s Apollo and Skylab spacecraft and for the space shuttle. It had also tested larger units for home use. {WSJ, 12/20/73, 24; P&w Pio)
NASA announced the selection of Grumman Aerospace Corp. for negotiation of a contract to modify two Gulf stream II aircraft for crew trainers for the space shuttle orbiter, The contractor’s proposed cost was $19.5 million, (nasa Release 73—278)
Johnson Space Center had invited Boeing Co. to submit a proposal for wind-tunnel tests using a 747 transport aircraft to ferry the space shuttle orbiter, nasa announced. The orbiter would be mounted pickaback on the 747 in tests to determine feasibility of the plan. Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had been invited earlier to submit a proposal for use of a C-5A cargo aircraft as a ferry during wind-tunnel tests [see Sept. 25]. (nasa Release 73—204)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations reported H.R. 8825, FY 1974 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation bill that included a $3.002-billion NASA appropriation, $13 million above the $2.989-billion version passed by the House June 22. The bill increased the appropriation for construction of facilities from $89 million to $101 million, including $56.3 million for space shuttle facilities at various locations. (CR, 6/28/73, D771; S Rpt 93-272)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the statement given out at the nasa FY 1974 budget briefing held Jan. 27: “The budget the President has approved for NASA for FY 1974, like those of other agencies, has been reduced substantially below previous plans and expectations to hold total government spending to the targets set by the President. At the same time, the budget will permit NASA to carry forward a substantial and significant program in space and aeronautics.” The budget provided for continuing the major projects in the schedule announced Jan. 5 and for starting two new projects: Nimbus-G, “another in NASA’s series of experimental earth oriented satellites, which will be directed at environmental pollution and oceanographic measurements, and LAGEOS, a new geodetic satellite for extremely accurate measurements of movements of the earth’s surface.” In addition to reductions in programs announced Jan. 5, the budget required “that we stretch out schedules in a number of ongoing projects. The second Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-b) will be delayed two years, until 1976. This will allow it to carry an additional sensor. Tiros-N, the prototype of a new series of operational meteorological satellites for the National Weather Service, will be delayed by about one year to 1977. “We will also undergo another belt-tightening in NASA. By the end of FY 1974 our civil service complement will be reduced 1880 positions below the FY 1973 end strength approved in the FY 1973 budget. This reduction includes the previously announced reductions related to the termination of our nuclear programs.” Despite a “sharp decrease from the level budget anticipated last year,” Dr. Fletcher was “very pleased with the program content we were able to retain. Clearly from what has been said today and on January 5, we will have to curtail several activities that are of major importance to the nation.” But “we have been able to keep NASA’s main line program essentially intact and each of the programs curtailed will still be done, either at a later date than anticipated or in an alternate way to that planned last year. Although I, personally, would like to see a higher NASA budget, I believe we can capitalize on the belt-tightening required to produce even greater yield for the tax dollar in future years.” NASA was “making substantial efforts to reduce future costs . . . while still giving the nation a strong program in space and aeronautics.” Additionally, a prime object of the space shuttle program was to reduce costs of operating in space. NASA intended to “develop and introduce new design concepts and management approaches which, together with the relaxed weight and size constraints of the Space Shuttle, will result in substantially lower development and operating costs.” NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly discussed personnel cutbacks necessitated by the new budgetary limitations. The total NASA Civil Service reduction of 1880 positions would include a Marshall Space Flight Center cut of 650; Goddard Space Flight Center, 158; Kennedy Space Center, 100; Manned Spacecraft Center, 75; Wallops Station, 17; Lewis Research Center, 660; nasa Hq., 150; and Ames, Langley, and Flight Research Centers, a total of 70. From a peak Civil Service complement of more than 34 000 in 1967, nasa would be reduced to under 25 000 employees by June 1974—a drop of 30%. Total employees from all sources—contract and in-house—would drop from the 1966 peak of 420 000 to about 100 000. (Text; Transcript)
Award of a $7.3-million contract to Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. to provide a site for the final assembly and checkout of the space shuttle orbiter was announced by NASA. The contract included modifications and additions to facilities at Air Force Plant 42, Palmdale, Calif. (nasa Release 73—196)
Marshall Space Flight Center was drop-testing the space shuttle solidfueled rocket booster (srb) scale model and a three-parachute recovery system to determine the feasibility of keeping parachutes attached to the SRB rather than releasing them on impact with the water, (msfc Release 73—172)
Experiments by 50 European scientists at the European Nuclear Research Center (cern), near Geneva, had indicated that electromagnetism and the “weak” force of radioactive decay—two of nature’s four basic forces—might be expressions of the same phenomenon, the New York Times reported. The findings had been supported by experiments at the National Accelerator Laboratory near Batavia, 111. If accurate, the findings would support the long-sought goal of a “unified field theory” relating the four seemingly diverse forces, which also included gravity and the “strong” force that bound together particles of the atomic nucleus. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/30/73, 29) NASA and the Dept, of Defense were in the final phase of a joint study to determine the most efficient development method for the shuttle space tug, or upper stage, for high-energy orbit missions. “One consideration is the adaptation of existing stages such as the Agena, Centaur, or Tran-stage, which could be modified for use with the shuttle. Since the modification . . . would not satisfy all of the science, application and DOD requirements that are now projected for the 1980s, we are also examining costs and technical characteristics of new configurations which would have the performance capability required to accommodate the entire range of prospective payloads. It may be possible to phase these two Tug approaches in a way that will provide adequate transportation capability when needed while reducing near-term funding requirements. We . . . expect to reach a final decision by the end of this calendar year.” Dr. Fletcher presented 1973 Payload Model: Space Opportunities 1973—1991, a study of the number and kinds of payloads that could be launched through 1991 with the space shuttle and Spacelab using budgets at the FY 1973 level. The study was not a program plan but an estimate of kinds of payloads that could be flown. Dr. Fletcher felt “the full range of the space capability offered” by the Shuttle was even greater than the model indicated. Anticipated possible annual space payloads for all NASA programs and the user community, excluding DOD, began with 12 in 1973 and moved through 18 in 1974, 38 in 1980 (when the shuttle was to begin its operational phase), 61 in 1985, to 70 in 1990 and 59 in 1991. The 70 payload opportunities in 1990 included 21 automated and 27 sortie (Spacelab) payloads for nasa and 17 automated and 5 sortie for non-NASA, non-DOD users. Anticipated requirements through 1991 totaled 810 payloads, 572 for nasa and 238 for non-NASA, non-DOD users, nasa and other non-DOD agencies were expected to use 69% of the shuttle traffic and dod 31%. The model anticipated NASA automated payloads through 1991 might include 77 for astronomy, 43 for physics, 49 for planetary exploration, 8 lunar, 26 life science, 53 earth observations, 22 earth and ocean physics, 2 communications and navigation, and 6 space technology. Anticipated user totals were 120 automated communications and navigation payloads, 59 earth observations, and 9 earth and ocean physics. Possible nasa sortie payloads were forecast at 58 in astronomy, 52 in physics, 24 in earth observations, 43 in space processing, 24 in earth and ocean physics, 11 for communications and navigation, 28 in life science, and 46 in space technology. User sortie payloads might be 10 for space manufacturing and 40 foreign payloads. (Transcript) October 31:	The first powered flight of the X-24B lifting body was aborted when the igniters failed to function properly during the prelaunch sequence check. The B-52 aircraft and the captive X-24B returned to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., without mishap, (nasa prog off) October 31—November 22: The U.S.S.R. launched biological satellite Cosmos 605 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 400-km (248.6mi) apogee, 214-km (133-mi) perigee, 90.7-min period, and 62.8° inclination. Tass reported that Cosmos 605 carried white rats, steppe turtles, insects, fungi, and instruments to monitor their condition. Objectives of the mission were to study the effects of space on living organisms and to test life-sustaining systems for biological subjects. The spacecraft was recovered Nov. 22. Dr. Avetik I. Burnazyan, U.S.S.R. Deputy Minister of Public Health, said in a Pravda article on Nov. 9 that the satellite was a continuation of earlier Soviet experiments designed to gain statistically reliable data on the effects of weightlessness on individual cells of organisms and the effects of radiation on the genetic properties of organisms. Previous Soviet biological satellites included Cosmos 110 (launched Feb. 22, 1966, carrying two dogs for a 22-day mission) and Cosmos 368 (launched Oct. 8, 1970, carrying yeast cells, seeds, and onion bulbs all of which were exposed to radiation during a 6-day mission). (gsfc SSR, 10/31/ 73, 11/30/73; fbis-Sov, 11/1/73, Ul; 11/9/73, Ul; 11/13/73, Ul-U3; NYT, 11/25/73, 23; SBD, 11/2/73, 10) During October:	Selection of Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) to receive the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for 1973 was announced by the National Aeronautics Assn. The trophy would be presented Dec. 17 in Washington, D.C., for “leadership and inspiration to all elements of aviation in the United States, both military and civilian, and for serving as an articulate spokesman for American aviation and space in the Congress and throughout the world.” (naa News, 10/73, 1)
Johnson Space Center was evaluating a Lockheed Aircraft Corp. proposal to test the feasibility of using a G-5A aircraft to ferry the space shuttle orbiter. Lockheed had proposed to mount a scale model of the orbiter in latest configuration on a C-5A scale model for tests in its low-speed- tunnel, (nasa Release 73-193)
A lightweight version of the space shuttle was being refined by Rockwell International Corp.’s North American Aerospace Group for the major systems requirement milestone, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The lightweight version, with a gross liftoff weight of 1.86 million kg (4.10 million lbs), was scaled down in size from the previous baseline configuration, which had a gross liftoff weight of 2.38 million kg (5.25 million lbs). It had the same maximum payload capability of 29 480 kg (65 000 lbs). The major weight reduction had been achieved by switching to a more efficient double delta wing on the orbitor. Also, a newly designed external fuel tank, which could be separated from the vehicle before orbital velocity was reached, would eliminate the need for a solid-fueled-rocket deorbit motor on the nose of the tank. The solid-fueled boosters were also redesigned to a lighter weight. (Av Wk, 4/16/73, 18-19)
Award of a 12-mo, $234 788, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to General Electric Co.’s Valley Forge Space Center to study future earth resources systems was announced by NASA. GE analysts would assist Johnson Space Center’s Earth Resources Program Office in planning projects to be started at the decade’s end. Guidelines would include unique space shuttle contributions to earth resources surveying. The study would focus on hardware and procedures to be developed for use from 1978 to 1982. (nasa Release 73-94)
Contractor project definition and cost (Phase B2) studies were begun in Europe on the European Space Research Organization (esro) Spacelab (sortie lab) for NASA’s space shuttle. (NASA Release 73-191)
Proposals for developing space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motors (srms) had been received from Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and United Technology Center, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The space shuttle motor program would be conducted in three increments: design, development, and test, ending in September 1979; production of new and refurbished SRMs for 54 flights (108 units) beginning early in 1978; and delivery of new and refurbished units for 385 flights (770 units) beginning in July 1980. (msfc Release 73-125)
Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass.), Chairman of the House Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans, introduced H.R. 8825, FY 1974 HUD-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation bill that included a $2.989-billion NASA appropriation—$2,194 billion for research and development, $87.8 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. The bill would cut NASA’s requested $2,197 billion for r&d by $3 million and the $112 million requested for construction of facilities by $24.2 million. Research and program management funding would remain at NASA’s requested $707 million. The Subcommittee had reduced NASA’s requested $28 million for supersonic flight research to $11.7 million; strongly urged NASA to continue advanced nuclear technology development “within the total funds provided in this appropriation”; urged NASA to reprogram funds to launch ERTS—B as early as possible if the malfunction in Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) continued to degrade performance; urged continued development of the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft “to insure American competitiveness in this largely underdeveloped area of commercial aviation”; and allocated $2.5 million to replace NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft (lost in an April 12 mid-air collision). Reductions in construction of facilities funding would defer amounts for space shuttle facilities construction. (CR, 6/19/73, H4994, H Rpt 93296)
NASA released to industry a request for proposals for design, development, and production of the space shuttle external tank. Invited to bid were McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and Martin Marietta Corp.’s Aerospace Div. (nasa Release 73-64)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
Former nasa scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Hampshire College astronomer, criticized manned space flight spending in a New York Times article: “The spectacular problems of the $2.5-billion Skylab mission and the failure of the first three Soviet Salyut space stations may have dealt a death blow to manned space flight. The enormous expense, the high risk, the much-ballyhooed and grossly exaggerated claims about the pertinence of manned earth orbital flights to the quality of life on earth are creating an ever-widening credibility gap between the public interest and a vested interest inherited from the space of the nineteen-sixties. The result is the squandering of public funds.” He suggested “indefinite postponement of the space shuttle program, a reduction in excessive NASA management costs and the establishment of a moderate unmanned space program emphasizing space science and applications” on a less than $2-billion budget. (NYT, 6/5/73, 39)
Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar announced completion of Phase I of the air-route-control-system automation program. Memphis had been the last of 20 cities to install IBM 9020 computers in a nationwide network system to transfer flight data from one facility to another. The network had 61 automated radar terminal systems (arts), (faa Release 73-32) February 14:	Selection of four firms to negotiate contracts to study systems for the space tug (space shuttle 3rd stage) was announced by Marshall Space Flight Center. General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. each would perform a 10-mo study of a cryogenic tug using liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants. Grumman Aerospace Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. would perform parallel studies of tug using storable propellants, (nasa Release 73—24)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed a joint symposium on space program planning of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and the Society of Automotive Engineers in Denver, Colo. Points paramount for the U.S. space program, in his mind, were: “First, despite a year with all the trappings of potential disaster, NASA is coming through in pretty good shape. Second, now is the time for space planners—inside and outside the NASA family—to get serious about how best to use the space shuttle. Third, the single most important need for a healthy future space program is a substantially higher NASA budget request for Fiscal Year 1975. Fourth, Congress is willing to leave overall planning for future space options to the Executive Branch, but cavalier disregard for specific congressional decisions—such as we witnessed last January— is not likely to be so lightly accepted in the future.” (CR, 7/14/73, S13479)
President Nixon sent a $268.7-billion FY 1974 national budget request to Congress—an increase of $18.9 billion over FY 1973. The budget projection for the succeeding fiscal year was included for first time, with the FY 1975 budget estimated at $288 billion. The national total for FY 1974 included an R&D budget of $17.4 billion (an increase of $300 million), with $3.1 billion requested for civilian and military space programs. Emphasis was on practical, immediate results from R&D rather than expanding scientific knowledge, with reduced priority for space research. The total request for NASA new obligational authority of $3,016 billion (1.2% of the total U.S. budget) was $391 million less than the FY 1973 noa of $3,407 billion. FY 1973 funds of $91 million were to be carried over to FY 1974. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase $74 million, from $3,062 billion in FY 1973 to $3,136 billion. The FY 1973 increase of $11 million had been largely for space shuttle engine and airframe design and development. Of the FY 1974 budget request, $2,288 billion would go for R&D, $112 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. In manned space flight, elimination of Apollo funding reflected successful completion of the Apollo program with the Apollo 17 mission. Manned space flight operations—including $233.8 million for Skylab; $90 million for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) ; $220.2 million for development, test, and mission operations; $21 million for space life sciences; and $15.5 million for mission systems and integration— would decrease from $879 million in FY 1973 to $580.5 million. The decrease reflected removal of space shuttle funding from the manned spacecraft operations category to separate program status. The FY 1974 budget request allocated $475 million to the space shuttle program for the orbiter, main engine, solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tanks, technology and related development, and vehicle and engine definition. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring the total for manned space flight (including the shuttle) to $1,057 billion, down $100 million from FY 1973. Funding for space science programs would decrease $95.2 million, from $679.2 million in FY 1973 to $584 million in FY 1974. The decrease reflected suspension of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program, in which two flights had originally been scheduled during 1976-1978. The physics and astronomy program would receive $95 million, down from $126.2 million; lunar and planetary exploration would receive $312 million, down from $331.9 million; and launch vehicle procurement would receive $177 million, down from $221 million. NASA’s space applications programs would receive $153 million (a decrease of $35.7 million), including $51 million for weather and climate research with satellites, meteorological soundings, experimental instruments and techniques, and for the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $13.9 million for pollution monitoring, including $9 million for Nimbus-G oceanographic and air pollution observation satellite; $42.6 million for earth resources survey; $10.7 million for earth and ocean physics; $3.1 million for space processing; $22.1 million for communications, including a multi-use communications experiment satellite (ats-f) and a Canadian Cooperative Satellite (cas-c) ; $3 million for a multidisciplinary Earth Observing Satellite (eos) ; $4.5 million for shuttle experiment definition; and $2 million for application studies. The total requested for NASA’s aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $232.5 million in FY 1973 to $240 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $150.6 million in FY 1973 to $171 million, including $22 million for experimental engine programs, $9.3 million for flight experiment programs, and $30 million for system technology programs. Space research and technology would receive $65 million, and nuclear power and propulsion $4 million (a drop from $17.1 million). Tracking and data acquisition funding would rise from $248.3 million in FY 1973 to $250 million. The Dept, of Defense FY 1974 budget of $85 billion was at an1 all-time high,	$4.1	billion above the	FY 1973 budget	authority, but was 28.4% of	total Federal outlays for	FY 1974 (a	percentage decrease from 29.0% in FY 1973 and the lowest proportion since 1950) and 6.0% of the	gross	national product	(the lowest	GNP	percentage in 24 yrs, down	from	6.2% in FY 1973). The dod	total	included $8.7 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation (rdt&e), a $600 million increase over FY 1973. Of the requested rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, the first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, a prototype satellite to demonstrate precise navigation capabilities, continued flight experiment programs, and technology programs in advanced navigation, guidance, sensors, cooling, reentry, and propulsion—would receive $604.6 million (up $169.9 million). Military sciences would receive $509.8 million (up $13.7 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,787 billion (down $86 million), and missiles rdt&e $2,245 billion (up $143 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for the Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile system ($1,712 billion, up $917 million), new Air Force F—4J jet fighter aircraft ($131 million), CVN-70 aircraft carrier ($657 million, up $358 million) and F-15 air superiority fighter ($1,148 billion, up $240 million). Decreases of $198 million in funding for the Safeguard antiballistic missile system, $208 million for the Poseidon missile, and $64 million for the short-range attack missile (sram) reflected a modernization program, as dod continued the transition from combat support in Southeast Asia to strengthening baseline forces. The Dept, of Transportation budget request of $9,025 billion was a decrease of $2,302 billion from FY 1973. dot funding would continue a 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration funding of $2,126 billion would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect the upper atmosphere, and design a safer and more productive airport system. The Atomic Energy Commission FY 1974 budget request of $3,066 billion, up $382 million over FY 1973, would cover production of nuclear materials to make electricity and for use in nuclear weapons and as nuclear reactor fuel, research into availability of source materials, operation safety, and development of techniques for long-term storage of radioactive waste. The National Science Foundation FY 1974 budget request of $582.6 million was down $63.1 million from FY 1973, but r&d funding would increase from $510.3 million in FY 1973 to $554.1 million. Programs would emphasize research into domestic problems, problems of long-range national interest, and effects of R&D on the economy. Priorities would include development of solar power as an energy source and of tunneling technology for urban use under the Research Applied to National Needs (rann) program and development of a very-large-array radioastronomy facility. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (in the Dept, of Commerce) budget request of $343.0 million, down from $366.7 million in FY 1973, would permit continued improvements in weather monitoring, prediction, and warning; continuation of its polar orbiting satellite system and implementation of a two-geostationary satellite system in the weather satellite program; major hurricane modification research; and expansion of research on marine ecosystems analysis to determine effects of ocean dumping. The Environmental Protection Agency budget request of $148.7 million was down from $173.1 million in FY 1973. (omb, Budget of the US Govt, FY 1974; US Budget in Brief; Special Analysis; nasa budget briefing transcript; DOD Release 44-73; AIAA Release 73—3; nsf Release 73-106)
The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)
Mobile launcher 3, used for five manned Apollo/Saturn V launches, was being deactivated at Kennedy Space Center. A task team of NASA and contractor employees, organized by the icsc Support Operations Directorate, was removing and storing reusable equipment from the platform that was two stories high, 49 m (160 ft) long, 41 m (135 ft) wide. Nine swing arms had already been removed; other items to go included an acceptance checkout equipment room; a computer station; racks of electronic, timing and communications gear; and instrument cables. Cable salvage alone was expected to cover half the deactivation cost. With completion of deactivation in mid-1974, equipment worth millions would have been salvaged for future use in space shuttle and other programs. The basic launcher structure would be modified for use in space shuttle launches, (ksc Release 288—73)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced the award of a $1 375 484 costnofee contract to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for technical support for guidance, navigation, and control in the space shuttle program. The Laboratory would develop and evaluate mission requirements, integration of guidance, navigation, and control with avionics and the shuttle, failure detection, navigation techniques, and guidance policies, (msc Release 73-11) January 27:	NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying a Norwegian Defense Research Establishment magnetospheric physics experiment. Preliminary data indicated that the rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) January 28:	Japan launched four-stage rocket from Uchinoura Space Center to test orbiting techniques. (AP, NYT, 1/29/73, 3)
The April 6 announcement of the discovery of a distant quasar had strengthened the growing theory among astronomers that they had seen the edge of the universe, Walter Sullivan said in the New York Times. The implication was that, as Einstein believed, the universe was finite. “Beyond its expanding volume, . . . nothing exists—not even space, because, in this concept, over such great distances space curves back upon itself.” By determining the rate at which a quasar was flying away from the earth, astronomers could estimate its distance in terms of the time its light had traveled to the earth. The universe appeared to have originated in a “big bang” some 13 billion yrs ago, and the earliest quasars should be visible far enough away for their light to have been traveling earthward for that long. “But looking across vast distances—and hence, far back into time—man can see out only to 12 billion years (in the most distant quasars).” Hale Observatory astronomer Dr. Alan R. Sandage had said that in these quasars astronomers were seeing “the edge of the world.” Astronomers had long suspected the existence of some sort of wall preventing them from seeing quasars in the region beyond 12 billion yrs. “Now it is beginning to look as though the ‘wall’ is real.” (NYT, 4/8/73, 63) April 8-23:	Lunokhod 2 (landed on the moon by Luna 21 Jan. 16) began its fourth lunar day in the Sea of Serenity near the Le Monnier Crater with the activation of its solar battery. All onboard systems functioned normally after the third lunar night. During an April 9 session cosmic ray characteristics were researched, magnetic measurements made, and panoramic photos of the parking site were taken. Lunokhod 2 was brought to an area in the eastern part of the crater where a layer of basalt lava was bisected by a fissure 16 km (10 mi) long and i00 m (328 ft) deep in some places, to study the chemical composition and magnetic properties of the lunar rock in the fissure. Ledge rocks aided Lunokhod 2’s movement. The vehicle did not stick in the loose ground and its velocity could be increased. On April 17 the lunar vehicle was halted to replenish electric power reserves before making a complex trip around the fissure. On April 23 Lunokhod 2 was parked for the lunar night after covering 11 km (7 mi). (Moscow Domestic Service, fbis-Sov, 4/9/73, LI; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/11/73, L1-L2; 4/16/73, LI; 4/18/73, LI; Reuters, NYT, 4/23/73, 43) April 9:	Appointments of Philip E. Culbertson as Director of the new Mission and Payload Integration Directorate in the Office of Manned Space Flight and of Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.) as Deputy Director of the Advanced Programs Directorate, OMSF, were announced by NASA. Culbertson, formerly Director of Advanced Manned Missions, would be responsible for planning, direction, and coordination of payload activity and for management of the interface between users and the space shuttle, sortie lab, and tug. Freitag would participate in planning future manned space flight systems and in early development work, (nasa Hq WB, 4/9/73, 6)
The House passed H.R. 7528, the $3.074-billion nasa FY 1974 authorization bill [see May 9], by a vote of 322 to 73. Rejected were a motion to recommit the bill to the Committee on Science and Astronautics, an amendment by Rep. Bella S. Abzug (D—N.Y.) to delete $567 million for space shuttle programs, and an amendment by Rep. John Conyers, Jr. (D-Mich.), to prohibit use of tracking and data acquisition funds in South Africa because of South Africa’s apartheid policy. (CR, 5/23/73, H3921-51)
Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr.—Apollo 13 lunar module pilot, Apollo 8 and 11 backup pilot, and Apollo 16 backup commander—had been named Technical Assistant to the Manager, Orbiter Projects Office, at Johnson Space Center, jsc announced. Haise, who had logged 142 hrs 54 min in space, would be responsible for assisting Manager Aaron Cohen in the overall management of the space shuttle orbiter development, (jsc Release 73-41)
The Soviet research ship Professor Vize sailed from Leningrad with 60 scientists from Soviet weather service centers on an expedition to collect data on ionizing radiation of the sun and its influence on the upper stratosphere. During the two-month project the scientists would observe the June 30 solar eclipse, launch a series of high-altitude research rockets with onboard measuring instruments and photo equipment, and take deep measurements of the Atlantic Ocean. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 6/1/73, May 30:	The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 7528, a $3.046-billion FY 1974 nasa authorization bill, $28 million lower than the $3.074-billion House bill passed May 23. The Senate authorization—$30 million above NASA’s requested $3,016 billion—would be NASA’s lowest since FY 1962 and the lowest percentage of the total Federal budget—less than 1.2%—in 12 yrs. It would provide $2,231 billion for research and development, $34 million more than NASA’s request but $24 million less than the House bill; $110 million for construction of facilities, as requested but $2 million less than the House bill; and $705 million for research and program management, as requested but down $2 million from the House bill. The Senate Committee would retain Skylab funding at NASA’s requested $233 million and space shuttle funding at $475 million. It concurred with the House addition of $7 million for Earth Resources Technology Satellite program funding and added $5 million to space applications funding to replace NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft, lost in an April 12 crash. (CR, 5/30/73, S9866; S Rpt 93-179)
Four seven-year subcontracts totaling $140 million for the design and fabrication of major structural components for the space shuttle orb iter were awarded by Rockwell International Corp. Fairchild Hiller Corp. received a $13-million contract for the design and fabrication of the vertical tail. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received a $40-million contract to design and build the double delta orbiter wing. Convair Aerospace Div. of General Dynamics Corp. was awarded a $40-million contract to build the mid-fuselage that formed the payload bay section. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received a $50-million contract to design and build the orbital maneuvering system that would aid in orbital circularization and change and in rendezvous and deorbit maneuvers. (ri Release SP—17)
Declining jobs at Kennedy Space Center would level off at about 9600 total for contractors and Civil Service in 1976 when the space shuttle buildup began, Today quoted KSC Director of Administration George A. Van Staden as saying. The number would be a drop from the current 14 500 but would mean community stability in employment for the first time. Previously NASA had projected 6000 to 7000 jobs for shuttle operations. Employment would fall by 3000 at the end of 1973, with completion of Skylab, and would drop again after the mid-1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. When the 9600 level was reached in 1976, jobs would gradually build up for two years, to about 10 800 in 1978 when shuttle testing began. (Today, 3/22/73, Al)
A New York Times editorial commented on the successful Sept. 27—29 Soyuz 12 manned mission: “The purpose . . . was not primarily to set new records. Its main goal was to test the latest improved version of the Soyuz spacecraft. . . . Americans as well as Soviet citizens have reason to rejoice. ... In 1975 present plans call for the historic docking of a Soviet Soyuz craft with a United States Apollo vehicle. Thus Soviet and American astronauts must want each other’s space ships to be as safe as possible. And beyond the docking experiment in 1975 lies the prospect of a future fully integrated Soviet-American joint space program.” (.NYT, 9/30/73, 12) During September:	Soviet plans for a reusable space shuttle had been revealed by Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov and Soviet Academician Andrey Shikarin, according to a Vienna correspondent quoted by Interavia. The Soviet shuttle would consist of two vehicles coupled pick-a-back, each in delta configuration and designed for hypersonic operating speeds. One would be the booster, the other the orbiter. The spacecraft was designed for horizontal takeoff from a runway. The manned booster would carry the orbiter until it attained a 22-km-per-sec (4900 mph) speed corresponding to a 2- to 3-g acceleration. The stages would separate at about a 30-km (19-mi) altitude and the booster would descend in a controlled glide to land on the runway. The orbiter would accelerate to a more than 100-km (60-mi) altitude, complete its mission, and glide back to the earth. Construction was expected to begin during the 1970s. {Interavia, 9/1973, 945)
The House-Senate Conference Committee reported out its compromise Conference Report on H.R. 7528, recommending a $3.065-billion FY 1974 NASA authorization. The Senate agreed to the report, clearing it for House action. The bill provided $2,246 billion for research and development, up $14.5 million from the June 19 Senate-approved authorization but $9 million less than the May 23 House-approved bill. It provided $112 million for construction of facilities, the same as the House authorization but $2 million more than the Senate’s, and $707 million for research and program management, unchanged from the House and Senate versions. The r&d allocation included $555.5 million for space flight operations, $475 million for the space shuttle, $1.5 million for advanced missions, $63.6 million for physics and astronomy, $311 million for lunar and planetary exploration, $177.4 million for launch vehicle procurement, $161 million for space applications, $180 million for aeronautical research and technology (including $14 million for the JT3D refan retrofit research program), $72 million for space and nuclear research and technology, $244 million for tracking and data acquisition, and $4.5 million for technology utilization. Construction of facilities funds included $67.2 million for space shuttle facilities at various locations. (CR, 6/28/73, D773; Rpt 93-272)
Award of a $19 500 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for design, construction, and testing of an electromagnetic pulse simulator for testing large aircraft systems was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 190-73) April 16-17:	A joint meeting on the space shuttle Sortie Lab/Spacelab Project at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center was attended by 20 representatives of the European Space Research Organization (esro) , European Space Research and Technology Center (estec), and European space consortiums headed by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH and erno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH. The group was briefed by NASA on the space shuttle and Skylab programs, concept verification testing, and the msfc sortie lab activities. The consortiums presented a summary of European Spacelab studies, (msfc Release 7344)	. Dr. Bruce Murray, Cal Tech astronomer and principal TV investigator of the Mariner 9 mission (launched May 30, 1971), disputed the theory that ancient floods on Mars had carved the huge canyons shown in the Mariner 9 photos. “Mars’ atmosphere, which, at present, is only one-hundredth as dense as the earth’s, very probably never has been dense enough for water to run on the planet’s surface.” There might have been times “when Mars had virtually no atmosphere at all.” (NYT, 4/22/73, 31; Swaim, Pasadena Star-News, 4/22/73) April 17:	NASA announced the signing of a definitive contract with Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Div. for design, development, and production of the orbiter vehicle and for the integration of all space shuttle system elements.-The cost-reimbursement, fixed-fee, and award-fee contract would have a $477 400 000 initial increment. The contract superseded an Aug. 9, 1972, letter contract and would continue through Aug. 3, 1974. A second work increment—the balance of design, development, test, and evaluation, plus delivery of two orbiters—was planned to begin Aug. 4, 1974. Rockwell planned to subcontract to firms and suppliers in almost every state. (NASA Release 73-76)
Chairman Maurice M. Levy of the European Space Research Organization Council described steps to complete plans for European participation in the space shuttle program, during FY 1974 nasa authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “The ESRO Council has already approved the text of an agreement laying down the arrangements under which the Spacelab [sortie lab] will be developed, first in esro and subsequently within the European Space Agency which, in conformity with the decisions taken in Brussels, is expected to be set up in 1974. This agreement is open for signature between March 1 and the end of July. It will probably be implemented very shortly.” A technical agreement would have to be negotiated between nasa and esro as to Spacelab’s procurement and its integration into the space shuttle. A second agreement between governments would be necessary to cover commitments for nonduplication of efforts, the possibility of transferring technology to other European programs, access to the whole shuttle system, and the availability of conventional launch vehicles. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, testified that the $8.9-million budget request for space shuttle facility planning—in addition to $67.2 million for shuttle facility modification projects—included studies, engineering support, and preliminary engineering reports for upcoming projects and the final design for the pending FY 1975 facility needs. “This specific final design, when accomplished, will essentially complete facility design for the shuttle ground test program, the early and initial phase of Solid Rocket Booster (srb) production and test facilities,” and the pads and mobile launchers at the Kennedy Space Center. (Transcript; Text) *	Microwave measurements of the atmosphere of Venus were described by Univ. of California scientists in Science. Two sets of passive radio observations—measurements of the spectrum of the disc temperature near the 1-cm wavelength and interferometric measurements of the planetary limb darkening at the 1.35-cm water vapor resonance—had shown no evidence of water vapor in the lower atmosphere of Venus. The upper limit for the mixing ratio of water vapor to dry air was substantially less than the amounts derived from the Venus probes. The amount of water vapor could not produce dense clouds nor contribute significantly to a greenhouse effect. (Janssen et al., Science, 3/9/73, 994-996)
French hydrogen bomb testing in the Pacific was “a moral outrage and a diplomatic embarrassment,” a Washington Post editorial said, “but it is also a political fact, and one likely to become more rather than less important as the 1970s unfold.” As a strategic weapon the French nuclear striking force was relatively elementary, lacking warheads to fit into long-range missiles, multiple warheads, long-range missiles, and missile-carrying submarines. “As a political force, however, the force de frappe is quite real. As [the late President Charles] de Gaulle intended, it is virtually certain to give France a larger voice in the evolution of European affairs than it otherwise would have.” (W Post, 3/5/73, 26) May 3-4:	European Space Research Organization (esro) representatives met with U.S. space officials in Washington, D.C., to negotiate a draft Intergovernmental Agreement and draft a nasa-esro Memorandum of Understanding. Both agreements would cover U.S.-European cooperation in sharing costs of space shuttle development. The European countries, through ESRO, would fund and develop the $300- to $400-million Spacelab, a supporting system important to realization of the space shuttle’s full potential. The Spacelab would facilitate joint-use programs with U.S. and foreign astronauts, (nasa Release 73—191) May 4:	Major countdown demonstration testing of the first two Skylab launch vehicles and their spacecraft on Kennedy Space Center Pads 39A and B, with crew participation, had been completed, NASA announced. Both launches remained on schedule for May 14 and 15. The three astronauts earlier in the week had been pronounced physically fit for the 28-day mission, after completing medical examinations at Johnson Space Center, (nasa Release 73-92)
nasa announced the signing at Johnson Space Center of a $6 618 500 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with ibm Federal Systems Div. to design, develop, and maintain avionics software for the space shuttle orbiter data system. The contract would be effective through April 10, 1975. IBM also was selected by Rockwell International Corp. to develop and produce two other key electronic units for the orbiter—an orbiter general-purpose avionics computer and an input-output unit to work with the computer. The two contracts had raised IBM’s new business in August to nearly $22 million, (nasa Release 73-192)
U.S. technological progress had proceeded “almost without interruption” during 70 yrs of flight, Marquis Childs said in his Washington Post column. The doubters had “always been proven wrong.” In astronautics, Skylab was continuing successfully and work was progressing on the space shuttle. “As for the scientific benefits, perhaps only a few specialists can give a proper evaluation. Rut the cynics who spoke derisively of spending billions to put some clown in the sky are wrong on several scores.” The aircraft production record was equally impressive. In 1972 the U.S. had made 79% of the aircraft being operated by the world’s airlines, exclusive of the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China. The achievements in U.S. production, discovery, and invention were “in painful contrast to the failures in self-government illustrated by the grim mess in Washington, It may not be too much to say that if we find a way out of the morass, the swamp of intrigue, deceit and doubt, it will be thanks to American productivity.” The Smithsonian Institution’s new Air and Space Museum was to be dedicated July 4, 1976. “That no one can predict what manner of man will preside over thi occasion is a melancholy commentary on the gap between technology and politics.” (W Post, 10/9/73) October 9—12:	A radical new growth hormone theory evolved from Ames Research Center studies was introduced by arc scientist Dr. Richard E. Grindeland during a Raltimore, Md,, symposium on growth hormones. Dr. Grindeland’s theory that the growth hormone in blood was chemically different from that in the pituitary gland had originated from arc research to determine effects of physiological stresses like acceleration, simulated weightlessness, chemical agents, thermal extremes, and nutritional status on the human body. The theory, which the symposium suggested would have profound effect on the understanding of growth hormone physiology, showed that radio immunological methods detected only a minute fraction of the concentration of growth hormone in the blood, (arc Astrogram, 10/25/73, 1) Release 73—143; ksc Release 238—73; Marshall Star, 10/3/73, 1; MSFC PAO)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics continued hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, identified locations for space shuttle development: Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., as the launch and landing sites; NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility for the external tank production; and the Rockwell International Corp. facility at Downey, Calif., for orbiter and systems integration. “The major unknown, at the moment, is where the solid rocket boosters will be produced and tested. We expect that this location will be identified when the solid fueled rocket booster contract is awarded this November.” Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in omsf, contrasted a typical operational communications satellite program using expendable launch vehicles with one using the space shuttle. Launched on the Titan IIIB-Centaur launch vehicle, each spacecraft was estimated at 467 kg (1030 lbs). To fulfill 1979-1990 requirements for reliable communications services, 26 spacecraft would be required. Use of the Titan IIIB-Centaur would require 26 new spacecraft and 26 new launch vehicles, at an average cost for each flight of $25.8 million. “If the same program is carried out using the Shuttle and Tug, the cost changes significantly. First, with the Shuttle we can apply the low cost approaches to payload design. We are no longer constrained by weight limitations; therefore, we can ruggedize the spacecraft structure, simplify the design and verification test program, and thus reduce both development and unit spacecraft cost.” The shuttle and tug combination could deploy and retrieve 2 satellites on a single flight, making 13 flights to deploy 26 spacecraft—10 new and 16 refurbished. On 8 of these flights 2 spacecraft would be deployed and retrieved. “The total cost for conducting the program would be $14.9 million per spacecraft flight, compared to the $25.8 million for the expendable approach—a savings of 42 percent.” m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, discussed disposition of facilities at Lewis Research Center’s Plum Rrook Station, which would he closed because of FY 1974 budget cuts. LeRC was discussing the station’s availability and capability with potential user agencies—including the Electric Research Council, which planned to establish an electric power research institute, and the Eusi-ness and Employment Council of the Governor of Ohio, which had recommended establishment of a state-funded Ohio Development Center. LeRC was studying possible use of the station’s reactor for environmental research by the Environmental Protection Agency. The Plum Rrook space power facility was being prepared to test the shroud for NASA’s Viking spacecraft but “there are no additional programmatic needs for the use of this facility and it is anticipated that it will be placed in a standby mode by the end of Fiscal Year 1974.” (Transcript)
The House, by a vote of 315 to 21, approved H.R. 8825, FY 1974 Dept. of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation [see June 19]. A point of order was overruled, to block an amendment by Rep. Bella S. Abzug (D-N.Y.) that would have cut $475 million in NASA research and development funds and forbid any funding for the space shuttle. (CR, 6/22/73, H5191-5238)
Aviation pioneer Col. Clarence M. Young (usa, Ret.), holder of U.S. Civil Air License No. 2, died in Cottonwood, Ariz., at the age of 84. He had been appointed Director of Aeronautics in the Dept, of Commerce in 1927 and helped develop the Federal airways system. From 1929 to 1933 he was Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Aeronautics. Young joined Pan American World Airways, Inc., in 1934 to pioneer the first flying service across the Pacific. He was named to the Civil Aeronautics Board in 1946 and rejoined Pan Am in 1950 to direct its Pacific-Alaska Div. until his retirement. He learned to fly as a bomber pilot in World War I, was a member of the Aviation Hall of Fame, and had been named an Elder Statesman by the National Aeronautic Assn. (AP, NYT, 4/12/73, 44) April 10—12:	The Aerospace Industries Assn, of America’s International Committee held its Spring National Meeting in San Francisco. Richard J. H. Barnes, Director of International Planning & Programs in NASA’s Office of International Affairs,, discussed U.S.-European cooperation on the space shuttle sortie lab (designated Spacelab by the European Space Research Organization). ESRO was sponsoring a Phase B design competition between European industrial consortiums. Germany, Italy, Belgium, and Spain were participating, with other European countries expected to join. Germany had pledged to fund at least 40% of the program; Italy 20%. The program’s hardware phase was expected to start in early 1974. esro would design, develop, and deliver one Spacelab flight unit to NASA. NASA would provide assistance and would purchase one or more production units. Participating European countries would receive preference over nonparticipating countries in future use of the Spacelab. Ludwig Boelkow, President of the West German consortium Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH, described the status of European civil aircraft production: “The resources which only the U.S. had in the early fifties are now also available in Europe. . . . Europe today enjoys a slight edge in SST [supersonic transport] technology, as evidenced by the Concorde, and I believe equality in subsonic jets, as evidenced by the excellent progress in terms of cost, schedule, and test performance of the A300 B [European airbus].” (aia Memorandum gen 73-43) April 11:	The Air Force Systems Command announced it was developing the Air Force Satellite Communications (afsatcom) System to satisfy high-priority Air Force requirements for command and control of forces, afsatcom’s space segment would consist of Air Force ultrahigh-frequency transponders on the Navy Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System, the Air Force Satellite Data System (sds), and the global backup capability on other Dept, of Defense host satellites. The production contract award would be made after an extensive test program, (afsc Release 029.73)
The return payload limit on the space shuttle orbiter had been increased 28%, up from 11 300 kg to 14 500 kg (from 25 000 lbs to 32 000 lbs), following system analysis by Rockwell International Corp., Aviation Week & Spcwe Technology reported. The increase could be made without modifying the orbiter structure, by permitting the orbiter to land at a faster speed, and without exceeding the 68 000-kg (150 000-lb) liftoff weight limit. The orbital payload limit remained 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) in easterly orbits and 13 600 (30 000 lbs) in polar orbits. (Av Wk, 11/5/73, 9; nasa omsf)
Problems of the European space program were described in a Science article by Dominique Verguese of Paris Le Monde: Since 1964 the European Space Research Organization and the European Launcher Development Organization had spent $1 billion on space. One third had been used for the successful launchings of seven satellites but the remainder had been spent on an expensive and yet unsuccessful booster. Interest in the booster had dissipated despite the French desire to continue and the offer to pay for 60% to 70% of the costs. At two European conferences on space (December 1971 and December 1972) plans were made to merge ELDO and ESRO into a single agency and to allow member nations to cooperate with NASA on building a sortie lab for the space shuttle. France had threatened to leave ESRO unless more emphasis was placed on applications satellites and ESRO closed its plasma laboratory in Italy and its sounding rocket range in Sweden. France had also insisted that more use be made of national facilities and teams rather than esro’s technical center. Final agreements and objectives on a European applications satellite could not be made because of the conflicting interests of each nation. Nor could it be decided what role national programs should play. But Europe had successfully launched 26 satellites and had acquired an industrial competence which could easily provide a firm basis for more ambitious projects. (Science, 3/9/73, 984-986)
“We hope that through astute improvisations much of the Skylab I mission can be salvaged. Yet if it has to be scrubbed, then NASA should be encouraged to go ahead with backup plans to send a second space laboratory into earth orbit next year.” NASA could find the money “if it is prepared to cut back or postpone other activities, including the controversial $14 billion space shuttle program. . . . While space shuttles can operate independently, they will approach their full potential only when they can rendezvous with orbital space stations or laboratories.” (B Sun, S/YI/1Z, A18)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D—Wash.), introduced S. 2782 to establish a National Energy Information System, to authorize the Dept, of the Interior to undertake an inventory of U.S. energy resources on public lands and elsewhere, and for other purposes. (CR, 12/6/7.3, S22002) December 7:	A major reorganization plan that included two key directorates at Johnson Space Center had been announced by Dr. Christopher C.	Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, the jsc Roundup reported. Effective immediately, the reorganization would not be implemented fully until February 1974. Flight Crew Operations and Flight Operations would be combined into a new Flight Operations Directorate devoted entirely to space flight and aircraft activities. A new Data Systems and Analysis Directorate would provide institutional and programmatic data systems and analysis and the onboard software for the space shuttle. Pilot astronauts in the former Flight Crew Operations Directorate would be assigned to the Astronaut Office in the new Flight Operations Directorate. Scientist-astronauts would be assigned to Astronaut Offices in the Science and Applications and Life Sciences Directorates. Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht and Flight Control Div. Chief Eugene K. Kranz would be Director and Deputy Director of the new Flight Operations Directorate. They also would continue in their present assignments through completion of the Skylab program. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would be Chief of the Flight Control Astronaut Office. Howard W. Tindall, Jr., and Lynwood C. Dunseith had been named Director and Deputy Director of the Data Systems and Analysis Directorate. Astronaut Owen K. Garriott was Deputy to Director Anthony J. Calio of the Science and Applications Directorate; Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt would be Chief of the Science and Applications Astronaut Office. Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin would be Chief of the Life Sciences Astronaut Office, which also would include astronaut physicians F. Story Musgrave and William E. Thornton. In addition to their duties as space shuttle crew candidates, Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Eugene A. Ceman had been assigned duties in project management. Haise would be Technical Assistant to the Space Shuttle Orbiter Project Manager, Duke would be Technical Assistant to the Acting Manager for Space Shuttle Systems Integration, and Cernan would be Special Assistant to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Manager. Of 37 astronauts on active flight status, 26 were pilots. Of these, 16 would participate in space shuttle activities; 10 had been assigned to the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Eight scientist-astronauts would work in the Science and Applications Office, and three in Life Sciences. (Roundup, 12/7/Ti, 1)
The National Science Foundation published Federal Funds for Research, Development and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1971, 1972, and 1973 (nsf 72-317). The FY 1973 budget had indicated an upward trend since 1970 in Federal research and development support. The Federal r&d obligation total was expected to rise from $15.5 billion in FY 1971 to an estimated $16.8 billion in FY 1972 and to an all-time high of $17.8 billion in FY 1973. Of the $970-million increase in R&D obligations scheduled for FY 1973, the Dept, of Defense accounted for $400 million and NASA and the Atomic Energy Commission $67 million each. The three agencies made up more than 50% of the 1973 growth. (Text) February 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced establishment of the Large Space Telescope Task Force to direct planning and preliminary design of the lst to be launched by the space shuttle in the 1980s. The lst—to be capable of looking at galaxies 100 times farther than those seen by the most powerful ground-based telescope—would study energy processes that occurred in galactic nuclei, study early stellar and solar system stages, and observe supernova remnants and white dwarfs. The lst Task Force would be managed by James A. Downey III, Associate Director for Science in the Program Development Directorate, (msfc Release 73-15)
Receipt of proposals for design, development, test, and evaluation of the space shuttle external tank from McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Boeing Co., Martin Marietta Aerospace Corp.’s Aerospace Div., and Chrysler Corp.’s Space Div. was announced by Marshall Space Flight Center. The contract, calling for three ground-test tanks and six developmental flight tanks in the development phase, was expected to be awarded by Aug. 1. (msfc Release 73-60)
The 1972-73 edition of Jane’s Fighting Ships was published in London. In the foreword, editor Capt. John Moore said the Soviet navy was “a pre-eminent force with its own air power and with a greater range of submarines than any other. Above all, it has a far greater proportion of ships less than 10 years old than any other major fleet.” (AP, P Inq, 7/26/73, 11)	_ July 24-Aug. 8:	A summer school on manned space flight—sponsored at Nottingham Univ., England, by the European Space Research Organization (esro)—was attended by 63 graduate scientists and engineers from 13 countries and by NASA representatives. Its theme, “The Implications for European Space Programmes of the Possibilities of Manned Mission,” was based on use of the space shuttle Spacelab. (ESRO Newsletter, 10/73, 1)
Johnson Space Center announced the issuance of requests for proposals to build hydraulic actuators for space shuttle applications and to test them under simulated space conditions. The actuators were being considered for aerodynamics-surface and thrust-vector control on the shuttle. Proposals, leading to a firm-fixed-price research-and-development contract, were due by April 2. Work was to be concluded 12 mos after the contract award, (jsc Release 73-27) March 15-30:	Five U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint working groups met at Johnson Space Center and reached agreements on the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Technical specialists from each country would be in the other country’s control center during the mission and flight crews and specialists would be trained and made familiar with each country’s spacecraft and systems. Under a flammability agreement, the U.S. would provide fire resistant material for the Soviet cosmonauts’ flight clothing; the cosmonauts would use an Apollo headset in the Apollo spacecraft for communications to the Soyuz spacecraft over the Soviet communications link; the Soviet TV camera used in the Apollo spacecraft would be in a fireproof hermetically sealed container; and the still camera and film used by the cosmonauts in Apollo would be stored in a flameproof container. The U.S. would provide a 16 mm camera for Soviet use during docked operations in both Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. Agreements were reached on the prescribed procedure if either country encountered anomalous results during test activities that concerned the other country and on mission planning for rendezvous. The groups agreed that additional testing was required on the docking seals, that the U.S. would limit Apollo control system thrusting in the roll axis to two thrusters to preclude excessive structural loads on the Soyuz spacecraft, and that an additional docking test could be performed on the second day, with the Apollo systems passive and the Soyuz active. Both countries agreed to perform and exchange safety assessments in fire, pyrotechnic devices, cabin pressure, and propulsion and control systems. The 47-man delegation of Soviet scientists and engineers included Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and the Soviet astp Technical Director, Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev. At a March 19 press conference Bushuyev and U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney agreed that cordial, friendly, and cooperative progress was being made in planning the joint mission. Preliminary drawings of the two spacecraft had been exchanged so that mockups could be built. (C. M. Lee presentation to Aerospace Advisory Panel, 4/10/73; msc Release 73-24; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; Wilford, NYT, 3/20-73, 32; jsc pio)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
Johnson Space Center had issued a request for proposals for a costplusfixed-fee contract to build two modified aircraft for flight crew training simulating space shuttle operations, NASA announced. Proposals were due Oct. 9, with work to be completed in two and one half years. The shuttle training aircraft (sta) were to simulate space shuttle orb iter flying characteristics, performance, and trajectory during atmospheric flight, (nasa Release 73-194)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development, Space, Science, Veterans, proposed to the Senate a counterbudget that would cut $4 billion from the President’s $268.7-billion FY 1974 U.S. budget request. The counterbudget would reduce the $3.1-billion space budget by $500 million. “The prime candidate for cutting is the space shuttle, which this year will cost us $400 million. ... I think Skylab, where spending of $315 million is scheduled, could be stretched out and postponed. Additional savings could be made in a much more vigorous effort to substitute unmanned for manned space efforts. Scientists tell us that unmanned flights can be as productive as manned flights at roughly half the cost.” (CR, 2/6/73, S2108-10)
Some members of Congress were urging a second series of Skylab missions beginning in 1976, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The purpose would be to avoid the hiatus in manned space exploration between the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission in 1975 and the first orbital flight of the space shuttle in 1978. Dr. James Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had estimated the cost of a second Skylab series at less than $1 billion if the same experiments were flown. Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), would try to add funds for a second Skylab to nasa’s FY 1974 authorization. (Av Wk, 3/12/73, 16)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held a hearing on the General Accounting Office’s June 1 report on space shuttle program costs. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator Willis H. Shapley testified: “nasa believes that the results of our cost benefit analyses are important and valid elements supporting the decision to develop the Space Shuttle, even though the principal justification for the Space Shuttle is in the new capabilities it will provide. In our view, the GAO review, which we welcome as an independent review and check of what we have attempted to do, has not found or demonstrated any substantial reasons for questioning the correctness of the decision which has been made to proceed with the development of the Space Shuttle.” The Subcommittee concluded, following their testimony by NASA and Gao representatives: “a. The five noneconomic issues cited by gao ‘ as major considerations in the decision to develop a space shuttle are valid and proper elements in the original decision to proceed and in the future evaluation of the progress and pace of space shuttle development, b. Cost, performance and schedule goals and estimates are both a valid and essential element in the decision making process of the Congress and the GAO studies in these areas . . . must have sufficient depth to encompass all major cost considerations, c. The fragmentary arguments with respect to costs advanced by GAO reports are so incomplete as to fail to validate the GAO conclusions drawn from them. d. That GAO should continue review of the space shuttle program development in conjunction with the legislative and oversight activities of the responsible committees of Congress with emphasis on evaluation of cost, performance and schedule as the space shuttle development program progresses.” (Transcript)
b/g William J. Kennard (usaf, Ret.), former air surgeon of the Military Air Transport Service, died at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., at age 67. He had served from 1959 to 1967 as Executive Vice President of the Aerospace Medical Assn, and managing editor of Aerospace Medicine. (W Post, 10/26/73, C8) October 24:	Establishment of the Spacelab Program Office in the Office of Manned Space Flight was announced by nasa. The new office, to be headed by Douglas R. Lord, would replace the Sortie Lab Task Force. The reorganization followed the Sept. 24 signing of a cooperative agreement by NASA and the European Space Research Organization which called for European design, development, and manufacture of a Spacelab to be flown in the space shuttle orbiter. (NASA Release 73-228)
The People’s Republic of China was expanding communication lines to rest of world with the aid of American communications satellite technology, the New York Times reported. Communications Satellite Corp., RCA Global Communications, Inc., and Western Union Internationa] had provided ground stations that would be operational before the end of 1973, to link Peking and Shanghai via satellite to 63 nations that also had ground terminals. (Lyons, NYT, 1/5/73, 4) January 5:	NASA began program cutbacks to adjust to a lower spending level in compliance with President Nixon’s $250-billion target for total Government spending in FY 1973. Space shuttle manpower buildup would be slowed, delaying the first orbital flight. Work on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) was being suspended at least one year and work on communications satellites would be phased out, with cancellation of ats-G. Work on nuclear propulsion would be discontinued and work on nuclear power curtailed. Plum Brook Station of Lewis Research Center would be closed. In aeronautics, quiet, propulsive-lift, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft would be canceled, but technology would continue to be developed. Skylab, space shuttle, Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), Viking, Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, and many applications and aeronautics projects would be retained to continue essential elements for a balanced and productive space and aeronautics program within tight fiscal restraints. NASA also would continue development of a new front fan to reduce jet aircraft engine noise. NASA spokesmen told the press that the cutbacks would trim 700 civil servants from the NASA payrolls and would save the Government $200 million through June 30, 1973. (nasa Release 73-3; W Post, 1/6/73)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight transmitted Space Shuttle— Skylab, 1973: Status Report (dated January 1973) to its parent House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The report covered the transition from detailed design to development phase of NASA’s shuttle program (in which the first manned flight was planned for 1978) and the updated cost, performance, and status of the Skylab program (to be completed in 1973). The Subcommittee concluded that technology and resources existed for successful development of the NASA configuration for an earth-orbital shuttle and that the shuttle design would permit the total development cost to stay within $5.15 billion and the per-flight operational cost within $10.5 million. Success in meeting this cost was “particularly sensitive” to the cost of the hydrogen-oxygen tanks and an acceptable recoverable and refurbishment cost of the solid-fueled rocket boosters. Space tug development was “of key importance to gaining full utility of the space shuttle.” Development of a low-cost space shuttle system was essential “if the nation is to realize the full benefits of near space in . . . scientific exploration, practical application, and national security.” The Skylab program was within costs projected by NASA for FY 1973. Development schedules were being met “with some problems being encountered in procuring and integrating experiments.” NASA was recommended to consider the possibility of flying Skylab in the 19741976 period and also possible Skylab revisits after the first three manned missions. (Text)
NASA and space shuttle contractors held the third quarterly Space Shuttle Review at Marshall Space Flight Center. Attended by 400, the review provided information on external tanks and solid rocket boosters. (Marshall Star, 3/7/73, 1)
