Rockwell International Corp. Space Division, prime contractor for the space shuttle orbiter, signed a $16.5-million supplemental agreement with NASA. This 27th supplemental agreement since the contract was awarded 9 Aug. 1972 brought the estimated contract value to *$995 million. It incorporated authorization for sneak circuit analysis, vertical flight-test support, midfuselage mockups, integration of all shuttle elements, and other changes. (jsc Release 74-258)
Major reorganizations were announced at NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director. Dr. Fletcher said the Headquarters reorganization and key personnel appointments would consolidate planning and direction of research and development programs under the Associate Administrator and overall planning and direction of the field center operations under the newly created position of Associate Administrator for Center Operations. Dr. Petrone was named Associate Administrator. He would remain as msfc Director until early summer when he would be replaced by Dr. William R. Lucas, msfc Deputy Director. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator. He would also continue as Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science until a successor was named. Dr. George M. Low, in addition to his duties as Deputy Administrator, would serve as Acting Associate Administrator for Center Operations until the new position was filled. He would be assisted by Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), who would also continue as the Assistant Administrator for Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs, was named Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. Bernard Moritz was appointed Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. The reorganization, effective 15 March, followed completion of the Apollo and Skylab programs and would provide mechanisms for the phaseover from conventional launch vehicles to the space shuttle and new programs, Dr. Fletcher said. At msfc, Dr. Petrone said that the reorganization, effective 30 May, would enable the Center to fulfill requirements of its varied assigned programs and improve its competitive position to obtain new assignments. The major changes were in the Science and Engineering Directorate. A Deputy for Operations and a Deputy for Systems had been established. Business operations and control of all resources had been consolidated into a centralized office at the directorate level. Elements under the s&E Directorate included two associate directors, an Associate Director of Engineering and an Associate Director of Management; two offices, Reliability and Quality Assurance and Research and Technology; and eight laboratories. The laboratories were being restructured to emphasize system engineering and integration, analysis, design, and testing. The in-house capability to manufacture, inspect, and check out major hardware projects had been eliminated, with the associated supply, warehousing, and procurement capability. Reorganization in msfc’s Administration and Program Support Directorate included consolidation of Center-wide automatic data-process-ing functions within A&PS. Offices under a&PS would include Technology Utilization, Manpower, Financial Management, Facilities, Procurement, Management, Services, Logistics, and Computer Services. (NASA Ann, 5 March 74; NASA Release 74-76; msfc Release 74-31)
NASA announced the award of a $483 000 000, costplusfixedandaward-fee supplemental contract and 11-mo contract extension to Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. for development of the space shuttle orbiter and integration of all elements of the shuttle system. The supplement brought the total value of the contract, which would continue through 30 June 1975, to $943 248 000. Rockwell was to subcontract more than 50% of the dollar value of the contract. (NASA Release 74-195)
Dr. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on manned space systems in development, before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Dr. Culbertson said 986 payloads were projected for the 12-yr period beginning in 1980, with one third each for applications, science, and the Dept, of Defense. Duplication of the accomplishments expected from the space shuttle sortie (Spacelab) program would require automated spacecraft, sounding rockets, a manned space station, and a system for manned transport. The shuttle, with effective integration of payloads and the ability to service in-orbit spacecraft, offered a potential savings of $14 billion over expendable systems from 1980 to 1991. Studies had shown that 725 flights were required to fly the projected 986 payloads, an average of 60 flights a year. At a 10% rate of discount and a 10% rate of return, the space transportation system would break even if the shuttle were flown only 25 times a year. (Transcript) industry unwillingness to risk capital on advanced communications research and development. Private industry could meet short-term commercial needs but “continued NASA activity is essential to identify and meet long term national needs.” The investment level in advanced communications r&d would increase from $1.0 million in FY 1974 to $1.4 million in FY 1975. R&d included investigations into advanced antenna techniques to define radiation pattern contours to fit geographical boundaries and eliminate unwanted spillover; technology to open near-and far-infrared wavelengths for communications; new techniques in solid-state, high-power devices to replace traveling wave tubes; and use of millimeter-wave regions to expand the spectrum for satellite communications. The ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite scheduled for 1974 launch would conduct health and education telecommunications and radio beacon experiments and measure charged particles and magnetic fields over the U.S. for one year. The satellite would then be moved over India to beam educational TV to 4000 villages, ats-f (to he Ats 6 after launch) also would be used to extend coverage during the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission. Following completion of the Indian experiments, ats-f would he moved back over to the U.S. to continue experiments there. (Transcript)
Key appointments in the space shuttle program at Marshall Space Flight Center became effective. Robert E. Lindstrom became Manager of the Space Shuttle Office, replacing Roy E. Godfrey, who became Special Assistant to the msfc Director. Within the Shuttle Office, James R. Thompson became Project Manager for the space shuttle main engine. John A. Chambers became Deputy Manager of the Shuttle Engine Office and Frank M. Stewart became technical assistant to the Manager of the Shuttle Projects Office, (msfc Release 74-41)
Personnel from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, operator of the solar observatory at Johnson Space Center since 1970, would move to Marshall Space Flight Center, jsc announced. NOAA would continue at msfc as co-investigator in an experiment conducted with the Apollo Telescope Mount on the Skylab Workshop during its 1973— 1974 mission. The experiment had gathered solar radiation data in the x-ray region of the solar spectrum. The jsc-noaa solar observatory would reopen for space shuttle operations, (jsc Release 74-253)
A Washington Star-News editorial commented on the triumph of the Skylab program: Although a “fellow wondering where his next tank of gas is coming from has difficulty getting excited about the cosmos,” the country “could take much encouragement from the successful completion of the $2.6-bilIion Skylab program.” We could expect that this had been well worth the effort and that a similar crash program on energy could meet with the same success. Americans would not venture into space again until the space shuttle project at the end of the decade, except for the 1975 linkup of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft. If all went well, that “could be the most fascinating and heartening adventure since that first landing on the moon.” (W Star-News, 14 Feb 74, A18)
Construction of the $22-million runway for the space shuttle was begun at Kennedy Space Center after a brief ground-breaking ceremony at the construction site northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. Dr. Debus, KSC Director, said the shuttle would lead to a “new era of international transportation to and from space” and the “boom and bust of the 1960s of this community and the activities of the government will be changed to a more steady—more reliable—situation.” The 90-m wide, 4600-m long, 40-cm thick runway would accommodate a 75 000-kg spacecraft returning from space at a 15° to 20° angle and at a speed of nearly 295 km per hr. More than 8000 km of grooves in the surface would permit drainage and prevent hydroplaning while " landing in the rain. To reduce the speed of the returning shuttle, astronauts would have the help of brakes, parachutes, and a net at the end of the runway. The runway was scheduled for July 1976 completion. (Spaceport News, 4 April 74, 1, 5; McElheny, NYT, 2 April 74, 22)
Marshall Space Flight Center began a six-month study of the feasibility of adapting the backup Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount to fly on the space shuttle for solar observations. NASA anticipated that modified atm instruments positioned in the shuttle payload bay could provide low-cost scientific returns on early shuttle flights, (msfc Skylab Off, interview, Jan 75; Covault, Av Wk, 15 April 74,24-5)
The first system to use solar energy to heat a U.S. school began operation in Timonium, Md. The $568 000 project, jointly sponsored by the National Science Foundation and AAl Corp. [see 2 Feb.], was rushed into operation in six weeks to use the remainder of the winter’s chilly days to gather experimental data for future solar heating systems. (Richards, W Post, 8 March 74, C2) 7, 12-14 March: Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on NASA’s space science program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1975 authorization hearings: A Solar Maximum Mission (smm) satellite was proposed for FY 1975 design study and launch in the next period of maximum solar activity, 19781979. smm would investigate solar flares and related phenomena and their effects on the solar-terrestrial system, making, for the first time, simultaneous measurements of flares across the electromagnetic spectrum—within a national program of satellite, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations of the sun during maximum activity. The spacecraft would be shuttle-retrievable for refurbishment and reflight with advanced solar physics experiments in the 1980s. Requested funding for the Large Space Telescope (Ls’r) for FY 1975 was $6.2 million, to proceed with design of telescope optics, detectors, and support systems. NASA had originally planned to spend about $10 million in FY 1975 on the lst—to be launched on the space shuttle in 1980—but reduced the request to reflect the four- to six-month delay in shuttle development. NASA—in cooperation with the Naval Research Laboratory, Sandia Laboratories, and West Germany—was developing an Aries sounding rocket to support the physics and astronomy program. Aries, which used the 2nd stage of surplus Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missiles, would provide a greater lift and longer flight time than possible at the price of rockets now in use. Cost overruns on the 1975 two-spacecraft Viking mission to Mars could total 10% of the original $838-million estimate for the program because of hardware development problems. Major problems with the biology instrument included packing the sophisticated instruments into a small volume, development of very small valves to inject sufficiently small amounts of nutrients into Martian samples, and thermal control. The instrument was running $21.2 million over the budgeted cost. Difficulties also had been encountered in producing enough 0.005-cm plated magnetic wire of uniform characteristics for the onboard computer. Dr. Naugle said that, although the overall coniplexity of the spacecraft had been underestimated, “we expect these problems to be solved and to launch both Viking spacecraft on schedule in 1975.” (Transcript) Experiments were designed to demonstrate an attitude control accuracy of better than three arc minutes using a gas jet system, measure the performance in orbit of operational infrared sensor components, demonstrate an inexpensive Canopus sensor of high reliability, measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft, determine interference generated by the propane gas control system, demonstrate a basic sensing element with application in digital sun and earth albedo sensors, and measure degradation of silicone solar cells in orbit. NASA’s objective of placing the satellite in an earth orbit that would permit achievement of the scientific objectives was met, and the mission was adjudged a success 19 March. Under a December 1972 Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the U.K.’s Dept, of Trade and Industry, NASA would be reimbursed for launch vehicle and services. Developed for the U.K. by Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., the 83.5-by 66.5-cm, 92-kg spacecraft was powered by a four-panel 250-cm-long solar array of 1800 solar cells. Miranda was deployed in a fully sunlit polar orbit with a yo-yo despin system and its attitude control system acquired the sun through three sun sensors. The eighth NASA launch of a U.K. satellite and the fourth on a Scout vehicle—Miranda carried the names of 80000 Boy Scouts from nine U.S. states on a microdot. (NASA MOR, 21 March 74; NASA Releases 74-36, 74-53; UN Reg;- Newport News, Va, Daily Press, 22 Feb 74; SBD, 12 March 74,59)
Johnson Space Center announced selection of Singer Co. Simulated Products Div. for an $8-million cost-plus-award fee contract to develop a space shuttle orbiter aeroflight simulator for crew training. Singer would design, manufacture, and test a simulator that would include a high-fidelity crew station, out-of-the-window color visual scene, motion base, and flight computer and simulator interface to simulate vehicle flight dynamics and motion during the atmospheric phase of missions, (jsc Release 74-276)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a 90-day $950 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp. for studies, analysis, planning, and design required to define the interface and performance relationships of the solid-fueled rocket motor to the solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tank, and orbiter of the sDace shuttle. Award of the 90-day contract was necessary to continue the overall development schedule of the total space shuttle system. A contract award to Thiokol in November 1973 to develop the motors for the shuttle had been delayed pending the resolution of a protest filed by Lockheed Propulsion Co. (NASA Release 74-130; Huntsville Times, 17 Feb 74)
Dr. Robert A. R. Parker, scientist-astronaut and program scientist for the Skylab mission, had been named Chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, Johnson Space Center announced. Dr. Parker succeeded Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, who had been named Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs at NASA Hq. in May. The s&ad would serve as an interface between eventual space shuttle payload users and nasa and participate in the shuttle flight research program. Dr. Parker had been named a nasa scientist-astronaut in 1967 and had been a member of the support crews for the Apollo 15 and 17 missions. (JSC Release 74-186)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 2 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1975 NASA budget plan for new authorization of $3,247 billion and spending of $3,273 billion, although a “constrained budget,” would carry forward the programs planned in FY 1974. Goals and major programs were the same, with three new projects in space science and applications, but the space shuttle had been slipped four to six months. NASA’s FY 1974 budget had “reflected a sharp temporary reduction, because of Government-wide fiscal problems . . . , below the $3.4 billion level previously planned as the long-term level.” Increases in FY 1975 and later years were therefore “in order to approach again the level required to maintain . . . advances in space and aeronautics for the rest of the decade.” The FY 1975 increase of “about $100 million,” however, was less than required to return to NASA’s complete program as planned, and adjustments had been necessary. Principally, the first manned orbital flight of the shuttle was rescheduled to the second quarter of 1979, instead of the end of 1978, but NASA had a “firm commitment now” that there would be no more slips for budgetary reasons, and none was expected for technical reasons. NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly said at the briefing the stretchout was expected to increase shuttle costs about $50 million “in 1971 dollars.” The $800 million requested for the shuttle was $89 million less than NASA had submitted to the Office of Management and Budget. In the three new space flight projects, Pioneer Venus had top scientific priority as the next step in planetary exploration. Two missions launched in 1978 would study the Venus atmosphere for a better understanding of that planet and of the earth’s atmosphere, meteorology, and climatology. In the second new start, seasat, an experimental applications satellite, would measure ocean characteristics to aid scientific understanding of ocean dynamics and determine if a forecasting system could be developed, seasat-a was to be launched in 1978. The third start, the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm), would launch an Explorer satellite in 1977 to make thermal measurements of the earth’s surface to help find mineral resources and potential geothermal energy sources and to discriminate rock structures for planning civil works such as highways. NASA was asking $6 million to build the world’s first large infrared telescope, on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for planetary research to complement planetary space flights, especially to provide data for the 1977 launch of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn probe. Another new thrust, still in the planning stage, was the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , to return the large amounts of data expected from the shuttle in the 1980s and permit phase-out of some tracking stations. NASA would not develop the spacecraft for the TDRSS but would lease satellite services from a private organization, beginning in CY1979. Analysis of data from the Skylab missions that were ending with the 8 Feb. splashdown of Skylab 4 would continue for many years. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joint engineering and training activities with the U.S.S.R. were on schedule. All shuttle hardware prime contractors and most subcontractors had been selected, and the Dept, of Defense tentatively planned to modify an existing upper stage for use as an interim space tug with, the shuttle. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, was still working well, exceeding its design life by more than six months. ERTS-b, previously planned for 1976 launch, had been moved to 1975. A number of nasa and 11 commercial applications launches were scheduled during the year. A nominal communications satellite research program would be continued. In space astronomy, oso-i was scheduled for 1975 and the heAo series would be resumed, with launches planned for 1977, 1978, and 1979. Astronautics programs would continue to develop technology to improve fuel economy, reduce noise, and improve performance of U.S.-built civil transport aircraft. nasa’s Civil Service employment was to be stabilized at the end of FY 1974 levels except for a further reduction of 354 persons at Marshall Space Flight Center following completion of Skylab. NASA’s FY 1975 total would be 24 616, about 2200 less than in FY 1973 and 354 less than in FY 1974. Support service contractors at the Centers had reductions planned at about the same level, the 25 000 FY 1973 total dropping to 24 000 in FY 1974 and to 22 000 in FY 1975. (Text; NASA, FY 75 Budget Briefing transcript & background material)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to negotiate a twoyear, $13.2-million, cost-plus-award fee contract to support the space shuttle program in system analysis; avionics system engineering; mission planning, analysis, and software formulation; computer systems and software; and crew procedures and flight planning, (nasa Release 74-83)
A nine-month, $321 394 study contract to provide NASA with engineering concepts, requirements, and design trade-offs for a zero-gravity atmospheric-cloud-physics-experiment laboratory to fly on the space shuttle had been awarded to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The proposed laboratory would permit study of “trigger” actions in clouds, such as the formation of ice crystals or water droplets, electrical charges on droplets, and waterdroplet—icecrystal interactions to aid in the ultimate control and modification of hazardous weather conditions. The laboratory could be reused on at least 20 Spacelab missions. ( msfc Release 74-27; msfc pao)
Lockheed-California Co. had received a $25-million letter contract from Rockwell International Corp. for structural testing of the space shuttle orbiter, the Huntsville Times reported. (Huntsville Times, 12 Sept 74)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998 was reported to the Senate by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The Committee authorization of $3,267 billion was $8,145 million higher than that passed by the House 25 April. It was equal to 1% of the total FY 1975 Federal budget and was $0.5 billion below the constant-level NASA budget endorsed by Congress two years earlier. The Committee had added $16 million to NASA’s 4 Feb. budget request, to fund procurement and launch of a third Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-c) for continuity of remote-sensing data. The Committee also had added $6 million to support activities under way and the initiation and application of new ideas in energy and environmental areas. It refused to concur in $20 million added by the House to the space shuttle program. (SRpt 93-818)
Martin Marietta Corp. had been awarded a $26 453 600 NASA contract for support of the external tank effort of the space shuttle program, NASA announced. The consolidated facilities contract, which would run through 31 Aug. 1978, provided for acquisition of plant equipment at Michoud Assembly Facility, rehabilitation of existing facilities, and construction, modification, maintenance, and repair of facilities, (nasa Release 74239)
The House passed, by a roll call vote of 407 to 7, H.R. 15572, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans FY 1975 appropriations bill. The bill—passed as recommended to the House by its Committee on Appropriations 21 June—appropriated $3,203 billion to NASA, $44.1 million below the FY 1975 budget request and $63.9 million below the FY 1975 authorization. Research and development funds totaled $2,327 billion, construction of facilities $135.67 million, and research and program management $740 million. An additional $4,435 million had been provided in the Special Energy Bill. The House cut $6.2 million authorized as planning funds for the Large Space Telescope, noting that the lst was not among the top four priority telescope projects selected by the National Academy of Sciences. Also the House deferred the $8.0 million requested to initiate seasat and recommended that the satellite be configured to fly on an early mission of the space shuttle. The Committee urged NASA to reprogram funds to begin work on erts-c as soon as possible but directed the agency not to reprogram any funds for cost overruns on the Viking project without requesting additional funds from Congress. Other cuts from the authorization included $15.8 million for the construction of facilities and $9.6 million for research and program management. (CR, 26 June 74, H5746-73; Com Rpt 93-1139)
A New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial advocated international cooperation in space: The U.S. was committed to a reusable space shuttle for possible use in the future with a permanent manned space station. The U.S.S.R. would probably embark on its own space shuttle and space station program. “The cost of establishing a space station ... is such that it would be foolish for each nation to assume the full burden when a common station could provide everything a separate one could—even a ‘secure section’ for each side for passive military uses.” {T—Picayune, 13 May 74,23)
Columbia Broadcasting System newsman Walter Cronkite recalled the two most exalting moments in his years of TV space coverage, during an interview with the Christian Science Monitor. The first was “Alan Shepard’s little 15-minute plop-down into the Atlantic. Rocketry itself was so uncertain ... I just didn’t know whether or not I was going to he able to watch.” The second was the first lunar landing. “That was a highly emotional moment for me. The actual touchdown, not so much Neil Armstrong’s walk.” Cronkite, preparing for the TV documentary “Space: A Report to the Stockholders,” said he still believed the major achievement of the moon landing was that “it proves that we truly have the capability at this stage of man’s civilization to do any dam thing we want—the most outlandish or the most practical things.” Of course there were important spinoff values. “Probably one of the most important industrial spinoffs ... is the command that U.S. industry had gotten in the computer business. ... I attribute that almost solely to the space program.” Cronkite said that recent cutbacks in the manned program were proper. “It is just about where it ought to be— most of the concentration now is in unmanned satellites” and a deliberate, but not crash, program toward the reusable space shuttle. If newsmen were allowed to travel on the space shuttle, he’d go “on any flight they offered me.” When asked if he wouldn’t he missed by American TV viewers at blastoff, he said, “What do you mean. . . ? I hope to he broadcasting all the time from inside!” (CSM, 19 July 74)
A mainshaft seal for turbine engines was being developed at Lewis Research Center to reduce wear, maintenance, and fuel consumption. By creating a thin gas film, the self-acting lift-pad seal eliminated contact between the seal bore and the rotating shaft shoulder except at startup and shutdown. The seal functioned at higher pressures, speeds, and temperatures than conventional contact seals and, with its low wear and leak rate, would be used in the NASA space shuttle liquid-oxygen pump. (LeRC Release 74-55)
The nasa Space Shuttle Cost and Review Committee recommended program changes to Dr. James C. Fletcher, Administrator, to reduce rising costs. It also reported design changes made necessary by thermal weight constraints. The committee, headed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, recommended delaying the second shuttle orbiter flight, refurbishing the first test orbiter earlier than planned instead. Deferrals of three months to two years were recommended for components of the second shuttle launch complex at Kennedy Space Center, which had originally been scheduled for completion about the time of the first shuttle flights. Also recommended was a delay in the development of improved spacesuits and portable life support systems for extravehicular activities from the space shuttle. Instead, evas would use Apollo-style hardware. Emergency barriers on shuttle runways and a building at Ksc for installing fairings and parachutes on solid-fueled rocket motors were judged unnecessary. Some tests were recommended for cancellation. Design changes to accommodate thermal and weight constraints included payload doors of a graphite epoxy composite that expanded less when heated and weighed 400 kg less than die aluminum composite originally planned for use. Solid-fueled-rocket separation motors that would provide a higher thrust level for a shorter time when separating die large solid-propellant boosters from the orhiter after launch were found to cause no orbiter damage—solving a possible problem anticipated with the original separation motors. The committee also recommended switching to a new thermal coating material for the external liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen tank to prevent tank overheating during launch, (nasa prog off, interview, 22 Sept 75; Av Wk, 9 Sept 74, 9-10; NASA Off of Admin, Daily Appointments Calendar)
Congressmen and staff of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were briefed at Marshall Space Flight Center and Michoud Assembly Facility in preparation for hearings on NASA’s FY 1975 budget. Committee members were briefed on Skylab, space shuttle, tug, Spacelab, concept verification test, and use of space transportation systems at MSFC. On 2 Feb. they were briefed on the space shuttle external tank at Michoud. {Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 2)
A declassified feasibility study by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. had indicated that reflector satellites 200-900 m in diameter could illuminate ground areas continuously at night, the Huntsville Times reported. Pointing out commercial uses, an official from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had managed the Project Able study, told the Times that potential applications included reflecting microwaves from space for conversion to electrical power, beaming rays on Florida’s orange groves should frost threaten the fruit crop, and lighting Alaska during its extended darkness. Launched on a Saturn V booster or on the space shuttle, a 640-m-dia, 20 000-kg reflector satellite could provide twice the light of the full moon and raise the temperature of the area covered by several degrees, (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 11 Sept 74)
The space shuttle would introduce a new mode oi space research in the 1980s, Dr. John E. Naugle, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, said at a space transportation system press briefing in Washington, D.C. Sounding rockets gave the scientist an immediate return of data but only for a very short-duration flight. Satellites provided longer mission times but it might be five to seven years from the initiation of the project until data were received. Experiments flown on the shuttle could remain in orbit from 7 to 30 days and then be returned immediately for evaluation. This capability would be a powerful tool in the development of new technology. Dr. Myron S. Malkin, Space Shuttle Program Director, said NASA’s commitment to Congress called for a total development cost of $5.15 billion in 1971 dollars for two operational shuttle vehicles plus $10.5 million for each of 725 missions projected for 1980-1990. Mission costs would be shared by participating experimenters, and estimates were now running at $9.05 million per flight because of reduced estimates for external tank development. Cost for a shuttle flight, which could take 29 500 kg into orbit, contrasted with $18 million for a 4500-kg payload launched on an expendable Atlas booster and up to $58 million to orbit 14 000-18 000 kg on a Saturn IB. Shuttle development was on schedule; the first approach and landing tests were to be in the second quarter of 1977 and the first manned orbital flight in 1979. Orbiter manufacture was under way. The main engine oxygen burner had been tested 14 April and the first big engine firing was scheduled for the end of 1975. NASA would need a fleet of seven orbi-ters at $250 million each if the projected missions were flown. Elwood W. Land, Jr., of the Space Shuttle Systems Office said a 25-astronaut flight corps probably would be maintained to fly missions averaging more than one a week. LeRoy E. Day, Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, reported the main engine was being designed to make 55 starts before refurbishment was necessary. Engine lifetime would be much longer. The solid boosters were being designed for 20 flights. Phillip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration, said that all but the smallest expendable launch vehicles would be phased out about three years after the shuttle became operational. (Transcript)
President Ford as a Congressman had been a “staunch defender of space spending” whenever critics suggested cuts in NASA’s budget, the San Diego Union reported. As minority leader, Ford had declared that the space program could be justified by its spinoffs. In April 1972, Ford had defended a $200-million space shuttle appropriation because he had believed that its loss would end the space program. (Macomber, SD Union, 8 Sept 74,19) With President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Mstislav V. Keldysh, Dr. Fletcher visited the space flight control center near Moscow, from which the ASTP mission would be controlled in July 1975. Dr. Fletcher also visited the cosmonaut training center and the Apollo-Soyuz laboratory center with the head of the Intercosmos Council, Academician Boris N. Petrov, and discussed Soviet-American cooperation in exploration and peaceful uses of outer space with Deputy Chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers Vladimir A. Kirillin, (nasa Off of Admin, Daily Appointments Calendar; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12 Sept 74, U1; 13 Sept 74, U1)
A space shuttle launch processing system (lps) was being developed at Kennedy Space Center to provide a flexible, reliable, and cost-effective method of testing systems, controlling launch operations, and monitoring status of vehicle, ground support equipment and facilities during ground operations. A single automatic system, replacing the multiplicity of systems used in previous programs, would support every technical and management activity required to process the launch vehicles, their payloads, and all ground support equipment, (ksc Spaceport News, 24 Jan 74,4-5)
The U.S.S.R.’s Cosmonautics Day and 13th anniversary of the first manned space flight, made by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin in 1961, was marked by articles in the Soviet press. “Cosmonautics is one of the most important testing ranges of science in which many directions of science and technology are being synthesized into a single constantly perfecting system,” Soviet Academician Valentin Glushko wrote in Pravda. The successes of cosmonautics in the preceding 15 to 20 yrs had given a powerful impetus to various branches of knowledge. The initial accumulation of facts by spacecraft had been completed. On the agenda now was the detailed study of dynamic processes, the interconnection of phenomena, and the verification of hypotheses and models. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, acknowledged in an interview with Sovietskaya Rossiya the importance of orbital stations for future space experiments. He also acknowledged that Soviet designers had not yet been able to develop a satisfactory space shuttle. He said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned landing on the moon. His impassioned defense of the Soviet space program suggested that it, like the U.S. program, was under fire by domestic critics; “many millions of rubles” had been saved because of the use of meteorological satellites. In Trud, Academician Boris N. Petrov, head of the Council of International Cooperation in Space Exploration and Use under the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that manned flights “must become more frequent and more extended” to produce “really creative work for specialists of many branches of science.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 16 April 74, Ul-2; Wren, NYT, 13 April 74) to meet mission lifetime requirements—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 23 April. Westar 1 was acquired by a mobile ground station at 9:38 pm edt and control was turned over to Western Union. The satellite apogee motor was successfully fired at 5:21 pm edt 16 April and Westar 1 was placed in geosynchronous orbit with a 35 592-km apogee, 35 166-km perigee, 23-hr 35-min period, and 0.6° inclination. An onboard hydrazine reaction control system was moving the satellite toward its final position above the equator at 99° W longitude. Each of 12 transponders aboard Westar 1 could relay 1200 voice circuits, 1 color TV channel with program audio, or data at 50 megabits per sec. The Westar system-including one satellite to be launched in June, one satellite to be held in reserve, and five earth stations—would greatly increase Western Union’s capacity for commercial and personal communications. Expected to be operational in August, the system would be the first to interconnect, under one company, satellites and an existing continent-wide, computer-switched, multipurpose terrestrial network. (nasa mors, 19 March 74,24 April 74; gsfc Wkly SSR, 11-17 April 74; nasa Release 74-77; McElheny, NYT, 15 April 74, 1; AP, CSM, 18 April 74; SBD, 26 April 74, 322; gsfc proj off, interview, 7 Nov 75)
Skylab . . . has demonstrated that this nation is capable of conducting broader and more useful beneficial activities in space that directly relate to our own planet Earth,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a postrecovery press briefing at Johnson Space Center. It had “moved the space program from the realm of the spectacular into a new phase that can be characterized ... as almost businesslike if not yet quite routine.” The Skylab experience was necessary for the future in space and had confirmed that NASA was proceeding in the right direction with development of the space shuttle. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said 30 earth resources passes had been planned and 39 accomplished during the Skylab 4 mission. There had been 350 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount observations planned and 338 hrs completed. Observations of Comet Kohoutek included 13 by the Apollo Telescope Mount and 111 by other instruments. All 28 planned corollary experiments and all major medical and student experiments had been completed. Original planning had called for 140 days in orbit for the three manned missions; 172 were accomplished. Skylab’s greatest achievement “was to prove . . . there is no limit in our space research”; the limit “is only our resolve, not our ability to do work, not the ability of men to work and not our technical knowledge.” (Transcript)
The first few space shuttle flights would land at Flight Research Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced in a talk before the Antelope Valley Board of Trade, Lancaster, Calif. First horizontal test flights would be made from FRC and first orbital test flights would return there because of added safety margins and good weather conditions. FRC would also he a secondary landing site for operational shuttle flights when weather or other conditions made it desirable. (nasa Release 74-279)
NASA had selected International Business Machines Corp. Federal Systems Div. for a $636 000 one-year contract, with options for renewal, to provide system engineering and software development support to the Design Engineering Directorate at Kennedy Space Center for space shuttle launch processing systems. IBM would help provide a flexible, reliable, and cost-effective means of system-testing, launch operations control, and status monitoring of the space shuttle, ground support equipment, and facilities during ground operations, (nasa Release 74-104)
Permanent nasa employment had decreased 4.2% during FY 1974, dropping from 25 955 to 24 854 employees, NASA’s Office of Personnel reported. Despite a numerical decrease of 470, employment in professional occupations had risen to 61.4% of the NASA total. The minority component increased to 6%. The increase in average age slowed to 0.2 year, reaching 42.7 years, while the average GS grade remained the same at 11.0. The 2358 separations were almost twice as many as the 1246 accessions, with most of the reduction-in-force separations occurring in technical support, wage grade, and clerical occupations, (nasa, “The In-house Work Force,” FY 1974) During June: NASA began “Outlook for Space,” a comprehensive planning study to identify potential roles for space exploration and exploitation 1980-2000. The year-long study, headed by Deputy Director Donald P. Hearth of Goddard Space Flight Center, would seek to relate goals of potential civilian space activities to national interests, to develop a list of desirable and practical U.S. civilian space activities, to group activities with specific sets of goals, to define research and development tasks required for potential commercial and operational uses of space, and to identify social and economic challenges that could benefit from the use of space. NASA would consult representatives from universities, other Government agencies, and' industry. The study would supplement “The 1973 NASA Payload Model” planning effort, which had evaluated potential uses of the space shuttle, space tug, and Spacelab and which had been completed in October 1973. The new study would continue through June 1975. (NASA Activities, 15 Sept 74, 2-6; gsfc proj off, interview, 17 July 74)
A standardized solar-electric propulsion stage (seps) that could become part of a space transportation system for payloads in planetary and earth-orbital missions was under study at Marshall Space Flight Center, seps, one of several concepts under study, would be able to accept modules such as a docking subsystem for earth-orbital missions or a science package for planetary missions. Another concept, for an attachable SEP module, would provide propulsion only and depend on spacecraft subsystems for all other functions, seps would carry a cluster of six to nine thrusters, fueled by ionized mercury, and two lightweight 27-m solar-array wings to supply 25 kw of power to the thrusters and payloads. It was being designed for use with the space shuttle and space tug, and application of an attachable Sep module to a Mariner spacecraft was being studied. The tug, supplemented by seps, would be able to deploy and retrieve a 2500-kg geosynchronous equatorial payload in 100 days, tripling the amount the unaided tug could deliver. After one delivery, the seps could continue to operate between the shuttle orbit and intermediate orbits, delivering and retrieving 20 more payloads before the thruster life was used up. (nasa Release 74r-38; NASA omsf, interview)
Marshall Space Flight Center had requested quotations from industry on a contract to study a two-way data link using laser beams and operating between ground and payloads in low earth orbit, msfc announced. The study, which could lead to a flight system on the space shuttle, would indicate the most effective lasers and frequencies and analyze effects of orbital dynamics on acquisition, tracking, and pointing systems, (msfc Release 74-28)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
The space shuttle had no imaginable use which could not be met more cheaply and expeditiously by rockets already in existence, columnist Nicholas von Hoffman charged in the Washington Post. Of the justifications for the space shuttle program, one of “the most persuasive is the large amounts of money that will be pumped” into an ailing economy. However, “it would be difficult to think up a more inflationary way to provide jobs for people.” (W Post, 8 July 74) '
Wind-tunnel tests of 4% scale models of the space shuttle orb iter had begun at Air Force Systems Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force announced. The tests of heat buildup on the forward half of the orbiter during the critical period of reentry and at other points in the flight trajectory were scheduled to continue through the remainder of the year. The 4% model, the fourth size to be tested in the aedc tunnels, reflected the latest design details on the forward half of the orbiter. (afsc Release oip 207.74)
The economic return from the U.S. space program amounted to 33% per year, exceeding the typical yield from investments in stocks, bonds, and real estate, Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Johnson Space Center Director, said in a speech at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. at Blacksburg, Va. Among returns not immediately visible to the public were some 30000 inventions available by the end of the Apollo program. The price of Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite—surveying the earth since its launch 23 July 1972—was less than 50 cents per American. “Given its potential for aiding us in the coming years, who would not support a program that costs less than a . . . half-pound [one fourth kilogram] of ground beef?” Dr. Kraft estimated that the space shuttle, at an annual cost of $5 for each American, was an investment that would “pay, perhaps, the greatest return to future generations.” With such a vehicle we could not only perform a variety of scientific studies with immediate application to life on earth but build permanent, space stations and launch planetary vehicles and eventually starships. The space shuttle program, with its international cooperation, would unite “many nations for the benefit of all.” (Text)
Chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and members of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics received an annual program review at Kennedy Space Center, preliminary to FY 1975 congressional space budget hearings. The Subcommittee was briefed on preparations for the space shuttle, manpower, and plans for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Center personnel would be' further reduced in the next five months, with the closeout of the Skylab program. Runway construction was to begin in the spring for the shuttle, (ksc Release 18—74)
The International Aeronautical Federation held its 25th Congress in Amsterdam with the theme “Space Stations, Present and Future.” Among speakers, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, U.S. and Soviet commanders in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, stressed how well joint work and understanding had advanced. A paper by Daniel J. Shramo of Lewis Research Center, with B. R. Foushee and P. J. O’Leary of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., described the Centaur primary upper stage for solar system exploration and its potential adaptation as an upper stage for the space shuttle. A Ukranian Academy of Sciences research team reported on experiments in the formation of melts in weightlessness with radiant heating and on prospects of using solar energy for space engineering. Comparative studies of metal solidification had suggested that a more uniform distribution of short-grained structures under weightlessness might become the basis of space technology, with the added attraction of using the sun as an energy source. The team had built a prototype solar plant that could be mounted on a spacecraft or used in a vacuum chamber on the earth. Soviet medical investigations during the flights of Soyuz 12 (launched 27 Sept. 1973), Soyuz 13 (18 Dec. 1973), and Soyuz 14 (3 July) were reported by Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko and others. Findings indicated that prolonged exercises, full and partial spacesuits, and gravity-simulating fittings had reduced effects of weightlessness during the space flight and after the crew’s return. Although reports of initial adaptation symptoms were similar to American findings, the Soviet paper also noted that cosmonauts had reduced vestibular symptoms by deliberately slowing down movements, especially head movements. Prof. Hilding A. Bjurstedt, Head of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, received the 1974 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for studies of physiological responses to environmental stress. Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, was elected iaf President (iaa Ann Rpt, 28 Aug 74; Parks, SF, Feb 75, 42-50; Program, 25th iaf Congress; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74, 21) During September: Large-scale verification tests of the “rectenna” receiving system for microwave energy transmission were run at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA. A microwave energy transmission system was being developed to determine the possibility of transmitting energy through space. The tests established a new record for microwave power transmission, delivering one kilowatt over a 1.6-km range. The 10-yr program had increased DC-to-DC efficiency of transmissions from 17% to 50% and efficiency of the rectenna in converting radio frequency to dc from 25% to 78%. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 15 Oct 74, 57-60)
Manned space spectaculars were gone, at least until the 21st century, Thomas O’Toole said in the Washington Post. The similarities between the air age when men had begun flying and the space age were striking. Aviators had been considered stuntmen until they began to carry the mail. The Apollo flights, with their “vaguely circus air,” had struck many pepple the same way. The space shuttle promised to change all that. The U.S. planned to operate five shuttles, each one carrying more than 27 000 kg of satellites and space machinery into orbit 12 times a year, to “improve the quality of life on earth and to find out if life exists elsewhere in the solar system.” By the end of the 1980s the U.S. would have visited eight of the solar system’s nine planets; the only exception was Pluto. While one part of the space agency looked at the other planets, another would be looking down to learn more about the earth’s health. The next 20 yrs would see an unprecedented use of earth orbit to observe and communicate with the earth. O’Toole quoted Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as saying that the earth orbit might become overcrowded. Not that things would bump into each other but “there will not be enough radio frequencies to communicate back to earth.” (W Post, 24 March 74, Cl)
Static test firings of a 6.4%-scale model of the space shuttle to gather acoustical data for design and development activities began at Marshall Space Flight Center. A series of 24 acoustic test firings would continue through November, with 7 additional tests later to study possible sound-suppression methods. The test model’s two solid-propellant engines, representing the shuttle vehicle’s solid-fueled-rocket boosters, were being tested first, to be followed by full system firings, including the three model liquid-propellant engines representing the main engines, which would use liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. On each firing, 60 acoustic measurements were taken by specialized microphones to monitor areas potentially sensitive to high sound-pressure levels: vehicle skin panels, thermal protection devices, electronic guidance components, and ground support and related structures, (msfc Release 74-154; msfc pio, interview, 15 July 75)
A golden age of planetary exploration was a realistic possibility, Science quoted Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as saying in an interview. Dr. Fletcher believed space science was likely to be a major thrust of the space program in the 1980s, although NASA’s budget was vulnerable to cuts in the present political climate. He ruled out manned programs other than the space shuttle, but NASA would not become an all-purpose technology development agency for energy, ground transportation, and similar nonspace systems. Applications and materials processing would be important. Dr. Fletcher believed NASA’s program was acceptable to Congress and to the White House and that its future problem would not be wholesale cancellation of the space program but surviving annual budget cuts. Increased competition for money and staff attention in congressional space-related committees could aggravate NASA’s budgetary problems, according to Science. Observers had predicted that Congress would be faced with a choice between the shuttle and continuation of the space science and applications program. The decision could rest on the support of the shuttle program by organized labor, as it had in a 1972 Senate attempt to kill the shuttle. Some scientists had suggested that a $l-billion NASA budget cut would be better for science than a $100-million cut because the former would entail canceling the shuttle, in theory freeing money for space science. Dr. Fletcher had maintained, however, that a balance between programs would be kept. (Hammond, Science, 13 Dec 74, 1011-3) .
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center since its establishment in 1962, announced his retirement. Born in Germany, Dr. Debus had begun his career in U.S. military and NASA space programs in 1945, when with Dr. Wernher von Braun he had joined the Army’s ballistic missile program. He had supervised the launch of the first Redstone ballistic missile in 1953 and the flight-testing of Jupiter and Pershing missiles and Jupiter C and Juno launch vehicles until the Army team was transferred to NASA in 1960. He had directed the launch of the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, on 31 Jan. 1958, and NASA launch programs from the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1961 to preparations for space shuttle operations. Dr. Debus had received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award from the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics as well as the Army’s highest civilian decoration, the Exceptional Civilian Service Medal, and NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal. (ksc Release 135-74; Debus letter to ksc employees)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers testified during the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1975 NASA authorization that space shuttle subcontractors, vendors, and suppliers had been selected in 32 states. Of the major subcontractors, 30 had already begun work. By June 1974 the total major subcontractor team would be at almost 100% of the required level. Shuttle employment was 16 000 and would reach 27 000 by June 1974 and 37 000 by June 1975. The first major subsystem test of the shuttle main engine would be made before the end of June 1974. Fabrication of Orbiter 1 would begin by the end of 1974, with the first horizontal flight test scheduled for the second quarter of 1977, the first manned orbital flight for the second quarter of 1979, and initial operational shuttle capability for 1980. (Transcript)
Wind-tunnel tests of almost all supersonic portions of a typical NASA space shuttle flight were completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center. The simulated flight profile included separation of the orbiter and its fuel tank from the two large solid-fueled rocket motors, orbiter flight with and without fuel tank, and orbiter reentry into the earth’s atmosphere. The tests, begun September 1973, showed orbiter flight characteristics and the heat levels segments of the system could be expected to experience while traveling 4% to 20 times the speed of sound, (afsc Newsreview, June 74, 8-9; aedc proj off, interview, 27 March 75) 6-7, 12-13 March: nasa Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Edwin C. Kilgore and other NASA officials testified on the FY 1975 nasa oast budget in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Kilgore testified 6 March that in FY 1975 oast would modify its “program again to meet the changing needs of the Nation.” Energy conservation “is an inherent part of our aeronautics and space research and I believe we have the capability also to provide significant support to civil needs for energy technology. At the same time, we must continue our effective response to the Nation’s need for a quiet, clean, economical air transportation system, for support to military aviation, and for a viable program to exploit and explore space.” Much of the aeronautics program [see 26 Feb.] already was “contributing to aircraft fuel conservation.” Advanced avionics systems to relieve terminal congestion, more highly maneuverable aircraft and operational procedures, more efficient engines, composite materials for weight reduction, and aerodynamic drag reduction techniques—“all contribute to fuel economy.” And the program was being examined to increase emphasis in areas related to the national energy problem, both in conservation and in long-term technology. For space exploration, propellants with more powerful liquified-gas oxidizers—storable in cold space conditions—offered up to 30% increase in payloads over those permitted by earth-storable propellants. Nuclear energy studies included investigation of low-temperature thermionic converters, gaseous uranium reactor concepts, and use of heat from high-temperature reactor sources for industry use. In stationary power, NASA was working with the Dept, of Interior’s Office of Coal Research to increase power produced from coal 40%. [See also During March.] George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs, oast, said 12 March that research and development on shuttle systems had contributed to substantial improvements in both high- and low-temperature reusable insulations, coatings, bearings, seals, and hydraulic fluids, all applicable on the earth. The requirement that a reusable space tug return to the shuttle for return to the earth had doubled the velocity requirement of the vehicle, speeding the development of a high-performance propulsion system. (Transcript)
NASA announced selection of General Electric Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., and TRW Systems Group to negotiate three six-month, $600 000, fixed-price contracts to make parallel system definition studies for the Earth Observatory Satellite (eos) mission. The studies were to design a low-cost modularized spacecraft with a space platform for testing sensors and collecting remotely sensed data for a variety of applications missions, eos would be designed for launch by both conventional boosters and the space shuttle. (NASA Release 74-80)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had signed a protocol agreement in Moscow with the U.S.S.R. on possible future cooperation, including development of civilian transports and helicopters, air traffic control, and navigation and communications systems, Lockheed announced. The protocol was one of 20 agreements the U.S.S.R. signed with U.S. companies. (Lockheed Release, 30 Jan 74) 30 January—4 February: Two representatives of the 10-nation European Space Research Organization that would develop and build Spacelab for use with NASA’s space shuttle accompanied U.S. scientists on the Ames Research Center’s Galileo II Convair 990 aircraft on flights evaluating electronic instruments designed to measure sea conditions. Dr. D. J. Shapland of the United Kingdom and J. De Waard of The Netherlands observed the flying laboratory, which would serve as a pattern for shuttle sortie missions carrying Spacelab. Spacelab was to have two elements: a manned laboratory module permitting scientists and engineers to work in a shirt-sleeve environment and an instrument platform, or pallet, for telescopes, antenna, and other equipment requiring space exposure, (nasa Release 74-31; arc Aerospace Sci Div, interview, 17 July 74)
NASA announced two Kennedy Space Center contract awards for space shuttle facilities. Morrison-Knudsen Co., Inc., had been given a $21 812 737 contract to construct a space shuttle runway with overruns, apron, taxiway, and access roads. The runway—to be completed within 850 days after the notice to proceed—was to be built northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. Reynolds, Smith, and Hills received a $1 463 000 fixed-price contract to design modifications to Launch Complex 39 and Mobile Launcher 3 for shuttle operations. Complex 39, Apollo and Skylab launch site, would next be used for a manned flight in 1975, for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Releases 74-66, 74-67)
Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, Dept, of Defense Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testified on dod space programs before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1975 NASA authorization hearings: dod would provide an interim, upper, orbit-to-orbit stage (oos) for initial use with NASA’s space shuttle until NASA could develop a permanent space tug. The oos, which would provide the high orbits necessary for about 60% of military payloads, would be a low-cost modification of an existing upper stage and would be phased to coincide with the first operation of the shuttle orbiter in 1980. About $3.0 million would he spent in FY 1975 to select stage configuration and initiate detailed specifications. The oos would have no payload retrieval capability and might not be reusable but could be used by NASA or any other shuttle user during early shuttle operations, dod would install facilities to provide initial shuttle capability at Vandenberg Air Force Base in December 1982. Shuttle hardware, software, operating procedures, and ground equipment would be common and interchangeable to the maximum extent possible between KSC and Vandenberg. During FY 1974 DOD had initiated the development and validation plan for the navstar Global Positioning System, using satellites to provide worldwide precise positioning and navigation, accurate to tens of meters. The system, usable for civilian purposes as well as military, would halt the proliferation of specialized systems. The Navy’s Fleet Satellite Communications System (fltsatcom) , to provide reliable beyond-the-horizon communications for command and control of mobile DOD forces, was “well into development.” Terminal equipment for the fleet would be installed in FY 1975 and FY 1976 and would be operated through minimal leased transponders in Communication Satellite Corp.’s Maritime Communications Satellite System pending full operation of fltsatcom in 1976. Three operational early warning satellites were in geostationary orbit. DOD would seek to improve coverage and mission duration and continue development of a simplified processing station. Two Lincoln Experimental Satellites, comsats les 8 and 9 scheduled for 1975 launch, would use radioisotope thermoelectric generators instead of solar cell arrays. The Space Detection and Tracking System (spadats), which could cover up to 5600 km, would he expanded. DOD was working on detectors, target discrimination, data processing, and other critical optical and radar components, to reach a near-real-time ground-based capability by FY 1978 to detect, track, and identify all objects up to 36 000-km altitude. (Transcript; Av Wk, 1 April 74,20)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced his decision to award Thiokol Corp. immediately a 5.5-million, 180-day letter contract to develop the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motors. The definitive contract would be awarded later. Lockheed Propulsion Co. had protested to the General Accounting Office the original, 20 Nov. 1973 contract award to Thiokol. gao validated NASA’s selection procedures 24 June 1974. gao stated, however, that the NASA cost analysis had contained an overstatement of the cost differential favoring Thiokol’s proposal over Lockheed’s and recommended the NASA Administrator determine whether the award should be reconsidered. Dr. Fletcher advised the Comptroller General that the decision to proceed with Thiokol was based on the conclusion that the rationale used for the initial selection remained valid, (nasa Release 74-178; 74-180; A&A 1973)
Johnson Space Center had issued requests to 11 interested aerospace companies to submit contract proposals for computing and data processing for space program software systems, JSC announced. Primary objective of the contract would be to define, design, .develop, and maintain software systems (for space shuttle, earth resources, and other science programs) that had maximum flexibility for supporting a wide variety of missions and future requirements. The cost-plus-award-fee contract would run from 1 July 1974 through 31 Dec. 1979. (JSC Release 74-30)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998, a clean bill introduced 4 April to replace H.R. 12689, was reported out of the House Committee oh Science and Astronautics. The revised bill would authorize $3,253 billion in FY 1975 funding, an increase of $6 million over the original request. Authorizations for research and development increased $11 million to $2,357 billion, and construction of facilities decreased $5 million, to $146.5 million. Funding for research and program management remained the same. Iiicluded in the k&d increases was a $2Q-million addition, to a total $112.3 million, for the space shuttle main engine, which had encountered technical problems during early development. The increase was proposed to add confidence in meeting schedules and hold total program costs at the current projection. A $4.3-million increase, to $170.7 million, was added for aeronautical research and technology. A $1.8-million increase brought the total for space and nuclear research and technology to $76.6 million. Manned space flight operations funding was decreased $15 million, to $308.3 million, including a $5-million decrease (to $109.6 million) for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and a $10-million decrease (to $165.2 million) in development, test, and mission operations. Changes in facility construction authorizations included an increase of $4 million, to $10.04 million for construction of the infrared telescope facility in Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The Committee also requested that NASA make a scientific and technological inventory of its capability to contribute to such critical national needs as energy, transportation, and environmental control. NASA was to report to the Committee by 1 Aug. (H Rpt 93-983)
Johnson Space Center announced award of a 12-mo, $300 000 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. Denver Div. to study technical and operational concepts for manned and automated assembly of space systems from the space shuttle orbiter. Martin was asked to consider use of manipulative devices, an astronaut maneuvering unit, and simple docking systems, (jsc Release 74-251) _ _
NASA announced selection of International Business Machines Corp. for an fill-million, two-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to design, develop, and implement a ground-based computing and data-processing system for the space shuttle and other programs. (NASA Release 74-132)
The success of the Skylab program had made the idea of continuous occupation of an orbital base more concrete to the directors of the American space efforts, a New York Times article reported. Such a base could be assembled by flights of the space shuttle being developed by NASA and could be used to observe the sun and the earth and for manufacturing special materials under weightless conditions. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider had said in an interview, “We have shown that there is no man or machine limitation on whatever we want to do in space.” The confidence of space scientists had been strengthened by the apparent adaptation of the astronauts to space, although the Times reported Skylab 2 Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin and Johnson Space Center Director Christopher C. Kraft as cautioning that nine men “is a very small statistical sample.” More long test flights would have to be made. However, if the medical data held true, the design of future space stations could be made much simpler and the number of space shuttle flights to establish it would be fewer. Schneider had noted that the conflict between the Workshop’s need for power and its program for observation was still to be solved. The current design called for Workshop solar panels to point toward the sun rather than the earth. In a future space station, observatories might be placed on long booms which could turn on their own, minimizing the station’s need to maneuver. (McElheny, NYT, 10 Feb 74,40)
A Boeing 747 aircraft had been chosen to transport the space shuttle orbiter and related hardware from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, NASA announced. The 747 would also be used in approach and landing tests of the reusable orbiter. Bought from American Airlines, a used 747 would be modified and equipped with fittings to permit quick installation of the orbiter or hardware on top of the aircraft. Flight profile tests would begin immediately; modifications were to begin after November. Ground and flight tests would begin in late 1976. Takeoff weight with the orbiter was estimated as 35 000 kg. (nasa Release 74-160)
Johnson Space Center had requested proposals from 21 firms to design, develop, fabricate, install, and check out one orbiter aeroflight simulator to support crew training during Orbiter 1 development flights in the space shuttle program, JSC announced, (jsc Release 84[74]—150)
Tentative NASA plans for launching 810 payloads into space in the next two decades were outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. The total, for late 1973 to 1991, included non-NASA payloads for Government agencies (other than the Dept, of Defense), foreign agencies, and private industry. The tentative payload model—presented to Congress in October 1973 to show “what could be done in the 1980s” when the space shuttle was in use—included as many as 10 missions to the outer planets Uranus, Neptune, Jupiter, and Saturn. In 1990 and 1991 two very heavy payloads might be sent to orbit one of Jupiter’s moons and land an instrument package. Tentative missions to the inner planets included five missions to Venus, one of them with a lander, and two spacecraft to orbit Mercury. Tentative Mars missions included one spacecraft to orbit the planet, two landers, and two to return samples from the two moons of Mars. Lunar missions under consideration included a lunar polar orbiter in 1979, two other orbiters in the 1980s, two lunar rovers in the 1980s, a lunar halo satellite to ensure communications with the hidden side of the moon, and two lunar rovers in 1990 and 1991 that could return samples to the earth from any point on the moon. Other plans under consideration were a flyby and rendezvous with Comet Encke and a landing on the nucleus, a flyby of Haley’s Comet in 1985, and two missions to asteroids in 1986. Of the 810 total payloads, 57 were designated for planetary exploration and 753 for earth orbit. Scientific satellites for earth orbit were Large Space Telescopes, High Energy Astronomical Observatories, Large Solar Observatories, Large Radio Astronomy Observatories, and x-ray telescopes. The large spacecraft would be unmanned but visited regularly by space shuttle crews and brought back to earth for refurbishing. In the applications field were large Earth Observatory Satellites. And NASA expected to orbit 120 communications and navigation satellites for other agencies or private industry through 1991, not including those for DOD. Of some 300 payloads to be flown in the Spacelab, most would be NASA payloads in the fields of astronomy, physics, earth observations, earth and ocean physics, communication and navigation, life science, and space technology. Of non-NASA payloads, 10 would be for private industry space processing, beginning in 1985. Some 10% were expected to be flown for foreign users. The large number of contemplated missions, even with the increasing number of U.S.S.R. launches, was expected to have very little impact on the environment. Effects of the major constituents of the solid-fueled rocket booster exhaust—water vapor, carbon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, and aluminum oxide—would be negligible. (Text)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a two-phase planning study contract for the space transportation system (sts) to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Phase 1, funded at $116 214 for six months, would define a master scheduling concept for effective use of the space shuttle, interim upper stage, space tug, and Spacelab. Phase 2, funded at $183 240 for an additional nine months, would validate a master planning technique and establish specifications for scheduling. (msfc Release 74-242)
The Army was issuing a $1 988 000 firm-fixed-price contract to Algernon Blair Industrial Contractors, Inc., for modifications to orbiter propulsion system test facilities for space shuttle engine testing at NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility, the Dept, of Defense announced, (dod Release 59—74)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $69 316 six-month contract to International Telephone & Telegraph Corp. ITT Gilfillan Div. to analyze a two-way optical data link, using laser beams and operating between the ground and payloads in low earth orbit. The study, which could lead to a laser communications system for the space shuttle, was expected to provide information on the most effective lasers and frequencies and the effects of orbital dynamics, (msfc Release 74-105)
Johnson Space Center had awarded a $6 598 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Inc., for Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and space shuttle orbiter software development, jsc announced. (jsc Release 74-62)
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $3 850 000 contract modification to Rockwell International Corp. for architectural and engineering services and construction of test and industrial facilities for the space shuttle main engine, NASA announced. (NASA Release 74-97)
Astronaut-physician Dr. F. Story Musgrave and Dr. Dennis R. Morrison of Johnson Space Center’s Bioscience Payloads Office spent one week in a mockup Spacelab at JSC in a shakedown' test of operational procedures and experiments. Spacelab, a scientific space laboratory, was being developed and built by the European Space Research Organization for orbital missions aboard NASA’s space shuttle. A rehearsal for future tests and a means of perfecting operational procedures, this first test also evaluated proposed space shuttle ground support and flight crew operational procedures, data-handling techniques, man-machine integration, and biomedical demonstrations representative of Spacelab medical experiments, (jsc Release 74-255; jsc Roundup, 11 Oct 74, 1)
nasa announced a 45-day $500 000 continuation of a 13 Feb. contract with Thiokol Chemical Corp. for the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motor design study. In addition to original contract requirements, the continuation contract required that Thiokol assist nasa in idenifying materials, independent of the specific final motor design, that had long-lead-time supply times, (nasa Release 74-130)
Federal research and development support of space programs had declined steadily in proportion to civil projects from 1969 to 1975, the National Science Foundation reported in its Analysis of Federal R&D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969—1975. Energy and environment programs had outpaced other major civil programs, while space programs had been reduced more than any other R&D function in the period. In FY 1975, the space budget was 13% of the planned $19.6-billion Federal r&d funding, a decline from 23.9% in 1969. Manned space flight, including the space shuttle, would account for more than half the 1975 total, (nsf Report 74-313)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Aerospace Co., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., and Martin Marietta Corp. for negotiation of parallel contracts of about $300 000 each for preliminary design and program definition studies for the support systems module (ssm), a major element of the Large Space Telescope (lst) . The lst was scheduled for launch into orbit on the space shuttle in the 1980s. The ssm, attached to the structure housing the telescope, would provide electric power, data storage, communications, and automated attitude sensing, pointing, and control. The unit would also contain some of the elements for orbital servicing and retrieval of the telescope by the space shuttle, (nasa Release 74-308)
The European Space Research Organization decided to award a $226million, six-year contract to vfw—Fokker/ERNo Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor heading a European team to design and develop Spacelab, the reusable, manned laboratory to be carried into orbit on NASA’s space shuttle in the 1980s. The unanimous decision, made at a Paris meeting of esro’s Administrative and Finance Committee, followed six weeks’ evaluation of two industrial proposals. The second proposal had been submitted by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm. The contract provided for delivery of one Spacelab flight unit, fully qualified and ready for installation of experiments, by April 1979. Two engineering models and three sets of ground support equipment and initial spares would also be delivered. Spacelab, to be reusable for 50 missions of 7 to 30 days each, would permit scientists and engineers to work in earth orbit in shirtsleeve comfort and without extensive astronaut training. The first launch was scheduled for 1980. (esro Release, 5 June 74)
The National Academy of Sciences issued Scientific Uses of the Space Shuttle, report of a July 1973 conference in Woods Hole, Mass., sponsored by the nas Space Science Board. The conference, attended by 61 U.S. and European scientists from seven scientific disciplines, concluded the shuttle could be an important asset to scientific research. Increased size, weight, and simplicity permitted for payloads would be of chief importance. But many potential advantages depended on innovative management and clear-cut, efficient, and flexible procedures for flying multipurpose missions. Small experiments could be flown cost-effectively on small standardized pallets with integrated experiments, put on standby and flown when space was available. The projected 28-day sortie mission would be valuable for most disciplines but major programs requiring longer observation times should be carried out on free-flying automated spacecraft launched from a pallet in the shuttle’s payload bay. Cost-effectiveness of recovering and refurbishing payloads in orbit required additional study. A sophisticated Large Space Telescope—proposed for launch on the shuttle—might be worth the cost to revisit and service or return to earth. But visits to less expensive spacecraft in inconvenient orbits might prove too costly. Limits on recoverable payload weight might also restrict recovery. Scientists expressed concern that weight requirements for men in addition to a crew might limit scientific payloads. A manned Spacelab module was considered essential for biomedical research but other disciplines could often use a smaller module housing a payload specialist and his console. Because of weight penalties, real-time control and evaluation might be best supplied by a ground-based control using a shuttle-to-ground communications system, such as the proposed Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , giving continuous global coverage with a high rate of data interchange. (Text) July 1974
Design work on the primary rescue system for space shuttle passengers proceeded at Johnson Space Center. A prototype “beach ball” large enough for a person to crawl into, zip up, and pressurize had been demonstrated and given a go-ahead at NASA Hq. in December 1973. Assistant Chief for Shuttle Larry E. Bell in jsc’s Crew Systems Div. had told a news interviewer the balls could be packaged into cylinders to accompany each passenger aboard the shuttle in the 1980s, “almost like a parachute.” Simplicity, size, light weight, structural strength of the ball shape, and low cost had won approval over expensive and complicated spacesuits for nonastronauts on flights and eliminated the requirement for a rescue docking module. In an emergency, passengers could enter the balls—each with its own window—an hour or two before rescue by a second shuttle. Oxygen containers connected to the shuttle supply system would be used until just before rescue; a device would remove carbon dioxide. Once disconnected, each container would last an hour; transfer through space to the rescue shuttle was expected to take 30 min. (Bell interview, 4 March 75; Hill, H Chron, 21 April *74)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in his article “Are Skylab and the Space Shuttle Worth the Investment?” in Government Executive that everything done in the Skylab program—with total runout costs of $2.6 billion through FY 1974—had been necessary for future progress in space. He believed the Skylab team had “taken another giant leap for mankind comparable to the first step upon the Moon or the first satellite in Earth orbit.” And even if the shuttle were not expected to save $1 billion a year in launch and payload costs, as it was—after an $8-billion 1972-1991 investment—the U.S. “should still build it. We cannot run Spaceship Earth without it.” We could not “begin to think of obtaining solar power from collectors in space without the Shuttle; we cannot hope to unlock the still hidden energy secrets of the Sun and stars without improved space observatories launched by the Shuttle; we cannot hope to develop the tools for management of natural resources and protection of our environment on a global scale without manned and unmanned Earth observatories launched and serviced by the advantages of a ‘hydrogen economy’ in the future unless we are willing to support such important steps toward that future as a hydrogen-fueled Shuttle. In short, there is no new frontier in space for America and mankind without the Shuttle.” (Govt Exec, Jan 74,38-42) February 1974
An Aviation Week <& Space Technology editorial said the FY 1975 aerospace budget request offered the aerospace industry “its best prospect in a decade.” The dollar increases were “significant because they were aimed at alleviating problems caused by a decade of neglect in basic weapon system development and diplomatic euphoria” and recognized that aerospace was an “important sinew of national power and economic strength.” It was the first budget in many years that had no major program cancellations or cuts. The worst cut, $89 million, meant a six-month delay in the first shuttle flight but was accompanied by a written guarantee of future support for full funding of the program. The military budget was well balanced between research, development, and procurement. While the NASA program would not satisfy the space buffs, it was a strong continuing effort supplemented by $500 million in military space activities and the growing communications and applications space activity in other agencies. The aerospace industry must now spend extra effort in delivering the hardware and performance to meet the challenge required by this budget. (Holz, Av Wk, 11 Feb 74,7) # _
A giant nylon parachute was demonstrated at Kennedy Space Center as a possible design for the recovery of the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket booster casings. The parachute—built by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. to provide knowledge of handling heavy parachutes—had a base diameter of 40 m, base canopy circumference of 120 m, and total weight of 940 kg. Plans called for the use of three or four chutes of this kind in addition to a drogue chute to land the shuttle’s two 73 000-kg booster casings in the Atlantic, where boosters and parachutes could be retrieved by ships. (Spaceport News, 27 June 74, 5)
NASA had awarded the Planning Research Corp., Huntsville, Ala.,- a oneyear $6-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, with an additional one-year SlO-million option, to provide design engineering support services for development, test, and mission operations primarily in support of the space shuttle at Kennedy Space Center, ksc announced, (ksc Release 75-74)
Ames Research Center awarded a $400 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for a design study of an infrared telescope to be carried on the space shuttle above the impeding effects of the atmosphere. The telescope, to operate in orbit attached to the shuttle orbiter, was to have a one-arc-sec pointing accuracy, a 1- to 1.5-m aperture, and cooled optics and sensors. The study would include the telescope facility concept, interfaces with the shuttle orbiter and Spacelab, operating requirements for shuttle and telescope, and ground station requirements including data transfer from the telescope to the ground and control of the telescope from the ground if necessary, (arc proj off, interview, 29 July 75; AvWk, 19 Aug 74,18)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of six contracts, totaling $1.8 million, for development studies of the interim upper stage (ius) and space tug. The ius—a predecessor to the space tug, to be used with the space shuttle by both the Dept, of Defense and NASA until the more sophisticated and capable tug was ready for use in 1983—was being developed as the orhit-to-orhit stage (oos) by the Air Force. General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. was awarded a $290 000 contract to study space shuttle and tug compatibility and develop detailed interface requirements. A second contract to General Dynamics, totaling $268 000, was awarded for a definition study of space tug avionics systems with emphasis on areas where transition from the ius to the tug would require significant hardware or operational changes. United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. received a $375 371 contract to evaluate and verify the RL-10 high-area-ratio nozzle engine performance for space tug application. Under a $246 000 contract, Martin Marietta Corp. would develop concepts, techniques, and tools for tug fleet and ground operations, mission assignments, payload and orbiter integration, tug scheduling, and physical status, msfc awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $293 277 contract to study ius-tug payload requirements compatibility and International Business Machines Corp. a $337 250 contract to study ius-tug orbital operations, (msfc Release 74-135) <f
President Ford signed an $82.1-billion FY 1975 Dept, of Defense appropriation bill, almost $5 billion below the Administration request. The conference committee bill had been approved by the House 23 Sept, and the Senate 24 Sept. Research, development, test, and evaluation funds included $445 million for the B-l advanced strategic bomber, clearing the way for construction of a fourth developmental prototype during FY 1975. The Navy vfax fighter program was allocated $20 million for adaptation of the air combat fighter to be selected by the Air Force— either the General Dynamics Corp. YF—16 or the Northrop Corp. YF-17. Other funds included $81.4 million for six A-10 close-air-support R&D aircraft (in addition to $138 million for purchase of 25 production aircraft); $175 million for F—15 air superiority fighter R&D, and $8.6 million for Navy v/stol development. {PD, 14 Oct 74, 1250; CR, 23 Sept 74, D1125; 24 Sept 74, D1130; Av Wk, 23 Sept 74,17-8) Donald Stone of msfc’s Electronics and Control Laboratory reported a scanning laser radar for automatic rendezvous and docking had been tested for possible use on the space shuttle, space tug, and solar electric propulsion stage. Plans called for delivery of the radar to a simulator of the space tug flight system for evaluation under conditions similar to actual use. (Proceedings; msfc Release 74-182)
NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on applications programs before the Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1975 authorization hearings. In NASA’s weather and climate program, satellites were providing increasingly valuable information for short-range forecasting: day and night cloud-cover images around the globe, temperature profiles (although still cloud-limited) and surface temperature maps, gross moisture profiles, and sea ice mapping. NASA had begun microwave sounding experiments to overcome the cloud problem. Still needed were improved sounding accuracy and coverage, refined moisture profiles, and simpler and less expensive random-access data-collection systems. For one- to two-week prediction, space capabilities were contributing to progress but lacked complete coverage of critical wind and temperature areas around the globe. New measurement approaches and improved cloud tracking were planned. For severe storm and disaster warnings— which contained “the greatest potential payoff’—a long-term effort was studying advances in computer technology and display devices to assimilate and convey the mass of data produced. NASA had begun to develop primitive climate models for farmers that would have “high utility value to the agriculture section of our economy.” Remote sensing from space and research in a laboratory carried on the space shuttle could give data on weather modification possibilities and results. (Transcript)
The Shuttle Avionic Integration Laboratory (sail) was being established at Johnson Space Center to provide a central facility for testing and evaluating avionics, flight software, flight procedures, and ground equipment for the space shuttle. Testing in sail would provide information on system operation before each major step in the shuttle flight tests. (jsc Roundup, 4 Jan 74)
Skyrocketing fuel prices had added almost $1.5 billion to the cost of producing aluminum, titanium, and magnesium, threatening serious inflation for military aircraft programs and NASA’s space shuttle, the Washington Post reported. The price of aluminum had jumped from 6.5 cents for a half kilogram to 31.5 cents in the preceding six months. One aerospace company was quoted as telling the Pentagon and NASA that the rising aluminum prices would increase its program costs 16%. Grumman Aircraft Corp. had said it was paying 25% more for titanium and aluminum than one year ago. Grumman manufactured six models of aircraft, including the Navy’s F-14, which used more titanium than any other aircraft. Rockwell International Corp. had raised the estimated delivery cost of each of its B-l bombers from $45 million to $61.5 million, at least partly because of soaring aluminum and titanium prices. Each B-l required 12 000 kg of titanium and 24 000 kg of aluminum. (O’Toole, W Post, 8 May 74)
President Nixon was briefed on the space shuttle and the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at Johnson Space Center. Following a tour, the President and Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented the Sky lab 4 astronauts with NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal. Nixon praised the efforts of the “great American scientific, mechanical, and clerical communities” for their contributions to the space program. “You have contributed to . . . the spirit of a great country, which means always look out toward the unknown, go there, take any risk, make any sacrifice, and never be discouraged because sometimes you may fail.” Of the astp, President Nixon said that although systems of government were different, the U.S. wanted “to cooperate with the Russian people and with all the people on the earth in anything that will advance the cause of science, the cause of health, the cause of a better life foT all our children, as well, of course, as the cause of peace.” (jsc Roundup, 29 March 74,1; PD, 25 March 74,345-347)
The Senate approved the House-Senate Conference report on H.R. 13998 recommending a $3.267-billion FY 1975 NASA authorization. The compromise between the 9 May Senate bill and the 25 April House bill would authorize $805 million for the space shuttle, a $5-million increase over the President’s requested funding instead of the $20-million increase voted by the House. An $18.8-million increase in space applications, instead of the Senate’s $23-million increase, dropped specific designation of $13 million for the erts-c spacecraft, but the Conference report recommended that the project be promptly initiated and it retained the Senate’s $3-miIIion addition for a Thor-Delta to launch erts-C. The Conference bill would decrease manned space flight operations funding by $10 million, instead of the Senate’s $5-million cut and the House bill’s $15-million cut. It would retain the Senate’s $5.1-million addition for aeronautical research and add 4.9 million for energy research, as well as the House-and-Senate-voted $2 million for research in shortterm weather phenomena and the House-added $1 million for ground propulsion research. (CR, 30 May 74, S9349-52)
