In the general purpose laboratory (GPL) at Marshall Space Flight Center, investigators from MSFC and Johnson Space Center were conducting experiments in high-energy cosmic-ray astronomy, superfluid helium, optical x-ray astronomy, and life sciences. The objective of the experiments, designated concept verification test (CVT) 5, was to verify operational and integration concepts for their applicability to Spacelab, the reusable manned space laboratory being built by the European Space Agency as a payload for the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the high-energy astronomy experiment was to demonstrate the use of minicomputers for experiment operation, control, and data management, and the real-time interaction of payload specialists with experiment operations. The superfluid helium experiment examined characteristics of helium droplets at temperatures near 2.2 K (—512°F), which would help in developing cryogenic techniques for use in Spacelab. The optical astronomy experiment, which demonstrated remote experiment operation by obtaining data from a Ferson 40.6-cm telescope 9.2 kilometers away, gave practice in investigator-experiment interaction and helped in developing computer control techniques, display requirements for telescope operation and data management, and astronomy training requirements for crew members. The four life-sciences experiments included studies of sporophore formation, the vestibular function, a clinical diagnostic system, and muscle-like contractile protein. Investigators also participated in an experiment to demonstrate the use of a computer in real-time mission planning, scheduling, and applications. By involving investigators in the CVT simulations, NASA would be able to plan the most cost-effective use of Spacelab. (MSFC Release 75-178)
Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)
A request for proposals for integrated electronic assemblies (IEA) for the Space Shuttle’s solid-rocket boosters had been issued by Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. The proposals would be for design, development, test and evaluation, fabrication, and assembly of 33 IEAs. The Space Shuttle would carry two refurbishable IEAs, one forward and one aft, to route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system to release the nosecap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket motor nozzle, detach parachutes, and turn on the recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—11)
NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration were near agreement on a plan to build a coal gasification plant near NASA’s Michoud assembly facility in La. to provide hydrogen gas for testing and operating the Space Shuttle, said Dr. Myron S. Malkin, director of the Space Shuttle program for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. In testimony before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Dr. Malkin said ERDA would hire a private contractor to build a $65-million plant and would operate it for 3 yr to obtain data on coal gasification; after that, it would turn the plant over to NASA. The facility would produce enough gas daily to provide 30 tons of liquid hydrogen for the Shuttle. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 858, 910)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two contracts to Martin Marietta Corp. for further studies on the Earth Orbiting Teleoperator System (EOTS). Under a $246 570 contract Martin would design EOTS, an unmanned remotely controlled spacecraft, to operate in earth orbit near the Space Shuttle Orbiter. The spacecraft would carry a TV camera for close-up inspection, have docking capability, and be propelled by cold-gas expulsion. Under a $64 000 contract Martin would develop a complete set of requirements for the control and display station, a unit in the Orbiter that would contain control equipment common to all experiments requiring a teleoperator system. (MSFC Release 75—29)
NASA had issued a request for proposals for the procurement of telecommunications services provided by a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) developed and operated by industry to meet NASA requirements, NASA announced. TDRSS, consisting of two specialized relay satellites in synchronous earth orbit and a U.S.-based ground terminal, would relay nearly continuous data and voice commands to and from mission spacecraft and the ground control center. The network could support all earth-orbiting spacecraft below 5000 km, including the Space Shuttle and Spacelab, and provide 85% coverage, compared with the current 15% coverage by the conventional ground tracking system. (NASA Release 75—37)
NASA announced the award of a $2 376 400 contract to Reinhold Construction Co. for phase 2 of the Space Shuttle landing facility, including the landing aids control building, Orbiter landing instrumentation facilities, and related communications and utility systems. Phase 2 was scheduled for completion by the end of 1976. Phase 1, which began in April 1974 as a $21 812 737 contract with Morrison Knudsen Co., included construction of the 4570-m-long, 91-m-wide runway, towway apron, and towway. Site preparation was nearing completion and the paving with nearly 200 000 cu m of cement would begin in July. Phase 1 was scheduled for completion by the summer of 1976. (KSC Release 62— 75)
The Air Force had announced operational concepts for Space Shuttle launches at Vandenberg Air Force Base. Construction, planned to begin in mid-1978, would cost $50 million less than original estimates through maximum use of existing facilities such as Space Launch Complex No. 6—constructed in the 1960s for the Air Force’s manned orbiting laboratory cancelled in June 1969—and existing roadways and railroad tracks. An “integrate on the pad” concept and modification of surplus Saturn IB rocket transporters to move the Orbiter and external tanks to the launch pad had eliminated the need for a new highway and railroad system. A study coordinated with the Navy showed that the solid-rocket booster that dropped off the main tank into the ocean could be successfully recovered with a minimum of new facilities by using an existing Navy dock and large stationary crane. Operations facility requirements would be programmed in two phases: Phase one, construction of a complete ground-support system, would allow the DOD to operate Space Shuttle missions from Vandenberg by December 1982. Phase two called for completion of a second launch pad in late 1986. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 16)
NASA’s basic goal in the U.S. stratospheric research program was to determine the normal makeup of the upper atmosphere with emphasis on understanding the dynamic processes occurring and the perturbations caused by natural and man-made events, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s current high-altitude program was being carried out by conventional and special purpose aircraft such as the U—2, instrumented packages placed on commercial aircraft, instrumented balloons, sounding rockets, and computer modeling techniques. Satellites still provided the best potential for continuing repetitive global observations of the upper atmosphere. The Nimbus satellites had measured properties affecting the ozone and had made vertical profiles of the upper atmosphere. Atmospheric Explorer (AE) satellites had made coordinated investigations of photochemical processes in the upper atmosphere caused by solar ultraviolet radiation. Dr. Fletcher said that NASA would continue these efforts and had plans for new atmospheric studies. In addition to payloads planned for launch on the Space Shuttle, NASA would use instrumented aircraft, balloons, and sounding rockets to study the effects of chlorofluorometh-anes, or Freon, on atmospheric ozone. (Transcript)
NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin as Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in the Office of Manned Space Flight, effective 1 Aug. In his new position Griffin would plan for the most economical and flexible operation of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. Griffin, who was Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs before this appointfnent, would be replaced by Dr. Joseph P. Allen, an astronaut assigned to the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. (NASA anno 17 July 75)
NASA had awarded a $152 565 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, and test of the Space Shuttle external tank, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The contract, which covered the first increment of the external tank project for 1 Sept. 1973 to 30 June 1980, called for a maximum production rate of 24 tanks per year and delivery of major ground-test articles and 6 flight-model tanks. The work would be done at Michoud Assembly Facility under the direction of MSFC. (MSFC Release 75—28) During January: Opportunities and Choices in Space Science, 1974, a report published by the Space Science Board of the National Research Council, recommended that NASA undertake the Large Space Telescope as the only new space research start in FY 1976. The telescope should be followed by a series of permanent national and international observatories in orbit. The report also recommended that, budget permitting, NASA undertake in 1977 a lunar—polar mission, a Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter, a Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission, and a solar maximum mission. However, NASA should compare the importance of the Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter with the Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission if current FY 1977 budget estimates would not support both missions. Other recommendations included an immediate reevaluation of strategy for missions to explore the outer solar system during the next decade and for returning a Martian surface sample to earth instead of landing an unmanned laboratory to perform analyses as current plans propose. The report strongly endorsed the High Energy Astronomical Observatories (HEAO), Pioneer—Venus mission, and Mariner— Jupiter—Saturn mission as vital to the nation’s space science efforts. (Text)
Design and fabrication of the first Space Shuttle Orbiter was progressing well, with all major structural elements—forward fuselage, tail, wings, mid fuselage—scheduled for final assembly in mid-1975, NASA Deputy Director of the Space Shuttle LeRoy E. Day told the Canadian Science Writers Association in Toronto, Canada. The main rocket engine, the most difficult development item, was being built on a 10-yr technology base in which government and industry had invested nearly $100 million. During 1974, initial component engine firings had been made, and firings of the first integrated subsystems test bed engine were scheduled for July. The emphasis for the expendable external tank had been on simplified low-cost production. An inexpensive spray-on insulation had been developed to protect the aluminum skin from excessive temperatures during ascent. ' In summary, NASA and its contractors were making steady progress, holding within cost and schedule commitments. The first Orbiter would be rolled out in 1976, with its first captive flight on the back of the Boeing 747 aircraft scheduled for the second quarter of 1977. The first approach and landing tests, in 1977, would be made by separating the Orbiter from the 747 at about 8500 m, permitting the Orbiter to glide down and land on the runway at Edwards Air Force Base. The second Orbiter would be used for the first orbital flight in 1979, with six developmental flights scheduled before the Space Shuttle became operational in 1980. (Transcript)
Air Force Systems Command Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory scientists were studying changes in human body weights and sizes as part of a NASA-requested anthropometric study to help engineers design cockpits and crew stations for future use. NASA engineers who wanted to lay out the Space Shuttle work station were concerned that body sizes of the pilots might change before the station was used. The scientists performing the study, using both current data and data that went back as far as the Civil War, estimated that in 1985 a pilot would average nearly 2 kg heavier and 1.5 cm taller than in 1967, when he had weighed 78.5 kg and was 177 cm tall. In addition to statistics, NASA requested drawing board manikins for designing the Shuttle’s work areas. The study had produced two 2dimensional manikins like cardboard dolls with movable joints; each manikin was articulated in nine places to represent typical ranges of body movement. A 95% manikin represented a person 189.0 cm tall; a 5% manikin, representing a 168.3-cm astronaut or pilot, was designed so that only 5% of the 1985 pilot-astronaut population would be smaller. An engineer using both manikins could design a crew station or cockpit that would accommodate 90% of all astronauts and pilots. (AFSC Release OIP 072.75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $4 409 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to Bendix Corp. for design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of integrated electronic assemblies (1EA) for Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters on the first six Shuttle developmental flights. Each booster would require two IEAs: The forward IEA would initiate release of the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket-motor nozzle, detach the parachute, and turn on recovery aids. The aft IEA would interface with the Orbiter, the forward IEA, and other avionic systems. Delivery of the IEAs would begin in 1976 and continue through 1 Apr. 1979. (MSFC Release 75 — 190)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Johnson Space Center’s Glynn S. Lunney, U.S. Technical Director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been named manager of the Space Shuttle Payload Integration and Development Program Office, JSC’s Roundup reported. The office had been created to plan and develop JSC payload for the Space Shuttle. The Apollo Spacecraft Program Office had been abolished, and personnel from that office and the Payloads Coordination Office had been reassigned to the new program office. Besides managing Shuttle payloads and components—including the Interim Upper-Stage low-cost modular spacecraft, long-duration exposure facility, and Large Space Telescope—the new office would manage JSC participation in international space activities, including any future U.S.-U.S.S.R. activities. (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 1)
Marshall Space Might Center announced selection of nine experiments on processing materials in space to be carried aboard a Black Brant 5C sounding rocket scheduled for December launch. The launch would be first in a 5-yr series of space-processing flights in MSFC’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to find improved methods of materials processing on earth, and ultimately to produce materials in space that could not be produced on earth. The nine experiments were: dendrite remelting and macrosegregation; liquid mixing; lead-antimony eutectic; foams from sputter-deposited metals; thoria-dispersed magnesium; dispersion-strengthened lead-silver alloys; particle-interface interactions; bubble behavior in melts; and contained poly crystalline solidification. The low-cost rocket launches, each of which provided approximately 5.5 min of low gravity (0.001 of earth’s) during the coast phase of the trajectory, would offer the only means of obtaining scientific data on space processing of materials in near-zero gravity until flights of the Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75— 225)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had said that NASA’s Space Shuttle program “might be on the verge of a financial breakdown,” the Washington Post reported. Citing a General Accounting Office report, Sen. Proxmire warned that the risk of cost overruns had increased and that Congress should look for “cheaper alternatives.” (AP, W Post, 6 March 75)
A long-duration free-flying manned space station in earth orbit appeared to be the most economical way of providing a continuing manned presence in space, according to “Manned Orbital Systems Concepts,” a study conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. A station that could significantly extend the time in space planned for the Space Shuttle would offer advantages for doing a given amount of work with fewer flights and reducing the number of turnarounds, checkouts, and similar operations. A permanent facility could offer maintenance and repair and even reconfiguration of payloads. The study envisioned development of four-man facilities that would serve as building blocks for growth into larger stations for 12 or 24 workers as needed; the four-man configuration would consist of a subsystems and habitability module carried into orbit by one Shuttle and joined with a logistics and payload module carried on a second mission. Several payload modules could be docked in tandem with the core vehicle, or in radial locations through use of a multiple-port docking adapter. The core vehicle would be left on station for a nominal lifetime of 5 yr, logistic and payload modules being replaced at 90-day intervals. Crew exchange and resupply would occur every 90 days. The study concluded that problems anticipated by the world in the 1990s should be solved in the 1980s, and that an extended-duration manned orbital facility could contribute significantly to those solutions. (MSFC Release 75— 26)
The first ground-test hardware for the Space Shuttle, a hydraulic actuator for the main engine, had arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center for functional checkout, MSFC announced. Each of the Orbiter’s three main engines would use two of the actuators to gimbal the engine for steering control. After checkout the actuator—one of 8 to be tested—would be sent to the National Space Technology Laboratories where the main engines would be tested. (MSFC Release 75— 68)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a $6 473 074 fixedprice indefinite-quantity contract to Modular Computer Systems, Inc., for minicomputers and associated equipment and services for the Space Shuttle. The contract included $4 226 646 in hardware and services already ordered and $2 246 428 in additional hardware. Modular Computer Systems would supply minicomputers, peripheral equipment, special interface devices, associated software, engineering and maintenance support, spares, and documentation. (KSC Release 114—75)
NASA’s new Low Cost Modular Spacecraft (LCMS), a recoverable compartmented spacecraft being considered for use aboard the Space Shuttle, was. demonstrated at a news conference at Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Division. The LCMS consisted of an instrument and spacecraft assembly joined by a transition ring. Scientific instruments or earth-resources sensors could be attached to the LCMS for specific missions. Designed by Goddard Space Flight Center engineers, the LCMS would fit into the 5- by 18-m payload bay of the Orbiter and also could serve as a platform for as many as 14 satellites. The system could be placed in orbit by the Shuttle and later serviced or recovered and returned to earth for needed repairs. Dr. Robert G. Wilson, Director of Advanced Payload Analysis at NASA Headquarters', said that a recoverable modular satellite system such as LCMS could save as much as $100 million annually over the cost of nonrecoverable satellites. (JSCRoundup, 14Feb 75, 3;GoddardNews, Feb 75, 8)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of United Technologies Corp. for negotiation of a fixed-price contract of $1,775 million for solid-propellant booster separation motors (BSM) for use on the first 6 development flights in the Space Shuttle program, beginning in 1979. The BSMs would separate the two reusable solid rocket boosters (SRB)—each SRB requiring eight BSMs, four forward and four aft—approximately 110 sec after launch. (MSFC Release 75—175)
Canada would develop the remote manipulator system (RMS) for NASA’s Space Shuttle to permit astronauts inside the Shuttle Orbiter to deploy or retrieve payloads in space, NASA announced. Canada would fund the $30 million project, providing the first flight unit to NASA without charge in 1979. Canada would also supply flight units for follow-on Orbiters. Costs for these units would not include charges for Canada’s research and development. (NASA Release 75 — 135)
Contracts involving $25 000 or more awarded by Marshall Space Flight Center during the month totaled nearly $200 million. Among them were awards to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Inc., for $67 500 to develop the capability of predicting radiant heating at the base region of the Space Shuttle, and for $49 971 to continue a two-phase study of flow effects on Space Shuttle plume simulation. Lockheed also had received $59 740 to continue analyses of Apollo Telescope Mount data obtained during the Skylab mission. A $29 945 contract had gone to Northrop Services, Inc., to continue studies on Space Tug recovery of a spinning satellite. The U.S.'Army Engineer Div., Ala., had received two contracts. A $2-million contract had been awarded for construction at MSFC of the structural test facility for the Solid Rocket Booster and a $2.93-million contract has been awarded for construction and modifications to the Dynamic Test Facility for vibration testing of the Space Shuttle in the vertical positions. The contracts also included a $152.6-million award to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the Space Shuttle external tank, including six flight units and test hardware. MSFC had awarded the Dept, of Commerce $60 000 for an atmospheric measuring program. Bendix Corp. had received $99 736 for a Skylab control-moment gyro anomaly investigation, and the University of New York had received $36 253 to continue data analysis of a Skylab zodiacal light experiment. (MSFC Release 75— 39) February 1975
The Space Shuttle orbiter might travel by ground rather than air from Rockwell International’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., to Edwards Air Force Base for its approach and landing tests, a Rockwell official said as the orbiter made its first appearance for the press. Original plan had been to send the orbiter piggyback on NASA’s Boeing 747 scheduled to launch the unpowered craft during its tests at Edwards. Travel on the ground would take 6 hr to go about 32 km, using an off-the-road vehicle inherited from the Apollo program, and would cost less. (NASA Release 75— 293; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 107)
The National Research Council’s Space Applications Board, directed by the National Academy of Sciences and a NASA contract, released a report entitled “Practical Applications of Space Systems,” with particular emphasis on approaches to socioeconomic benefits. The report stated that present institutional arrangements were “not adequate” to encourage future applications of space technology to promising areas such as natural resource exploration and management, telecommunications for education and health care, and long-range weather and climate forecasting. The report added: “There exists at present no institutional mechanism that permits the large body of potential users. . .to express their needs and to have a voice in matters leading to the definition of new systems.” Recommendations by the board included establishment of a national space applications council to direct policies affecting nonmilitary space applications; to set priorities for meeting user needs; to provide for exchanges between users and providers of space technology; and to encourage non-Federal investment in the application of space systems. The council could operate as an interagency group, with representation from state and local governments. To meet the launch needs of future applications satellites, the board recommended that plans for the Space Shuttle provide an early opportunity to orbit payloads in either polar or geosynchronous orbits. The Shuttle-launched payloads would have applications in hazardous weather warnings and long-range weather and climate predictions; land-use planning; agriculture, forest, and range management; exploration for food, water, energy, and mineral resources; and environmental monitoring. Other specific recommendations included lower cost, more accessible ground data-collection and readout stations; long-term observations of climatic factors—such as albedo, heat control of mixed layer in ocean, cloud distribution, and climatically significant changes in vegetation, land use, and snow and ice cover—to help provide a sound basis for long-range weather prediction; a resolution of 3 to 10 m for land-use applications; greater emphasis on Federal research and development programs for spaceborne sensors of water resources; continued development of earth physics techniques, including a system to measure relative displacement of tectonic plates within 3 cm; and vigorous continuation of the SEASAT-Aand Nimbus— C programs. The board had based its findings on the deliberations of 110 potential users of space-derived information and services who had attended a July 1974 study group in Colorado. The participants represented Federal agencies, state and local governments, industrial and business communities, and educational institutions. (“Practical Applications of Space Systems,” NAS publ, July 75)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 1 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA budget called for the authorization of $3,539 billion and net outlays of $3,498 billion for the 12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional NASA Budget Plan, FY 76 (in millions of dollars) FY 1974- FY 1975 FY 1976 Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 amounts of $958.9 million in authorizations and $905.6 in net outlays for the 3-mo transition period beginning 1 July 1976. Dr. Fletcher said the new budget was “lean but manageable.” For the first time since 1961 the budget provided no new program starts. In accordance with President Ford’s request "to hold FY J975 and FY 1976 expenditures to a minimum, NASA, in FY 1975, had deferred obligations of $72 million and outlays of $70 million, reduced civil service employment by 300, and made program adjustments to stay within the total FY 1975 and 1976 hudgets. Further adjustments might be necessary if the inflation rate continued to grow. Although NASA’s FY 1976 budget was up $300 million from the previous year, $200 million of this increase was specifically anticipated in last year’s budget to carry forward commitments built into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA had received an effective increase of only $100 million, or about 3%. This, along with the nation’s current 9% inflation rate, was a “good indicator of the leanness of NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” The budget would permit NASA to proceed with current major programs as planned: The Space Shuttle, scheduled for a first manned orbital flight in mid-1979, and Landsat—C, scheduled for a fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in aircraft remained a principal focus in NASA’s aeronautics research and technology. NASA was also continuing stratospheric studies, including the effects of pollutants on the environment, with significant contributions coming from NASA meteorological and atmospheric satellites, sounding rockets, and balloons and high-flying aircraft. Although there would be no new starts, NASA would continue its study and advanced technical development for science, applications, and aeronautics projects to be started in future years, including preliminary work for payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. The 1975 calendar year launch schedule was one of the most ambitious in U.S. history with 28 launches scheduled, including the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July and the two Viking missions to Mars scheduled for August. Although NASA’s legal responsibilities for energy research and development—designated under the Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 1974—had been transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration, NASA would work closely with ERDA in various aspects of solar research and development. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said at the press briefing that the largest budget increase was for manned spaceflight, where the increase for the Shuttle was partially offset by reduced spending for the rest of manned spaceflight. The small increase for space science did not tell the whole story: If funds for the Viking program were subtracted, the budget for the rest of science had increased $170 million from FY 1974 to FY 1976. Although applications, aeronautics, and space technology programs each showed small increases, funds for tracking and data acquisition decreased slightly despite increased maintenance costs for tracking stations, because NASA was beginning to close down tracking stations, preparing for the time when tracking and data relay satellites would be available. . NASA Budget Plan (in millions of dollars) FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1976 Manned space flight 999.9 1110.3 1414.6 Space science 664.5 542.8 582.6 Applications 159.0 174.5 175.0 Aeronautics and space technology 234.3 237.8 250.3 Tracking and data acquisition 244.0 248.0 243.0 Energy programs 4.7 4.4 5.9 Technology utilization 4.5 5.5 7.0 Total Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 Total budget plan 3156.0 3231.2 3539.0 William E. Lilly, NASA Comptroller, said that, of the $84.6 million budgeted for construction of facilities, $47.2 million was to continue the buildup of Space Shuttle facilities, mostly for launch and landing facilities at Kennedy Space Center. The remaining funds were for normal rehabilitation and modification of existing facilities, with smaller amounts for minor construction and for facilities planning and design. Civil service manpower was expected to continue at the same level for FY 1976 with 24 316 employees. However, the number of support service contractors—excluding mission or stage contractors—would decrease from 18 637 in FY 1975 to 17 811 in FY 1976. The estimated 125 000 persons working on NASA programs during FY 1975 was expected to increase by 6000 to 7000 by the end of FY 1976. Distribution of funds to the Centers would change: An increase of $224.3 million would go to Johnson Space Center for the Shuttle program. A decrease of $37.3 million for KSC reflected a decrease in funding for the construction program. Goddard Space Flight Center Estimated Distribution of Total NASA Budget (in millions of dollars) FY 1975 FY 1976 Decrease Johnson Space Center 922.6 1146.9 224.3 John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA 275.9 238.6 -37.3 Marshall Space Flight Center 428.7 541.2 112.5 National Space Technology Laboratories 10.0 10.9 0.9 Goddard Space Flight Center 493.7 461.1 -32.6 Wallops Flight Center 31.9 31.3 -0.6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory 180.9 188.1 7.2 Ames Research Center 168.2 193.0 32.0 Flight Research Center 34.6 40.3 5.7 Langley Research Center 285.5 249.4 -36.1 Lewis Research Center 218.1 253.3 35.2 NASA Headquarters 159.1 166.4 7.3 Undetermined 22.0 18.5 -3.5 Total 3231.2 3539.0 307.8 was down $32.6 million, largely because of a decrease in funding for Delta vehicles. (OMB, Budget of U.S. Govt., FY 76 and Appendix; NASA FY 76 budget briefing, 1 Feb 76, transcript; NASA Release, FY 76 budget briefing background material; Fletcher budget statement, 3 Feb 76, text)
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $1 279 000 contract to George A. Fuller Co., a division of Northrop Corp. of Chicago, for fabrication and erection of a structure for mating and demating the Space Shuttle Orbiter and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft at NASA’s Flight Research Center in Calif. KSC had been given responsibility for Space Shuttle launch operations and for Orbiter ground operations and support equipment both at KSC in Fla. and at FRC, which was to be Orbiter landing site for the first four missions. The contractor was to complete the structure—including hoist system, access platforms, and utility systems—within 328 days after notice to proceed. (KSC Release 290-75)
The rocket-powered M2—F3 lifting body—a wingless vehicle that derives aerodynamic lift from its body shape—arrived for display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C. In a flight program beginning in 1963 and ending in 1972, the three versions of tbe M—2 vehicle had demonstrated that a manned reentry vehicle could reenter from space, maneuver through the atmosphere, and safely make a deadstick landing. M2—F3 was the thjrd version of Ames Research Center’s M—2 lifting-body design. The first, M2—FI, was a lightweight plywood glider towed to altitude by a C-47 and released, whereupon the pilot guided the craft to a landing. A heavier version, M2—F2, was launched from underneath the wing of a B— 52 aircraft. After nearly a year of testing the unpowered vehicle, an XRL—11 rocket engine was installed in preparation for rocket-powered flight; on the second glide flight after engine installation, the vehicle crashed, badly damaging the vehicle and injuring the pilot. The lifting body was rebuilt, incorporating modifications, and designated M2—F3. The M2—F3 made more than 37 glide and powered flights with a jet reaction-control system that successfully demonstrated the feasibility of using a single system from orbit to landing. A lifting body design that had been considered for the reentry vehicle in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs was rejected in favor of a ballistic reentry design. The use by Space Shuttle of the maneuver-to-a-deadstick-landing concept was possible largely because of the confidence level built up by 9 yr of lifting-body flight tests. (NASA Release 75—199; A&A 62 through A&A 74)
NASA awarded a 1-yr contract to Boeing Co. to study a proposed Large Lift Vehicle (LLV) made up of Space Shuttle engines, fuel tanks, and avionics. Launched without the Space Shuttle Orbiter, the LLV could carry tons of freight into space, or could rocket to the moon with a second stage attached. It would be less expensive than the Saturn V because the avionics package could be retrieved in orbit and the twin boosters were recoverable. In a 1974 interview with the Huntsville Times, John H. Disher, NASA Director for Advanced Programs, had said that no definite mission for the LLV was planned, but that NASA was looking to the future. (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 12 Aug 74; NASA Hq Adv Progs Off, Fero, interview, 10 Aug 75) August 1975
NASA had decided to eliminate all expendable launch vehicles except Scout after the Space Shuttle became operational, NASA Associate Administrator John F. Yardley told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, but the Air Force wanted to play it safe. AF officials wanted extra vehicles on hand after Shuttle in case problems developed, he said. NASA had planned about 20 launches of expendable vehicles a year through 1980—4 Scouts, 10 Deltas, 3 or 4 Atlas-Centaurs, and 1 or 2 Titan-Centaurs—with 17 launches in FY 1977 and 27 in FY 1978. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 899)
NASA announced the award of a $ll-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Cutler-Hammer, Inc., AIL Div., for acquisition of the Microwave Scanning Beam Landing System ground stations for the Space Shuttle Orbiter. AIL would perform the research and development necessary to build the ground stations for the Shuttle landing sites. Ground-station hardware would be able to transmit localizer and glide slope signals to the Orbiter and respond to distance-measurement interrogations from the Orbiter. (JSC Release 75 —32)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of two contracts for 356 aluminum hand forgings for Space Shuttle solid-rocket boosters. A $465 935 contract went to Aluminum Co. of America and $62 900 went to Weber Metals & Supply Co. for forward-skirt thrust post fittings, inboard aft-skirt actuator support brackets, aft-skirt splice fittings, and aft-skirt holddown posts. (MSFC Release 75—151)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of two contracts for parallel studies on space-processing equipment for Space Shuttle and Spacelab missions. TRW Systems Group was awarded $299 981 and General Electric Co. was awarded $284 974 to provide preliminary designs for equipment that could be used to process various materials, such as metals and crystals, in space. (MSFC Release 75 — 125)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of an $18 749 million contract to Blount Brothers Construction Co. for modification of Launch Complex 39 Pad A, to accommodate all early Space Shuttle missions. The complex had been the site of all but one of the historic Saturn V launches; Pad B, from which the Skylab Orbital Workshop was launched, would be modified later. The contract included conversion of the mobile launcher for Shuttle operations. (KSC Release 164—75)
Assembly of the first main engine of the Space Shuttle had been completed by Rockwell International Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. 1 mo ahead of schedule, NASA announced. After assembly the engine was automatically checked out—for the first time in history—by the engine’s internal controller and integral digital computers for functional, electrical, and mechanical operations. Known as the Integrated Subsystems Test Bed, this engine was not built for flight but for static firing tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories. The Space Shuttle would use 3 of the liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engines. Designed to perform at high internal pressures for greater specific impulse, each engine would produce more than 2.1 million newtons thrust and would be used for up to 55 missions before overhaul, with between-mission maintenance comparable to techniques used by commercial airlines. (NASA Release 75—83; Rocketdyne Release RD—7)
West Germany was studying the possibility of purchasing a Spacelab pressurized module for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. The German Spacelab would be configured for research in space processing, a field of considerable interest to Germany. Its missions on Spacelab, launched by NASA aboard the Space Shuttle on a cost-reimbursable basis, would be separate from missions conducted by the European Space Research Organization. {Av Wk, 21 April 75, 27)
Rockwell International Corp., holder of the prime contract with NASA to build the Space Shuttle Orhiter, announced that more than $109 million in subcontracts for the Space Shuttle main engine had been awarded by the Rocketdyne Div. since work on the engine began 3 yr ago. Figures to date showed that firms in 40 states were participating in the Space Shuttle program. Rockwell reported that Space Shuttle development would funnel an estimated $5 billion into the U.S. economy by 1978 and create employment for approximately 50 000 workers. (Rockwell Int’l Release RO—9)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $1.9-million firm-fixed-price contract to the Martin Marietta Corp. for fabrication, acceptance testing, and delivery of 322 pyrotechnic-initiator controllers (PIC) for the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters. (MSFC Release 75—182)
Marshall Space Flight Center had selected Moog Inc. Controls Div. to negotiate a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract totaling $6 685 584 for the design, development, production, and acceptance testing of a thrust-vector control electrical-hydraulic servoactuator on the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The servoactuator would control the SRB’s exhaust nozzle. (Marshall Star, 12 Nov 75, 4)
NASA Life Sciences Director, Dr. David L. Winter, issued an invitation to scientists to help plan NASA’s future life sciences program in space. The invitation, sent to 30 000 biological scientists in the U.S., said that NASA was considering a series of manned laboratories staffed by scientists, engineers, and technicians to be launched aboard the Space Shuttle. One entire lab devoted to life-science experimentation would be launched every 6 mo. Other small highly automated life-science experiments could be performed during Spacelab and Space Shuttle missions dedicated to other disciplines; NASA estimated that as many as 200 life-science flight experiments could be conducted in space during the 1980s. The invitation stated that “in order to take maximum advantage of future research opportunities, NASA intends to involve a large cross section of the Life Sciences community in shaping scientific program objectives, in selecting spacecraft laboratory equipment, and in the planning and execution of Flight Experiments.” NASA estimated that approximately 200 scientists could participate as principal investigators of future flight experiments and that 50 of those could perform their research in space as crew members. As part of the first phase of the life-science program, NASA requested that interested scientists suggest general topics for future research and identify equipment needed to carry out life-science investigations. (Winter letter, text; NASA Release 75-140; UPI, ATT, 9 May 75, 7)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $5 137 000 contract to Mayfair Construction Co. to modify the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) for Space Shuttle operations. The contract provided for modifications to High Bay 3’s extensible work platforms, installation of new checkout cells in High Bay 4, and modifications to the north door of the VAB transfer aisle and related support facilities. (KSC Release 160— 75)
Astronaut Donald K. (Deke) Slayton had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Operations for Approach and Landing Test at the Johnson Space Center, announced Center Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. In the newly created position, Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the approach and landing test project for the Space Shuttle program. He most recently had been docking module pilot of the U.S. crew for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 75—314; JSC Release 75—100)
NASA announced the selection of Sperry Rand Corp. for the negotiation of a fixed-price $8-million contract for a Space Shuttle mission-simulator computer complex at Johnson Space Center. Sperry would design, develop, fabricate, test, and deliver a computing complex and all associated hardware for the Shuttle mission simulator. (JSC Release 75—37)
Johnson Space Center announced that the first of two Space Shuttle training aircraft had been test flown at Grumman American Aviation’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. The modified Gulfstream II would be used to train crews for Orbiter descent and landing procedures. The cockpit layout and the aerodynamic modifications of the trainers provided motion and visual cues and handling qualities similar to those of the actual Orbiter. The two trainers would be delivered to Johnson Space Center early in 1976. (JSC Roundup, 10 Oct 75, 1)
Rockwell International Corp., prime contractor for the Space Shuttle, announced selection of Consolidated Controls for a $1.5-million contract to provide high- and low-pressure helium valves for the Shuttle Orbiter reaction-control system (RCS). The valves would control helium output in the RCS propellant tanks, serving as a manifold shutoff valve in the vernier engine and as a low-pressure helium shutoff valve. (Rockwell Release SP—29)
NASA announced award of a $46.8-million cost-plus-award-fee contract to International Business Machines Corp. for developing and testing the Space Shuttle avionics software system. IBM would design, develop, test, and maintain the avionics software for the data-processing system on the Shuttle Orbiter that would include electric and electronic systems for guidance, navigation, and control capability; communication; computation; displays and controls; instrumentation; and electrical power distribution and control for the orbiter, external tank, and solid-rocket boosters. (JSC Release 75—63)
Potential propellants for the Space Shuttle had been tested at an underground facility at Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command reported. Testing was part of a selection process to find a compatible propellant for the auxiliary motors that would separate the Orbiter from the two solid-rocket boosters. Three candidate propellants were tested at a simulated altitude of 40 000 m. Reusable ballistic test-evaluation system motors, each loaded with 45 kg of propellant, were fired seven times, burning for 2 sec and generating 53 400 newtons of thrust. Exhaust plumes were directed at 15- by 15-cm tiles of thermal protective material at various distances and angles; after the tests, the tiles were checked for erosion of the surfaces and edges. Pressure and temperature were measured in the rocket plumes, and surface temperatures and heating rates were measured on 21 selected material samples. All data and samples were sent to Marshall Space Flight Center for analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 3)
Kennedy Space Center announced the selection of Modular Computer Systems, Inc., for final negotiations on a $6.7-million fixed-price contract for equipment associated with the Space Shuttle launchprocessing system. The company would provide minicomputers and their associated equipment, software, maintenance, spares, and engineering support. The launch-processing system now under development at KSC would provide automatic test, checkout, launch control, and operational management for NASA’s Space Shuttle program. (KSC Release 69—75)
Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. successfully test-fired the main chamber of the Space Shuttle main engine for the first time, at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories. Initial evaluation of ignition-test data indicated that all test objectives were achieved. During a second firing the engine’s high-pressure fuel pump reached a maximum speed of almost 7000 rpm, 19% of full power. The test was seventh in a planned series of 10 to 15 short-duration ignition tests that began 11 June and would culminate in the operation of the engine at 20% of maximum thrust level of 2 090 664 newtons (470 000 lbs). Subsequent tests would attempt higher mainstage thrust levels to evaluate engine-starting characteristics and performance. The Space Shuttle main engine, the most advanced liquid-fueled rocket engine ever built, was the first to use an electronic digital computer for automatic control. Three of these engines, designed for reuse up to 55 times, would power the Space Shuttle Orbiter. (Marshall Star, 2 July 75, 1; Rocketdyne Release RD—15; MSFC Release 75-115)
Sen. John Tunney (D—Calif.) defended the nation’s space program during a tour of Space Shuttle facilities at Rockwell International Corp. in Downey, Calif. According to Sen. Tunney, the most important justification for the space program was to provide new technology in weather mapping and control, to help increase the amount of land available for food production, and to locate additional stocks of natural resources in this country. Sen. Tunney stated, “I quite frankly think without a space program. . .mankind is going to have a rendezvous with destiny which would be catastrophic. . . .” But with this kind of program, a world food supply and adequate resources can “keep this country going indefinitely.” {Pasadena Star News, 6 Aug 75)
Johnson Space Center announced award of a $11.5-million contract to General Electric Co. Space Div. to provide acceptance-checked equipment for the Space Shuttle orbiter. The equipment would be used to conduct standard tests and to detect variances in spacecraft systems in assembly at the Rockwell International Corp. plant. GE would also provide checkout support during the approach and landing phases of the Shuttle missions. (JSC Release 75—92)
The preliminary design review of Space Shuttle Orbiter 102 for the first manned orbital flight was completed on schedule. (NASA Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 March 75, 39)
Development of a reusable single-stage Space Shuttle that could perform better than the current partially reusable design, and cost less, would be feasible before the end of this century “if pushed aggressively enough,” Robert E. Smylie, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology for NASA, told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Studies by the agency had shown that structural weight reductions of 25% and propulsion-system improvements of 5 to 6%, relative to current space flight technology, could be achieved in the late 1990s. In other areas of space technology, Smylie cited the concept of solar-electric propulsion that had been considered for planetary missions using the Space Transportation System, and described research in automated processing of microcircuits, robot vehicles for planetary exploration, vitreous materials resistant to laser radiation, and dry iubricant with application in space payloads. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 696, 726, 1130 ff)
The vertical tail assembly for the Space Shuttle arrived at Rockwell International Corp., in Palmdale, Calif., after being shipped by Shuttle subcontractor Fairchild Republic Co. The tail unit, more than 8 m high, had a root chord of nearly 7 m. (FRC X-Press, 6 June 77, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 76, 25)
At least five of NASA’s 25 000 employees had made use in past years of hunting facilities owned by Rockwell International, and the agency and Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had begun investigating the matter. The investigation had not been confined to entertainment at the Rockwell facility in Md., but included “receipt of other gratuities such as Redskin (football) tickets and use of hospitality suites,” the senator said. Rockwell had been prime contractor for the $6.4-billion Space Shuttle program that accounted for more than a third of NASA’s budget. Sen. Proxmire, vice chairman of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, had directed the committee staff to assist NASA in determining the full extent of “unethical or illegal lobbying by NASA contractors.” NASA had placed five inspectors on the case. (NYT, 19 Nov 75, 1)
Walter Cronkite, U.S. broadcaster who had covered the space program from its beginnings to date, reminisced about the space program during an interview with Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News. Cronkite recalled that news coverage in the early 1950s was done from the beach with very little official information. “All we had were tips from engineers and others we met in bars.” By Alan B. Shepard’s 5 May 1961 launch, things had improved only slightly; coverage took place from the back of a station wagon with a microphone, monitor, and very little incoming information. Later launches had seen drastic changes. “We’ve got so much information today that it’s the traffic cops’ job to take care of the flow, whereas before it was more imagination and fill-in-the-blanks.” Asked if he would be interested in riding aboard the Space Shuttle, Cronkite said, “I think newsmen will go on the Shuttle. . . . Just as soon as we prove out the equipment. ... I would guess that somehow or other we’re going to see that a pool man gets aboard, and I hope it’s Regarding the apparent apathy of the American public toward the space program, Cronkite stated that it would be difficult in this age to sustain the “high intensity of feeling about the space program, the race to the moon, [and] landing on the moon. ... We don’t have an attention span in the modern world, with so much going on, that permits us to remain at that high level of excitement.” (Spaceport News, 24 July 75, 6)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases, introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into public law P.L. 94— 303 on 1 June 1976 The committee appropriation allowed for no new starts but did permit an increase of $400 million in funding for the Space Shuttle. The committee supported manned NASA activities such as an international cooperative space-docking mission built on the successes of Apollo and Skylab programs, and the development of the Space Shuttle as an economical, versatile transportation system to give a wide variety of users access to space. The committee also endorsed a space science flight program furthering knowledge of the earth, atmosphere, moon, sun, planets, interplanetary space, and stars; a research and development program to identify and demonstrate useful applications of space techniques in areas such as weather and climate, pollution monitoring, earth-resources survey, earth and ocean physics, communications, and space processing; U.S. leadership in aeronautics and space programs; worldwide tracking and data acquisition support for NASA’s manned and unmanned programs; a program to assist in the development of national energy self-sufficiency; and a technology utilization program to speed dissemination of technological and engineering information gained during NASA programs to government, industry, and other users. The committee restored $48.4 million for the two-spacecraft Pioneer—Venus mission scheduled for launch in 1978; the House had cut the funds requested by NASA in the original budget. The Senate agreed with NASA that the project had high scientific priority, and that delaying it to a less opportune launch window when Venus was further from the earth would require redesign of the spacecraft and would cost $50 million more than originally planned. The committee also restored $1 million cut by the House from the $5 million requested for definition studies and advanced technological development of the Large Space Telescope. The study was necessary for NASA to define an optimum design at minimum cost. The committee added $7 million to the $7 million NASA request for research and development to help understand and monitor physical and chemical processes in the upper atmosphere, emphasizing the need for studies of the depletion of stratospheric ozone. Because some committee members had had reservations about the high cost and safety hazards of the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the committee said it would like to be notified well in advance of any future joint space mission to permit an accurate assessment of potential benefits and costs. The committee’s recommendation of $82.1 million for construction of facilities, $25 million less than the request, would allow continuation of previous work including Space Shuttle facilities, facility rehabilitation and modification and minor construction, and facility planning and design. Not only did the committee, agreeing with the House action, cut the $2.5 million requested for an addition to the Lunar-Sample Curatorial Facility at Johnson Space Center, it also agreed with the House in denying funds to modify the 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel at Ames Research Center—not included in the original request but authorized by Congress—until the committee had had an opportunity to review the necessary funding in a formal budget request. The recommendation of $775.5 million for research and program management, the same amount approved by the House, was $0.5 million less than NASA’s request. The reduction reflected a 10% cut in General Services Administration rental charges. The Senate committee recommended a total of $925 028 000 in funds for the transitional period 1 July— 30 Sept. 1976. NASA Transitional Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 730.6 700.6 (-30.0) 700.6 (-30.0) Construction of Facilities 14.5 10.8 (-3.8) 10.8 (-3.8) Research & Program Management* 213.8 213.8(0) 213,7 (-0.1) TOTALS* 958.9 925.2 (-33.8) 925.0 (-33.9)
NASA had awarded a definitive $140 577 924 contract to Thiokol Corp. Wasatch Div. for solid rocket motors for the Space Shuttle, MSFC announced. A previous letter contract issued 26 June 1974 had given Thiokol authority to proceed with the work which included design, development, test, and evaluation of the solid rocket motor. The contracts also called for Thiokol to provide support .equipment, tooling and support parts, systems-integration support and special studies, and data and documentation. (MSFC Release 75—91)
The Saturn V dynamic test stand at Marshall Space Flight Center was being modified under a $1 923 400 contract between the Army Corps of Engineers and the Universal Construction Co., to provide a Space Shuttle Mated Ground Vibration Test Facility, MSFC announced. The 123-m-high structure would be used to test the vehicle in launch and boost configuration, to determine the bending modes and dynamic response during launch and ascent conditions. (MSFC Release 75-230)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $4 778 000 contract extension to Bendix Corp.’s Launch Support Div. for support services including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39, mobile launchers, mobile service structure, industrial complexes, technical shops, propellant systems, life-support facilities, and a components-cleaning laboratory. The 4rmo extension brought the total value of the contract to $266 662 753. Complex 39, launch site for the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz Test Project missions, would be the launch and landing site for Space Shuttle. Modification of the facilities was under way. (KSC Release 260— 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $3.2-million contract by Space Shuttle prime contractor Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. to Avco Corp. Aerostructures Div. to manufacture the intertank section of the shuttle’s external tank. The intertank would provide support between the liquid-oxygen tank and the larger liquid-hydrogen tank. The disposable external tank, 47 m long and 8.4 m in diameter, would carry liquid propellant for the Space Shuttle’s three main engines. (MSFC Release 75 — 116)
Development of the Spacelab by the European Space Agency for NASA’s Space Shuttle continued. An annual Spacelab status review 4—5 June attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Roy Gibson, ESA Director General, established schedule milestones, determined readiness for the preliminary design review, and discussed arrangements for the first Spacelab flight. They also discussed plans for the instrumentpointing system and the first Spacelab payload, follow-on Spacelab procurement by NASA, and terms and conditions for use of the Space Shuttle—Spacelab system. On 6 June, the recommendations of 10 teams—which had met at Marshall Space Flight Center in May to discuss Spacelab systems, avionics, structures, environmental control and life support, software, test and integration, and payload operations and accommodations—were presented to the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight for concurrence. At the same time ESA was preparing similar recommendations at the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC). Beginning on 9 June, combined NASA—ESA teams met in Noordwijk to consider the 1772 review-item discrepancies prepared by both agencies and, after 2.5 days, had processed all of them. (Spacelab Newsletter 75—2, 3 July 75)
NASA announced the award of a $287-million contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen for the government’s East Coast requirements over a 12.5-yr period beginning 1 July 1975. The liquid hydrogen would be used primarily in Space Shuttle engine testing at the National Space Technology Laboratories and for Space Shuttle launches. (NASA Release 75—192) During June: Activities continued at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project launch in July. During the week of 2—6 June, KSC engineers and technicians checked the Apollo spacecraft for propellant leaks, filled the liquid-oxygen storage tank at the pad, loaded oxygen and nitrogen onto the docking module, and installed conax valves on the Saturn IB first stage. Spacecraft ordnance was installed 9—13 June and the command module was checked for leaks and prepared for hypergolic loading. Also during the week the liquid-hydrogen tank was filled. Prime crew members—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton—and backup crew members—Jack R. Lousma, Alan L. Bean, and Ronald E. Evans—arrived at KSC on 10 June for command and docking-module crew compartment fit and functional checks. The crew also familiarized themselves with stowage arrangements. (Spaceport News, 12 June 75, 5; 26 June 75, 3)
NASA Black Brant VC sounding rockets would be used to carry materials-processing experiments as a low-cost way of expanding observations made during the 1973—1974 Skylab missions, NASA announced. Three flights a year aboard the sounding rockets were planned from 1975 through 1980 to provide a better understanding of material behavior during melting, solidification, and heat treatment without the effects of gravity. Although the sounding rockets would provide only 6 min of low gravity—one ten-thousandth of the gravity on earth—rocket missions were the only way to get low-gravity materials-processing data between the July 1975 manned Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Space Shuttle flights in the 1980s. (NASA Release 75—12)
Charles M. Duke, Jr., an astronaut since 1966 and lunar mobile pilot on the Apollo 16 lunar landing mission (16—27 April 1972), announced he would leave NASA, effective 1 Jan. 1976. He would also resign from the Air Force after nearly 19 yr of service. DuringApo//o 16, Duke logged 11 days 1 hr 43 min in space, including a 71-hr 14-min stay on the lunar surface. He and John W. Young made 3 surface explorations of the Descartes region for a total of 20 hr 15 min of lunar excursion. Since April 1973 Duke had served as technical assistant to the manager for Space Shuttle systems integration. (JSC Release 75—74)
The first of a series of 5 conferences on design requirements for Space Shuttle and Spacelab payloads had been held at Marshall Space Flight Center. About 50 scientists and engineers from government, industry, and universities had met to define functioned requirements for payload equipment to further NASA’s Space Processing Applications (SPA) program, including analysis of selected design approaches and recommendations for getting the most use out of SPA payloads for the materials science and technology community. The meeting would hear presentations on the two SPA competitive engineering designs by General Electric and TRW Systems, Inc. The next 2 days would be used by working groups to discuss their specialties—biological preparations; chemical processes and fluid phenomena; glasses and ceramics; and solidification of metals, alloys, composites, and electronic materials. The 5 scheduled meetings should define payloads that are compatible with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and that would meet the research needs of the industrial and scientific communities. (MSFC Release 75—218)
The first set of wings for NASA’s Space Shuttle Orbiter began an 18-day land and water journey from Grumman Aerospace Corp.’s facility in New York to Palmdale, Calif., for final assembly with the Orbiter. The two wing panels, each 9 m long from tip to fuselage and 18 m wide at the fuselage edge, would travel aboard transporters specially designed to be pulled by a truck—at 16 km per hr—or loaded onto an ocean-going container ship. From New York the wings would make a 13-day trip through the Panama Canal to Long Beach, Calif., and then travel overland to Palmdale. The double-delta aluminum wings had been designed, manufactured, and tested by Grumman under a $40 million subcontract awarded by the prime Space Shuttle contractor, Rockwell International Corp., in March 1973. (JSC Release 75—38)
The Washington Post reported that, after launch of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, more than 1800 persons would lose their jobs. With the liftoff came the end of the Apollo and Saturn programs which had begun 25 May 1961 with President Kennedy’s request for a national commitment to a lunar-landing program. Layoffs would cut the Kennedy Space Center workforce to less than 8500, down from a peak of28 000. Of those who would lose their jobs, 1100 worked for NASA contractors— Rocketdyne Division pf Rockwell, Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—who built and mated the stages of the Saturn launch vehicle to the Apollo spacecraft. Another 700 worked for contractors such as International Business Machines Inc., TRW Inc., Grumman Corp., Aerojet General Corp., and Rockwell International Corp. Only 100 launch-operations contract employees would remain to help plan the launches of the Space Shuttle. The Shuttle launch force would begin to increase in size in 1977, but would never reach the size of the Saturn team because of increased automation. (O’Toole, W Post, 15 July 75, A9)
Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. successfully conducted the first ignition test of the Space Shuttle’s Integrated Subsystem Test Bed engine at the National Space Technology Laboratories. The test, conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center, lasted for 0.8 sec. It was first of a series of 8 ignition tests leading up to the firing of the Space Shuttle main engine. Initial evaluation of data indicated that all the test parameters were satisfactory and that the test objective was achieved. All ignition tests would be of short duration, none reaching full engine thrust. (Roundup, 20 June 75, 4; Marshall Star, IT June 75, 4)
The Space Shuttle was, in many ways, the “ultimate recycling program,” Robert Anderson, president and chief executive officer of Rockwell International Corp. said on Transportation Day at the Canadian National Exhibition in Toronto. Anderson said that the Shuttle program, with its international scope and emphasis on reusability, was the first major step toward economical and effective use of space. More advanced Shuttle-launched satellites Would benefit the world by aiding crop control; locating new sources of minerals and fossil fuels; monitoring weather, pollution, and localized disasters such as oil slicks and forest fires; mapping oceans and urban areas; and improving communications. “For the job of transportation is not just to move people and goods from point to point—it is to also move history forward by enabling the pioneers to explore the new frontiers and by enabling society to capitalize on their discoveries.” (Text; Rockwell Inti Release R—42)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $5 768 612 costplus-incentive-fee contract to Sperry Rand Corp. for design, development, test, and delivery of 37 multiplexer-demultiplexers (MDM) for the Space Shuttle rocket boosters. The MDM, an electronic device that permitted sending or receiving more than one message, signal, or unit of information on a single communication channel, was housed in the solid rocket boosters’ integrated electronics assembly. It would process signals for such functions as ignition, thrust vector control, release of nose cap and frustum, jettison of solid rocket motor nozzles, detachment of parachutes, and tum-on of recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—154)
The Saturn IB, used to launch three U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts into space [see 15—24 July], had experienced no unscheduled holds whatever during countdown, making it the most perfect launch of the Saturn series, Ellery B. May, manager of the Saturn Program Office at the Marshall Space Flight Center, said. Saturn 210, manufactured in 1967, was 10th of the IB series and had the oldest engine used. All Saturn launches had been successful and had met their objectives; although some had anomalies, such as leaks or faulty wiring, no major configuration changes were ever necessary. The ASTP mission marked the end of the Saturn series, but its impact on technology would continue. “Space Shuttle main engines (SSME) are an outgrowth of technology from Saturn engines,” May explained. The major difference between the two was that the Shuttle must have much higher pressure systems than ever before required and must be reusable. (MSFC Release 75 — 174)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the selection of Bendix Corp. Guidance Systems Div. for negotiations leading to a contract for integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of assemblies and assorted test equipment for the first 6 Shuttle flights. The initial contract would call for 33 units, including flight articles, spares, and development and test versions, with delivery to begin in 1976. Each solid rocket booster would have two assembly units, one forward and one aft. Ignition commands would route from the Orbiter through the aft assembly to the forward assembly. During launch, the aft assembly would route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system. The forward assembly would release the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid rocket nozzle, detach the parachutes from the solid rocket booster, and turn on recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—106)
Marshall Space Flight Center had resumed acoustic testing of a 6.4%-scale model of the Space Shuttle to provide information needed in designing the Shuttle and its launch facilities, MSFC announced. The tests would also produce data on effects of hot exhaust gases on the aft portion of the Shuttle immediately after ignition. Data from earlier testing of the model, which included the liquid-fueled engines and solid rocket motors, had alerted designers that special provisions would be needed to deflect hot gases out of the solid rocket boosters away from the facility fuel lines near the launch pad. A pad design based on this analysis had been tested and proven. During the tests, which had begun originally in August 1974, the model was held in a test stand while its engines were fired from 6 to 10 sec. (MSFC Release 75—205) During September: NASA had invited nearly 5000 scientists worldwide to propose experiments for a possible 6-yr mission to Uranus, beginning with a November 1979 launch. The mission, which could include a swing by Neptune, was being studied for inclusion in NASA’s FY 1977 budget request. A mission to Uranus and Neptune would mean that every planet in the solar system except Pluto would have been probed by a U.S. spacecraft by 1988. The spacecraft itself would be adapted directly from the Mariner probe now under development at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a planned 1977 mission to Saturn; like Mariner-Satum, the Uranus mission would use the gravity of Jupiter to hurl the spacecraft on toward the more remote planet. If the spacecraft remained healthy after it investigated Uranus, it would use the gravity of that planet to fly on to Neptune, more than 1.6 billion km deeper into space. (GSFC Goddard News, Sept 75, 2; UPI, NYT, 4 Sept 75, 20) October 1975
DOD announced the award of a $3 500 000 firm-fixed-price contract to TRW, Inc., for software support of the Space Shuttle. (DOD Release 83-75)
The aft fuselage for Space Shuttle Orbiter 101 arrived at Rockwell International Corp.’s Palmdale, Calif., assembly facility after a 160-km truck journey from Rockwell’s Downey plant. The aft fuselage joined the midfuselage, vertical tail, and wing panels delivered earlier by Rockwell subcontractors. The forward fuselage was due in Palmdale in October, with rollout of the first orbiter scheduled for the third quarter of 1976. Approach and landing tests would begin during the second quarter of 1977. (JSC Roundup, 12 Sept 75, 4)
NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Aerospace for a $22.8 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for checkout, control, and monitoring of subsystem hardware for the Space Shuttle launch processing system (LPS). Martin would design, fabricate, test, and install hardware for the subsystem, composed of hardware assemblies communicating directly with computers and with flight and ground equipment of the Space Shuttle. The LPS was designed to use automated and modular techniques to meet Space Shuttle launch, maintenance, and refurbishment requirements. (NASA Release 75—219)
Transfer of the Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program from the Office of Space Science to the Office of Manned Space flight, and transfer of the NASA Directorate for Life Sciences from the Office of Manned Space Flight to the Office of Space Science became effective. Also, the name of the Office of Manned Space Flight had been changed to Office of Space Flight, and the name of the Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program had been changed to Expendable Launch Vehicle Programs. In announcing the changes, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had said that the exchange of these functions would “provide a more logical alignment of responsibilities as we move into Space Shuttle operations. The new Office of Space Flight will be concerned primarily with launching. . . and conducting Shuttle operations, while Space Science will have responsibility for the science to be performed on these flights.” (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 1)
An Ames Research Center wind tunnel used primarily for testing the Space Shuttle had been shut down after a steel flange failed, setting off a high-powered explosion of compressed gas. The blast scattered hundreds of hot aluminum oxide pebbles over a wide area, causing several fires but no serious injuries. Space Shuttle testing had been postponed until the facility, which generated pressures up to 126 kg/cm2 (1800 psi) in testing models at 14 times the speed of sound, could be declared operational again. An investigation board was formed to determine the cause of the accident and recommend actions to prevent recurrence. (ARC Astrogram, 14 Aug 75, 1; ARC Experimental Fluid Dynamics Br, interview, 27 June 77; UPI, W Post, 1 Aug 75, A17)
A star tracker, STELLAR (Star Tracker for Economical Long Life Attitude Reference), Was being developed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a variety of future manned and unmanned space missions. STELLAR used a solid-state silicon detector, called a charge-coupled device (CCD), for image sensing and a microcomputer to process and format the data. Previous star trackers had used high-voltage vacuum-tube image dissectors for image sensing; the tubes were difficult to produce, had a limited lifetime, developed errors, and could provide attitude-reference data from only a single star in any given observation frame. STELLAR, which substituted a single low-voltage 6-mm-sq CCD chip for the complex and expensive tube, offered the advantages of solid-state reliability and of simple programming to adapt to varying mission requirements. In addition to substantial savings in cost of flight hardware, the CCD imaging devices were expected to revolutionize TV camera design, permitting miniature low-cost home monitors within the next several years. STELLAR, which had been developed under the management of NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, would provide trackers for planetary Mariner spacecraft after the Mariner—Jupiter—Saturn mission in 1977 and for such Space Shuttle payloads as the proposed Shuttle infrared telescope facility. For the telescope facility, STELLAR would track as many as 10 stars simultaneously, providing position coordinates and star magnitudes for each. (NASA Release 75—251)
A giant washing machine capable of doing 318 kg of laundry would help to develop economical and efficient methods of cleaning and refurbishing the Space Shuttle solid-rocket booster parachutes, and to identify the problems encountered during the process, Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News reported. The washer—2 m wide by 2 m high and 10 m long, and holding 23 668 liters of water—would wash a 23-m 318-kg 80-gore parachute. Once washed, the parachute, 136 kg heavier, would be taken by monorail to a drying area. A team of five technicians was required to complete the 4-hr process. (KSC Spaceport News, 18 Sept 75, 6)
Johnson Space Center announced signing of a $44 800 000 contract amendment with Lockheed Electronics Co., Inc., for electronic, scientific, and computing-center support services at JSC. The services would support JSC programs including Space Shuttle, earth resources, aircraft, health applications, and the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment. The amendment brought the estimated value of the Lockheed contract to $173 100 000. (JSC Release 75—93)
Western Union Telegraph Co. and RCA Global Communications, Inc., had been selected for negotiations leading to phase-one contracts to provide detailed systems-design proposals for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), NASA announced. TDRSS, to be developed and operated by industry to meet NASA service requirements, would consist of three or more specialized satellites in synchronous orbit to continuously relay tracking information and data and voice commands to and from NASA satellites. Western Union and RCA would both provide a technical, cost, and business proposal for leased services to be provided in the phase-two operational period. The proposals would be evaluated and a single contract for phase two would be awarded. The selected contractor would provide tracking, command, and data-acquisition services for essentially all spacecraft orbiting below 5000 km, including the Space Shuttle and Spacelab, as well as automated spacecraft to be orbited by the Space Shuttle, for a 1- to 10-yr period beginning in 1979. TDRSS spacecraft and ground stations would be the property and responsibility of the selected contractor. (NASA Release 75—176)
Marshall Space Flight Center forwarded the experimental payload for the first launch of NASA’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to Goddard Space Flight Center, where the payload would be integrated with its launcher, a Black Brant sounding rocket. The integrated unit would undergo checkout before being sent to N. Mex. for firing by White Sands Missile Range early in Dec. The payload consisted of nine scientific experiments on processing materials in near-weightlessness. After the first launch, three flights per year carrying similar payloads had been planned through 1980. All payloads were to be recovered by parachute for ground analysis. The low-cost SPAR missions would provide data on space processing until Space Shuttle flights began in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75—233)
Two solid rockets on the Space Shuttle acoustic model accidentally escaped from the test stand during a captive static firing. The model’s liquid-propellant rocket engines had operated normally for a few seconds when the two solid rockets ignited on schedule. Both solid rockets then separated from the test stand. One was propelled north for 1.2 km, landing in a pine thicket; a brush fire caused by the rocket was quickly extinguished and no one was injured. A nine-member board was appointed to investigate the cause of the accident, determine the amount of property damage, investigate the adequacy of safeguards to prevent further incidents, recommend corrective measures, and assure containment of facilities and surrounding areas in case of recurrence. Although the test stand was damaged, the Orbiter and external tank of the model were not. The model would be returned to operation with the replacement of some wiring and instrumentation. (Marshall Star, 2 April 75, 2)
NASA and Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. had signed a $1.8-billion supplemental agreement for the follow-on development of the Space Shuttle Orbiter, NASA announced. The agreement formally incorporated into an existing contract awarded for Orbiter design, development, and test and evaluation, the construction of Orbiters 101 and 102, approach and landing tests, and six orbital flight tests. The supplemental agreement for the additional work brought the value of the Rockwell contract to more than $2.7 billion. (NASA Release 75—266; JSC Release 75—90)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a 10-mo $149 325 contract to Econ, Inc., to study the technical and economic feasibility of two different solar power plants, both in space and on the ground, and compare them with conventional terrestrial plants expected to exist ift the future. The first system was an orbiting system which would generate electrical power from the sun and transmit it to industries and cities on earth. A second kind of solar-power generating system, located on a remote area of the earth, could transfer power via an earth-orbiting satellite to users thousands of kilometers away. Econ, Inc., would use results from earlier concept studies to define requirements for payload packaging, development and checkout, and resupply for launch on the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—37)
President Ford signed Executive Order 11834 establishing the Energy Research and Development Administration—under Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.—and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission—under Chairman William A. Anders—effective 19 Jan. Establishment of the two new agencies was provided for in the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, signed into law on 11 Oct. 1974 by President Ford, which abolished the Atomic Energy Commission and reassigned its responsibilities. ERDA would take over AEC’s research and development programs including the development of fossil, nuclear, solar, and geothermal energy to meet present and future needs. ERDA would also take the lead in energy R&D programs transferred from the Dept, of the Interior, National Science Foundation, and Environmental Protection Agency. NRC was assigned AEC’s licensing and regulatory responsibilities. (PD, 20 Jan 75, 54; ERDA Release 75—1; ERDA Fact Sheet) 16 January—8 February: U.S. and U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project working groups held their last major meeting in the U.S. before the scheduled July launches. The five working groups included 80 Soviet aerospace specialists led by Academician Boris N. Petrov and ASTP Technical Director for the U.S.S.R. Konstantin D. Bushuyev. Working Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan. and went directly to Rockwell International Corp. in California for joint tests of the docking system alignment pin and socket. Following the tests, the group returned to JSC to review the results of those tests and others made earlier in Moscow. NASTRAN to analyze Space Shuttle structures. Recipients of the awards included 12 NASA and 12 contractor employees. (NASA Release 75-13) 16 January—8 February: U.S. and U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project working groups held their last major meeting in the U.S. before the scheduled July launches. The five working groups included 80 Soviet aerospace specialists led by Academician Boris N. Petrov and ASTP Technical Director for the U.S.S.R. Konstantin D. Bushuyev. Working Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan. and went directly to Rockwell International Corp. in California for joint tests of the docking system alignment pin and socket. Following the tests, the group returned to JSC to review the results of those tests and others made earlier in Moscow. On 20 Jan. a portion of Working Group 1—for experiments, trajectories, and contingencies plans—arrived at JSC to prepare for joint simulations scheduled for March. Group 4, for communications systems, also arrived to review the results of independent U.S. and Soviet tests of the flight communications system. The latter group—accompanied by Dr. Glynn S. Lunney, U.S. ASTP Technical Director, and Prof. Bushuyev—then traveled to Kennedy Space Center 3 Feb. to make electromagnetic radio and TV compatibility tests. The remaining Soviet specialists arrived in the U.S. on 27 Jan. Working Group 2, for control systems and docking targets, prepared contingency-control modes for the mission, and Working Group 5 prepared the final report on the compatibility of ASTP life-support systems. Group 5 also certified the equipment to be transferred between the two spacecraft. Although a portion of Group 1 would remain in the U.S. through crew training scheduled for 11 Feb., most of the Soviet contingent returned to the Soviet Union 8 Feb. The next major meeting for the working groups was scheduled for mid-May in Moscow. (JSC Release 75—02; Spaceport News, 6 Feb 75, 3)
NASA expected to add 3800 contractor personnel in FY 1976, mostly for the Space Shuttle, NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly told a joint session of the House Subcommittees on Space Science and Applications and on Aviation and Transportation R&D. However, overall employment on the space program had been forecast down 68%, or 278 000 workers, from its peak of 409 000 in 1965. NASA would lose 17 more Federal positions in FY 1976 after losing 521 Federal employees in FY 1975. NASA is paying more for fewer employees, Lilly pointed out, because agency manpower expenses go up about $6 million a year, offset by only $1 million in replacing retired workers with new workers in lower grades. Total Federal employment at NASA had hit a high of 33 924 in 1966; NASA Federal employees now numbered 24 316. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 995, 1024, 1031)
A prototype of a flexible tunnel to connect the Space Shuttle airlock with the forward end of the Spacelab was being tested at Marshall Space Flight Center. The tunnel would provide a pressurized passageway for crew members and scientists to move to and from the orbiting laboratory without spacesuits. The flexible circular tunnel, built by Goodyear Rubber Corp., would accordion-fold to 0.6 m and extend to a length of more than 4.3 m. Made rigid by steel rings, the tunnel was constructed of layers of aluminum foil, Capran film, and nylon cloth covered by a spongy meteoroid shield. MSFC engineers were testing the tunnel, which would be exposed to the space environment when the Orbiter bay doors were opened, for structural strength, airtight integrity, and materials compatibility. (MSFC Release 75—63)
The House of Representatives’ Committee on Appropriations reported out H.R. 8070, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Independent Agencies Appropriations Bill for FY 1976. The committee proposed the continuation of the Space Shuttle and Viking projects; various planetary, weather, and scientific satellites; and further development of a strong aeronautics program. No new starts were proposed. The committee also directed deferral of the Pioneer—Venus mission for 1 year to permit a budget-priority decision in 1977 between the Large Space Telescope and Pioneer—Venus. The committee recommended reducing the $57 600 000 requested for Pioneer—Venus to $9 200 000 to maintain a management capability during the 1-yr deferral. NASA FY 1976 Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 2678.4 2687.2 (+8.8) 2629.0 (-49.4) Construction of Facilities 84.6 99.1 (+14.5) 82.1 (-2.5) Research & Program Management* 776.0 776.0 (0) 775.5 (-0.5) Totals 3539.0 3562.3 (+23.3) 3486.6 (-52.4)
Manufacture of unique items in space is nearing reality with the availability of the Space Shuttle, scientists from TRW Systems Group told the 6th U.S.—European conference on partnership for space applications. Five practical processes in the space environment would be crystal growth, purification and separation, mixing, solidification, and processes in fluids. The gravity-free environment would permit the manufacture of items such as contamination-free glass for laser requirements, pure crystals for semiconductors, and highly pure vaccines. Also, if materials like copper-lead alloys that do not mix on earth could be combined in zero gravity, retd breakthroughs in aircraft and automotive parts manufacture might be possible. (SBD, 14 Oct 75, 221)
Approximately 31 000 contractor personnel in 47 states were current .at work on the development of the Space Shuttle, NASA announced. That number was expected to increase to 34 000 by June and to reach a maximum of 50 000 persons within 2 yr. (NASA Release 75-63)
NASA’s Office of Space Science announced assignment to Marshall Space Flight Center of overall responsibility for a definition study of the Atmospheric, Magnetospheric and Plasmas-in-Space (AMPS) Spacelab payload, to fly on the Space Shuttle. AMPS would be a manned laboratory equipped to study the dynamic process of the atmosphere and magnetosphere, using active and passive probing techniques. (NASA Release 75—28)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. announced the award of an estimated $1 million subcontract to the United Technologies Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. to build the flash evaporator subsystem, a part of the Space Shuttle Orbiter’s environmental control and life-support system. The evaporator would use excess heat generated by Orbiter subsystems to turn water from the spacecraft’s three power-producing fuel cells into steam vented into space, handling as much as 60 kg of water per hr. (United Aircraft became UTC in May.) Rockwell held the prime contract with NASA to build the Orbiter and . integrate the complete Space Shuttle system. The evaporator subsystem contract was the third of three contracts totaling more than $27 million awarded to Hamilton. Under previously awarded subcontracts, Hamilton was also developing the Orbiter’s atmospheric revitalization subsystem, Freon coolant loop, water boiler hydraulic thermal-control unit, and ground-support equipment hydraulic cart. (Rockwell Int’l Space Div Release SP—17)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, associate director for science at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire after 30 yrs of Federal service on 28 Dec., NASA announced. Born and educated in Germany, Dr. Stuhlinger became a physicist and had been involved in rocketry and space work since 1943 when he joined the rocket development team at Peenemunde, Germany. He had come to the U.S. after World War II and worked for the U.S. Army before transferring to NASA when MSFC was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo telescope mount had been carried out under his direction, as well as early planning on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial phases of the Space Telescope project. His work had included electric propulsion studies and scientific payloads for the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—256)
If NASA had unlimited funding, “I would mpve fairly quickly on a manned station because that will become an important outpost foy anything that we do in space,” Dr. Geprge M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an interview with the San Diego Union. Dr. Low added that he would move quicker in launching a space telescope and bringing back soil samples from Mars, “both enormously important from a scientific point of view.” Dr. Low expressed concern that “we really aren’t being inventive enough. We haven’t discovered a new propulsion system.” All NASA’s rockets so far, including the Space Shuttle, had Used conventional means of propulsion, and with it man was limited. Dr. Low said that the moon landing “was enormously difficult because we are tied to chemical propulsion systems.” NASA was experimenting with solar electric propulsion but to date no one had invented a fission or antigravity system. (San Diego Union, 8 June 75) On 14 June at 9:30 am local time (12:30 am EDT) Venera 10 was successfully launched toward Venus from Baykonur Cosmodroipe. Tass reported that “in design and purpose it is analogous to the ‘Venera-9’ station launched on June 8” and that all spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Venera 10 was also expected to reach Venus in October. In an interview 17 June with the Christian Science Monitor, Boris N. Petrov, chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of International Cooperation in the Study and Exploration of Outer Space, revealed that the Venera mission called for a landing rather than just a flyby. (GSFC SSR, 30 June 75;FBIS—Sov, 8—17 June 75; Pond, CSM, 17 June 75,1; W Post, 8—17 June 75; NYT, 8—17 June 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center was seeking industry proposals for procurement of parallel definition studies of the atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space (AMPS) payload, a reusable research facility to be integrated with Spacelab. The proposed 12-mo studies were to define an overall AMPS program with special emphasis on ground- and flight-support systems and subsystems, systems engineering and integration, and ground/orbital operations with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. AMPS, a single laboratory system flown with the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments and observations in atmospheric science, magnetospheric physics, and plasma physics. (MSFC Release 75—172) 4—6 August: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, at its 1975 aircraft systems and technology meeting in Los Angeles, Calif., presented the following aerospace awards. Award Recipient (affiliation) Purpose Aircraft Design Walter E. Fellers (Northrop Corp.) For 30 yr of outstanding achievement in design and development of fighter aircraft to meet rapidly changing requirements Octave Chanute Alan L. Bean Jack R. Lousma Dr. Owen K. Garriott (NASA Skylab 3 astronauts) For outstanding contributions to manned space flight and scientific research. Using the most sophisticated instruments ever flown in space, crew performed scores of scientific experiments and observations vastly expanding man’s knowledge and enhancing quality of life on earth 38th Annual Wright Brothers Lecture Henri Ziegler (Airbus, France) Topic: International Cooperation in Aerospace Projects: cooperation between European industries and between Europe and United States (AIAA Release, 22 July 75)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for negotiation of a $14.8-million fixed-price incentive contract to develop, build, and deliver Space Shuttle solid rocket booster (SRB) structures, and to design and build the tooling necessary to produce them. The SRB structures would support the Space Shuttle on the launch pad, transfer thrust loading to the Orbiter and external tank, and provide structural support for the SRB recovery system, electrical components, and thrust-vector control system. (NASA Release 75-238)
NASA would store $900 million worth of surplus Apollo-Satum hardware instead of scrapping it as planned earlier, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague, Chairman of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology. The flight hardware would be stored in a manner to minimize costs and to permit restoration, if required, to flight condition. Dr. Fletcher also wrote that, as Space Shuttle launch-readiness schedule and program costs required, NASA would convert Launch Complex 39 and its supporting facilities to handle the Space Shuttle. As requested by the Committee during a 25 March meeting with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, NASA would supply the Committee with a summary of options for missions that could be flown using the remaining Apollo-Satum flight hardware. Dr. Fletcher also stated that, because of the “considerable cost” to the government of storing the equipment, NASA would like to discuss the matter with the committee once again during the FY 1977 authorization hearings. (Text, letter Fletcher to Teague, 9 April 1975; UPI, NYT, 17 April 75, 7)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported out H.R. 4700 authorizing FY 1976 appropriations to NASA. Changes recommended by the committee would raise the NASA authorization by $5.7 million to $3,545 billion. Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the Senate Committee Program Difference from Submission (millions) Recommended Authorization (millions) Purpose Research and Development: Space shuttle 0 1206.0 Accepted as presented Space flight operations -4.0 203.1 Allocation of reduction left to discretion of NASA Advanced missions -1.5 0 Recommended deletion of this item; activities to be integrated with similar and related functions in other programs Physics and astronomy +7.0 162.8 To increase knowledge of upper atmosphere, identifying problems and developing new technology for dealing with them Lunar and planetary exploration 0 259.9 Accepted as presented Launch vehicle procurement 0 166.9 Accepted as presented Space applications +8.9 183.9 To increase emphasis on weather research, LACIE program, advanced communications research, and Space Shuttle payload definition Aeronautical research and technology 0 175.4 Accepted as presented Space & nuclear research & technology 0 74.9 Accepted as presented Energy technology appHcations 0 5.9 Accepted as presented Tracking & data acquisition -2.2 240.8 To seek economies in the program Technology utilization 0 7.0 Accepted as presented R&D Totals: +8.2 2686.6 Research and Program Management: Basic submission 0 776.0 Accepted as presented R&PM Totals: 0 776.0 Construction of Facilities: Modification of 11-by-ll-ft transonic wind tunnel at ARC 0 2.7 Accepted as presented Addition to Lunar Sample Facility at JSC -2.5 0 Deleted from funds Addition for composite model and metal finishing shops at LaRC 0 1.9 Accepted as presented Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the Senate Committee (continued) Program Difference from Submission (millions) Recommended Authorization (millions) Purpose Construction of Facilities: (cont.) Space Shuttle facilities 0 47.2 Accepted as presented Rehabilitation of facilities at various locations 0 16.0 Accepted as presented Minor construction of new facilities or additions to old facilities 0 5.0 Accepted as presented Facility plannirig and design 0 9.3 Accepted as presented C of F Totals: -2.5 82.1 Grand Totals* +5.7 3544.7
Estimated cost of the Spacelab being built for the first Space Shuttle flight had risen from $400 million to $500 million during the last year, and the program had fallen 3 to 6 mo behind schedule, NASA’s Space-lab program director Douglas Lord told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. The European Space Agency, which was developing Spacelab, was confident of delivering it in time to fly on the Shuttle. Lord and NASA Associate Administrator John F. Yard-ley said the increased development cost would not affect NASA’s cost in purchasing the modules, because NASA’s agreement with ESA precluded the Europeans from recouping development costs. NASA had been committed to buying one set of Spacelab hardware at a cost “reasonable to NASA,” although pricing proposals would not be received for 6 to 8 mo. The two officials said European cooperation on the program had been “exceptional.” (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 889)
One of the most highly detailed and instrumented models of the Space Shuttle ever constructed had been wind-tunnel-tested at the Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command announced. Located throughout the 92-cm model were 835 temperature sensors to measure heat levels of major components at jettison of the two expended solid-propellant boosters. Two other Shuttle tests also had been completed for NASA at AEDC: A smaller model and computer-controlled systems were used to study aerodynamic forces during the separation of the expended solid boosters. During the test the Orbiter and external fuel-tank models were attached to the tunnel supports and a solid booster model was attached to the computer-controlled support. Measurements were recorded with a single booster model at various points below, beside, and behind the Orbiter-tank combination and with the booster and Orbiter-tank at various pitch and yaw angles. In the third test, heating data were obtained on an Orbiter model positioned at a high angle of attack at mach 8. Special paints that changed from a solid to a liquid at specified temperatures were used to record heating histories on the surface of the model, and oilcoating techniques were used to examine airflow. (AFSC Release OIP
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a $1 612 948 extension to a $600 000 contract to Reynolds, Smith, and Hills Co. for Space Shuttle architectural and engineering services. The contract, which would run until June 1977, provided for modification to Pad A and Mobile Launcher 3 at Launch Complex 39, both being reconfigured for the Space Shuttle. (KSC Release 109—75)
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for quotations for a proposed study contract to design, build, test, and deliver a full-scale solar-array wing for solar electric propulsion and Space Shuttle payload applications. The selected contractor would establish design requirements and develop techniques for low-cost fabrication and testing incorporating all previously developed technology. (MSFC Release 75—109)
A significant influence on NASA’s ability to maintain viable programs in the face of possibly unstable funding will be the extent to which commercial and foreign government users participate in the development and financial support of future payloads,” Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Av Wk interviewed the Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, Philip E. Culbertson, who said that it would be better, in the long term, to move into a position where more organizations outside NASA were sponsoring and paying for missions and payloads. The agency was encouraged by the interest of industries in flying and funding Space Shuttle missions involving a wide range of basic scientific and technical operations. Foreign reimbursable payloads, already an important part of NASA launch operations, were seen as an even iarger factor in Shuttle payloads development. Japan, already holding discussions with NASA to lay the groundwork for a viable national space program, was considered a serious Shuttle customer; Japan would like to develop both scientific and earth applications programs in the communications, navigation, and weather satellite fields.. Canada’s interest in positioning domestic communications satellites over its territory would continue into the Shuttle era. Even individual Soviet scientists had made inquiries into the possibilities of flying payloads on the U.S. Shuttle. Culbertson pointed out that, unlike earlier NASA manned space programs that included scientific funding in overall program budgets, NASA in-house Shuttle payload development was the sole responsibility of the specific NASA disciplines themselves. NASA’s FY 1976 budget request contained from $50 to $100 million for various efforts that could evolve into Shuttle payloads, and the budget for FY 1977 would markedly increase payload funding. However, with the budget crunch, funding for Shuttle payloads would compete directly with other programs and the payload proposals “will have to stand on their own merit.” Culbertson also said that major decisions would have to be made on how long to keep which expendable launch vehicles in the program. In another interview, NASA Spacelab Program Director Douglas R. Lord said that upcoming major decisions concerning Spacelab included a follow-on procurement plan for Spacelab hardware and priorities on how often ESRO (European Space Research Organization) and other crews and experimental hardware would fly on Shuttle— Spacelab missions. Lord said that operations of overall Spacelab functions would probably be maintained separately from payload operations: Johnson Space Center was the logical place to handle overall operations, and Marshall Space Flight Center was the leading candidate for the Spacelab payload operations center. Goddard Space Flight Center had expressed interest in handling operational needs of the high-energy experiments on Spacelab pallets. (Covault, Av Wk, 17 March 75, 59- 60) 18March: “The expertise and facilities of LeRC [Lewis Research Center], as well as other NASA centers, are being considered by ERDA [Energy Research and Development Administration] as part of its overall definition of a total institutional structure required to carry out the nation’s energy R&D program,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., ERDA Administrator said in a letter to Representative Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio). The letter was a reply to correspondence from members of the Ohio congressional delegation and Cleveland businessmen and industrialists to President Ford calling for increased use of LeRC talent to meet the nation’s energy crisis. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Seamans noted that the newly established ERDA was the lead Federal agency for managing national energy R&D. ERDA intended to use the expertise and facilities of other Federal agencies where it was feasible and in the national interest with respect to cost, timeliness, and program management. LeRC, NASA’s lead center for aerospace propulsion and power, was already involved in ERDA-sponsored projects in solar heating and cooling, wind energy, and topping cycles to increase the efficiency of coal-fueled steam plants. But LeRC would continue its main task to work on propulsion technology, conducting energy research in support of ERDA “when it was consistent with the requirements of its principal mission within NASA.” (Text, letter to Mosher from Fletcher and Seamans, 18 March 75)
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
Engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center were completing tests seeking to refine the means of towing to shore for refurbishment and reuse recovered solid rocket boosters from Space Shuttle launches. These tests explored the question of whether the parachute recovery lines and riser lines on the three recovery parachutes to be attached to each booster would, when under tension during descent, stretch enough to develop sufficient latent energy to deploy the 52-mm-dia by 15-m long tow rope from a tray located in the booster’s forward skirt. The tests employed a 10-m Saturn S—II-stage adapter ring, to which the parachute lines were attached. A crane hoisted the adapter ring until the stress on the rings was 12 000 kg, about one-half the stress expected on the parachutes lowering the booster. An explosive bolt was detonated, abruptly freeing the parachute lines; they contracted and the lines and fitting to which they were attached were yanked upward more than 60 m, quite enough energy to deploy the tow line. The recovery system parachutes would be fitted with flotation devices so they could be recovered. On the first six Shuttle developmental flights, the set of parachutes would be cut free from one booster in each set of two and both would be tested to determine which configuration made it easier to retrieve and tow the booster. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)
Kennedy Space Center announced the selection of General Electric Co.’s Space Div. and Martin Marietta Corp. for competitive negotiation of a contract to check out, control, and monitor subsystem hardware for the Space Shuttle launch processing system. The contractor would design, develop, build, test, and install the hardware. The launch processing system would use modern industrial automation techniques, applied to a modular concept, to meet maintenance and refurbishment requirements for tum-around and launch of the Space Shuttle. The other candidates for the contract had been Grumman Aerospace Corp. and Aeronutronic Ford Corp. (KSC Release 94—75)
Boeing Co., which had a 44-mo $3-million subcontract from Rockwell to detect electrical problems with the Space Shuttle, reported that 35 design or hardware changes had been necessary in main-engine electrical circuits of the Shuttle so far. Boeing was conducting a sneak circuit analysis of the first Shuttle orbiter, to be used for approach and landing tests; later studies were scheduled for the second orbiter, the solid rocket booster, and the external fuel tank, as well as critical ground-support equipment. (SBD, 18 Nov 75, 92)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a single-source request to Sunstrand Corp. to submit a proposal for the design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of the auxiliary power unit for the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster’s thrust-vector control subsystem. The APU would include a gas generator, turbine, gearbox, fuel pump, electrical controls, control valves, instrumentation, mounting system, and the mechanical and electrical connections required to interface with other SRB subsystems. Two APUs would be used during prelaunch and ascent phases of flight to provide hydraulic power to the thrust-vector control system of each booster. (MSFC Release 75 —62)
In a letter to Rep. Don Fuqua, chairman of the House of Representatives’ Committee on Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher summarized options for missions that could use the remaining Apollo-Saturn flight hardware. Options included an earth-orbital mission as an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project backup; a Skylab revisit; an Apollo geosynchronous mission; a lunar orbital mission; an earth-orbital mission to visit a Soviet space station; and a manned-satellite inspector. The hardware could also be used to launch a U.S. unmanned space station carrying a large U.S.S.R. payload, a large orbiting reflector, a space solar-power demonstration, a planetary probe, or multiple payloads. Another possibility might be to carry an Apollo spacecraft into space aboard the Space Shuttle to provide a crew-rescue capability or to serve as a habitable module, to demonstrate a Shuttle-serviced free-flying module, or to inspect and service orbiting satellites. Dr. Fletcher’s letter added that he did not foresee that funds would be available to support additional Apollo-Saturn missions in the period preceding the Space Shuttle operation. The subcommittee at a 25 March meeting had asked NASA to summarize the options when the agency had sought permission to dispose of surplus Apollo-Saturn equipment [see 9 April]. (Text, letter from Fletcher to Fuqua and attachment “Conceptual Flight Possibilities for Satum-Apollo Hardware,” 15 Sept 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
A 50 000-kg towing tractor, first piece of operational ground-support equipment manufactured by International Harvester Co. for Kennedy Space Center’s Space Shuttle operations, was accepted for delivery to KSC. The T—500S Paymover tractor would tow NASA’s Boeing 747 carrier aircraft or the orbiter, or the mated 747-orbiter combination after use at the Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif., during orbiter tests. (KSC Release 257—75)
Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development at Johnson Space Center, received the gold medal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers at its annual winter meeting honors assembly in Houston. Faget had been responsible for design and testing of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft and the Skylab space station, as well as of the Space Shuttle scheduled for flight in the late 1970s. Previous JSC recipients of the ASME gold medal had been JSC Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., in 1973 and former JSC Director Robert R. Gilruth in 1970. (JSC Release 75—98)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Donald P. Hearth, Deputy Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, gave in their testimony before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology a preview of the new NASA report “Outlook for Space.” The report had been submitted to NASA by a 21-member study group established by Dr. Fletcher in June 1974 to develop an unconstrained listing of desirable and practical civilian space activities; to group these around goals, objectives, and themes; to define R&D tasks required by potential commercial and operational uses of space; to identify social and economic challenges that could benefit from space-reported data; and to relate space goals and objectives to national ones. All space objectives defined by the study group were evaluated in terms of their contribution to national interests, which included expansion of human knowledge, physical benefits to the U.S. and humanity, contribution to the vitality of the nation, exploration of the unknown, national prestige and self-esteem, and international cooperation. The report suggested categorizing space missions as either earth-oriented or extraterrestrial. Earth-oriented programs for the rest of the century should help increase food production by improved weather and water-availability forecasting, improved crop forecasting, improved detection and monitoring of diseases and infestations in vegetation. The consequent economic benefits and stabilization of the commodity market could gain hundreds of millions of dollars per year. Other earth-oriented space programs should emphasize improved forecasting of seasonal and climatic trends, to aid in the managing of food and energy resources and associated transportation requirements. Benefits from improved climate forecasting could reach hundreds of millions of dollars annually. The space program should also address itself to the challenge of the unknown by adding to man’s knowledge of cosmic and human evolution and destiny. Spacecraft could take instruments above the “dark and dirty glass” of earth’s opaque atmosphere, and should continue to carry instruments to other planets, setting up laboratories there as well as bringing samples back to earth for analysis. Extraterrestrial missions should include textural, chemical, and isotopic planetary studies and comparisons of atmospheric trends for all planets and their satellites. Plans should also continue for human activities in space, using both the space shuttle and free-flying laboratories to repair and maintain orbiting spacecraft systems and perform research in space. Although the study panel had found it difficult to assert that manned orbiting or planetary bases should be undertaken in the next 25 yrs, it found that man was an integral and necessary part of the more creative space-exploration programs. If the U.S. was to avail itself of the potential benefits of space, the next logical step for NASA’s manned program could be development of a permanent space facility in which crews could work for extended periods. (H.R. transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 782, a biological satellite carrying 4 U.S. experiments as well as materials from Russia, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, Poland, and Romania, to be recovered in Soviet territory in about 3 wks. Launched from Plesetsk into an orbit with 405 km apogee, 227 km perigee, 62.8° inclination, and 90.5 min period, the satellite provided an opportunity for U.S. scientists to fly biology and weightlessness experiments that would otherwise have had to await flights of the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Last U.S. biology research spacecraft, Biosatellite 3, had been launched in 1969. Cosmos 782 was the first satellite equipped to simulate gravity in space, to compare effects on biological processes with those of weightlessness. A specially constructed centrifuge, consisting of a small disk that would rotate at a constant speed, would create a centrifugal force equal to gravity on earth for packages placed at the right spot on the disk. Comparing the specimens exposed to lack of gravity during orbital flight with similar specimens feeling the pull of gravity would prove any effects had resulted from weightlessness. Results of the experiments should be available in about 90 days, according to the Tass news agency. Ames Research Center managed the U.S. participation in the Cosmos 782 flight. It had had no advance notice of the launch date, place of launch, or mode of orbital operation, although life limitations of the biology materials had dictated a launch near this date. NASA had been invited to participate in a second Soviet biosat mission in 1977, and had planned to fly Russian experiments on its Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (NYT, 27 Nov 75, 62M; NASA Release 75—292; SBD, 28 Nov 75, 145; Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 148)
The Air Force System Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was developing a technique to study, under flight conditions, the physical behavior of the spray-on insulating material proposed for the Space Shuttle, AFSC announced. Using procedures similar to those used in analyzing aerial photographs, a series of reference lines was projected onto the original surface and photographed before wind-tunnel testing. The same pattern was then projected onto the surface during the testing. The shift in the apparent position of the projected lines as the surface eroded from the position shown on the original photograph allowed analysis of the behavior of the materials. (AFSC Release OIP 157.75) 24 —25 June: At its first meeting, the council of the European Space Agency (ESA) elected Wolfgang Finke (West Germany) as chairman for 1 yr. General Luis de Azcarraga (Spain) and Jan Stiernstedt (Sweden) were elected vice chairmen. (ESA Release, 27 June 75)
Frank Briscoe Co., Inc., and Santa Fe Engineers, Inc., were the apparent successful bidders on two major Space Shuttle contracts which would be awarded by Kennedy Space Center, KSC announced. Frank Briscoe Co. had bid $8 733 300 on a contract for the construction of the Orbiter processing facility, Orbiter towway, and associated site work and utilities at KSC. It was in the processing facility that the Orbiters would be safed, serviced, and maintained after returning from flights into space and then prepared for their next mission. Phase 1 of the construction—scheduled for March 1977 completion—included a 5000-sq-m building with a low bay area 88 m long, 30 m wide, and 8 m high and two high bay areas 61 m long, 46 m wide, and 29 m high. Santa Fe Engineers had bid $3 567 567 on a contract to construct the Shuttle approach and landing test facilities at Flight Research Center. The contract would include site preparation, construction of a maintenance hangar and shops, Shuttle Orbiter mating structure area, hypergolic fuel and oxidizer area, fire protection pump station, concrete towway and service aprons, parking area and road paving, and necessary utilities. The project was scheduled for completion in September 1976. (KSC Release 73—75) '
Kennedy Space Center announced a reorganization to prepare for the Space Shuttle era of space operations. John J. Neilon, Director of Unmanned Launch Operations since 1970, was named Deputy Director of Technical Support; George F. Page, Chief of Operations, Div. of Manned Spacecraft Operations, would move into Neilon’s former post. The Launch Operations Directorate would be reorganized into four major second-level groups: engineering, payloads, space transportation systems processing, and expendable vehicle operations. (KSC Release 253—75)
