Astronaut-pilots in training for the Space Shuttle program had used a simulated shuttle—a Grumman Gulfstream 2 twin-engine jet— in approach-and-landing maneuvers over the southern New Mexico desert at White Sands Missile Range, the New York Times reported. Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, JSC director, who recently watched the training at White Sands, said that the latter installation might eventually become a space port for launch and recovery of the shuttle. The pilots were to test an actual space shuttle—the Enterprise, unveiled this fall by Rockwell Inti.—some time next year; the first vertical launch of the shuttle had been scheduled for 1977 from KSC at Cape Canaveral, Fla. (ATT, 19 Dec 76, 41)
Study of earth’s climate to permit predictions of global climatic changes by the end of the century should be the top space priority, said a study group formed by NASA last year to assess U.S. progress in space and where it should go next. The 3-vol report of the study group did not mention manned exploration of Mars, which had been the prime recommendation of a forerunner study 7 yr ago. Citing the dependence of the world’s population on a complex system producing food and fiber where climate is favorable, the report said the entire system was predicated on a constant climate. Understanding of climatic processes would help solve earth’s most pressing problems: food shortages, and worldwide weather changes caused by pollution. The report estimated that a 1-degree cooling of earth’s annual temperature would mean loss of $1 billion in grain production, $2.2 billion in timber and fiber output, and $1.4 billion in fish catches; the drop would also increase the demand for electrical energy by $700 million, with a $2.4 billion rise in health costs other than treating skin cancers caused by alterations in earth’s atmosphere. The group recommended development of 6 satellites to identify and assess worldwide crop conditions; other satellites to study chemical changes in the atmosphere and to watch for solar changes affecting earth’s weather; and a network of 4 to 6 large geostationary satellites to observe ice and ocean conditions and keep tabs on the earth’s radiation balance. Manned flight should develop along the lines of Space Shuttle and space station— to be used partially for climate study—and instrumented craft should be sent to explore every solar-system planet except Pluto, the report said. Cost of the weather-satellite program was set at $1.7 billion, with operating costs over 20 yr estimated at $4.6 billion; the planetary exploration program would cost a total of $5.1 billion to the year 2000. (WPost, 22 Feb 76, A-3)
Kennedy Space Center announced award to Pan American Technical Services, Inc., Cocoa Beach, Fla., of the first contract to modify KSC facilities for Spacelab processing as part of the Space Shuttle program. The $129 627 contract included architect and engineer services to design the modifications of the Operations and Checkout Bldg., including changes in utilities (gaseous nitrogen, helium, high-pressure air, water and airconditioning) and adaptation of Apollo equipment acceptance and checkout rooms to make them compatible with ground-support equipment provided by the European Space Agency for automated Spacelab testing. Spacelab—to be carried into space by the Space Shuttle orbiter—was being designed, developed, and built by 9 member nations of ESA at a cost of $300 to $400 million. At the end of each mission, the Spacelab would be removed from the landed orbiter and prepared for the next mission. The engineering model to be used for facility and orbiter checkout was scheduled to arrive at KSC in July 1978; the first flight model was due in June 1979. (KSC Release 128-76)
Women would definitely be admitted to the U.S. space program, the Chicago Tribune reported, and NASA would make a formal announcement in July. Only one woman—Russia’s Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited for 3 days on Vostok 6 in June 1963—had been in space so far. The U.S. space women would fly on the Space Shuttle scheduled to be operational by 1980; the exact number had not been determined, but they would form part of a group of 15 mission specialists who would be chosen within the coming year. Screening, evaluation, and physical examination of applicants would be completed by Dec. 1977, and selectees would join NASA as candidates for space flight by July 1978. (B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
Dr. Mary Helen Johnston, metallurgist at MSFC, was principal guest speaker at the Federal Women’s Day program at Wallops Flight Center. Dr. Johnston, who said she wanted to be one of the first American women chosen for space flight, participated in 1974 as part of an all-women crew of experimenters in a 5-day tryout of the general-purpose laboratory at MSFC, a cylindrical mockup of the Spacelab being built in Europe for Space Shuttle flights. Using the neutral-buoyancy simulator, a working area for handling experiment packages in a zero-gravity environment, the crew developed techniques for use on Spacelab. As principal investigator for three scientific experiments and co-investigator on another, Dr. Johnston had planned the work in hopes of going on orbital missions in the 1980s. Also on the program was Audrey Rowe Colom, director of women’s activities for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and current president of the Natl. Women’s Political Caucus. Besides the speakers, the program included jskits by WFC employees and a costumed narration of “Two Centuries of American Women on Parade.” (WFC Release 76-15)
A launch-abort system for the Space Shuttle, for use in case of malfunction during the first 2.5 min of flight, was “quietly” removed by NASA 3 yr ago although such a system had been designed into the Shuttle late in 1971, according to the Washington Post. (In 2.5 min the Shuttle would reach a 40-km altitude from which it could “fly” to earth.) Staff writer Thomas O’Toole said that in 1973 NASA “reversed itself and dropped the launch-abort system ... a decision understood to have met with dissent inside the space agency.” The abort system designed for the Shuttle consisted of 2 huge solid-fuel rocket motors, one on each side of the Shuttle tail, that could be fired to separate the spacecraft and its occupants from the booster engines and main-engine fuel tanks in case of trouble; however, the abort motors weighed 43,500 kg—half as heavy as the entire 68 000-kg Shuttle carrying an average 18 000-kg pay-load—and even after they fired, the Shuttle would fall for 2 or 3 sec before being lifted away from the boosters. Elwood W. Land, director of system operations for the Shuttle program, defended the decision to remove the abort system, saying that it was not needed because of redundancy built into the spacecraft and its engine. Land noted that, in 58 manned space flights, neither the U.S. nor the USSR had resorted to a launch-abort system to rescue spacecraft crews, notwithstanding 2 close calls: Gemini 6 astronauts had almost fired their ejection seats when their engine shut down on the pad in 1965, and the Soyuz 18 cosmonauts never reached earth orbit but flew their spacecraft to a landing in southeast Siberia. The 1-man Mercury capsule had a rocket-boosted escape system to carry the spacecraft cabin away from its rocket engines and fuel tanks; the 2-man Gemini had ejection seats to fire astronauts from the cabin like jet pilots from disabled aircraft; and the 3-man Apollo carried a large solid-fuel rocket motor that could pull the 18 000-kg spacecraft away from its tower of engines sec after trouble hit the engines or fuel tanks. Only remaining provision for the Shuttle was a pair of ejection seats for pilot and copilot of the first 4 orbital test flights; the seats would be removed when 5 more crew members were added for subsequent tests and for operational flights. “There is no way to install 7 ejection seats in the shuttle,” the article noted. (WPost, 7 May 76, A-3)
RockwelLIntl. Corp. inspectors testing their inventory of transistors after a government warning to watch for counterfeit semiconductors had found 11 of 11 transistors of one type to be fakes, the New York Times reported. Rockwell had concluded that bogus parts had been “unwittingly built into [NASA’s] major current project, the Space Shuttle, for which Rockwell is the prime contractor.” The NYT said that “a rash of discoveries of bogus devices” had plagued the electronics industry for the last year and a half. The Defense Electronics Supply Center (DESC), a DOD agency that procured almost all electronic devices for defense, found 20 of 60 components taken randomly from stock to be “suspect” and had returned them to the makers for tests to determine authenticity. “Counterfeit” components—devices altered physically to misrepresent their true type or quality, by relabeling, renumbering, or adding false reliability information or dating— would not necessarily be nonfunctional; however, as the purpose of the alteration would be to indicate falsely that a part had passed certain quality tests, and would therefore be much more valuable, the part might fail under strenuous application. Failure of a single component could have consequences far outweighing its 25-cent cost. The transistors tested at Rockwell had been marked to indicate suitability for use in the most rigorous applications; upon disassembly, the parts showed no indication of having undergone any of the extra testing signified by the external markings, which had increased the cost fivefold. Although one trade organization (Electronics Industries Assn.) set up a task group to combat the problem of counterfeiting, “all sectors of the electronics industry are working against . . . major procedures to alleviate counterfeiting,” said the NYT report. At issue was the use of distributors, intermediary between producers and end users, who had a “heavy financial interest in maintaining the current system,” the report said. Most semiconductor producers sold rejects to junk or surplus dealers for their metal content; the items not disfigured were a very inexpensive source for remarking, and could be introduced into the market as high-quality low-cost items. Virtually all counterfeit components could be traced to the big defense contractors, said the NYT. Industry sources contended that 'the DOD had loose procurement practices, with a purchasing-policy rule that component contracts must go to the lowest bidder. As a DESC spokesman pointed out, “We are simply not allowed to pay a premium price on any contract,” even if the low bid is suspiciously below the going rate—“a strong indication that something may be wrong,” the NYT noted. Accepted methods of the industry made it impossible to guarantee the authenticity of any part that did not come directly from the manufacturer, the report added. Although vendors had predicted that a 1974 DESC edict calling for a strict and immediate upgrading of tests on military-grade components would disrupt the supply, few problems had arisen after the regulations had taken effect. (NYT, 24 Oct 76, 3F; Newsweek, 25 Oct 76)
MSFC announced it had shipped to GFSC the experiment payload for SPAR III, third in a series of about 15 space-processing applications rockets being flown over a 15-yr period to obtain space-processing data in near-zero gravity until Space Shuttle flights become available in the 1980s. The scientific payload built by MSFC would be integrated with GFSC components—igniter, separator, control and recovery systems—and shipped to the U.S. Army White Sands Missile Range, N.M., for a scheduled mid-December launch. SPAR payloads recovered by parachute would be forwarded to investigators for analysis. The SPAR flight would provide about 5 min of near-zero gravity in which to perform materials processing. (MSFC Release 76-204)
More new discoveries would be made in space than on the ground during the first 10 to 15 yr of Shuttle operations, a colloquium on bioprocessing in space was told by James H. Bredt, NASA program manager for space processing. The meeting of more than 200 industrial and academic bioscience researchers at Johnson Space Center heard reports on Space Shuttle and Spacelab capabilities and status. Noting that Spacelab would be able to carry 300 to 400 experiments, more on each flight than all other previous manned space missions combined, Bredt urged the audience to submit experiment programs that would make use of the new national resource. Participants recommended formation of a small group of bioscientists to advise NASA in discussions of space processing suggestions, and scheduling of followup meetings to define areas of interest so that programs could be developed before instrumentation development began. NASA spokesmen said more than 1400 experiment proposals for Shuttle flights were on hand, and Shuttle flight opportunities covering the first 2 Spacelab missions would be announced later this year. (Av Wk & Sp Tech, 29 Mar 76, 53)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced shipment of the first production segment of a motor case for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor from the manufacturer (Ladish Co. of Cudahy, Wis.) to the Cal-Doran Metallurgical Services plant at Los Angeles, where it would undergo heat treatment and cleaning before being forwarded to Rohr Industries at Chula Vista, Calif. Rohr—subcontractor to prime contractor Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Utah—would process the cylindrical segment, with a finished weight of about 5060 kg, for delivery to Thiokol in Sept. 1976. Thiokol would load the solid propellants into 4 motor-case segments over 3 m in dia. and 45.5 m long, each holding about 500 000 kg of propellant. The 4 segments joined would stretch to more than 35 m and constitute about three fourths of the solid-fuel rocket booster. Each launch of the Shuttle would use 2 boosters, burning from ignition on the pad to burnout at an altitude of about 42 km; at that point, the SRBs would be separated and descend by parachute into the ocean for recovery, refueling, and reuse. (MSFC Release 76-76)
Payload responsibilities for the first 6 flights of the Space Shuttle had been allocated by NASA, according to Aviation Wk and. Space Technology magazine. The first 6 orbital missions scheduled for 1979-1980 would be verifications of the overall Shuttle system; the first flight would carry no payload except a 45 000-kg data-analysis system, but the other 5 flight-test missions would carry scientifically meaningful payloads. NASA had assigned the second and fifth flight tests to its Office of Applications; the fourth and sixth, to the Office of Space Science; and the third, to the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. The Office of Applications would be involved with space-processing hardware, and the Office of Space Science would oversee the use of existing research instruments; the OAST had been considering a space “workbench” on which various instruments could be deployed for 3- to 9-mo periods. The orbital flight-test missions would begin with a duration of only a few orbits, which should increase to about 7 days by the sixth flight mission; the first 4 flights would land at Dryden Flight Research Center, and the latter 2 at Kennedy Space Center. {AvWk, 17 May 76, 21)
MSFC announced launchings of two giant helium-filled polyethylene balloons carrying cosmic-ray detectors, last week’s flight for a French-Danish team investigating isotopic composition of primary cosmic rays, the upcoming flight to evaluate instrumentation for a planned HEAO launch and for other Space Shuttle experiments. The HEAO flight scheduled for 1979 would survey and map gamma-ray and cosmic-ray flux. The balloon launch site near Sioux Falls, S.D., was chosen because earth magnetic-field lines there would deflect fewer cosmic rays, and the low population density and open terrain facilitated payload recovery. The balloons would reach an altitude of about 41 km, above 99.6% of earth’s atmosphere (which fragments cosmic rays), and remain aloft for 40 to 60 hr sending data to the ground. Upon electronic command from the ground, the instrument payloads would separate from the balloons and return to earth by parachute; the balloons would be destroyed by ground command over unpopulated areas. Telemetry tapes and recovered instruments would go to the investigators for analysis. (MSFC Release 76-172)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for a day-long meeting 16 Sept, at MSFC to review the status of the spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) that would deliver spacecraft from the Space Shuttle in low orbit to their operational synchronous orbits. The SSUS, carrying a satellite of the type now being launched by expendable Atlas-Centaur or Thor-Delta vehicles, would be launched from earth in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle. In orbit, the SSUS with its payload would be extended from the cargo bay on a cradle with a spin table that would stabilize the SSUS as it ejected from the cradle, before its own engine ignited to send it and its payload into the proper orbit. After reaching the required altitude, the payload’s propulsion system would position it in the desired orbital attitude. Industry representatives invited to the status review would hear presentations by NASA and Aerospace Corp. on concepts and current mission models for the SSUS. MSFC planned to issue requests for proposals for Phase B (preliminary design definition) about 1 Oct., with contracts being issued in Feb. Plans were to have the SSUS ready for flight in Dec. 1979. (MSFC Release 76-166; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 46)
Johnson Space Center announced “the most successful balloon flight of its type ever conducted” when a football-field-sized balloon carried a scientific instruments package at a 40-km altitude across the central Texas night sky for 12 hr to gather information on far distant giant and super-giant stars. The 589-kg package known as BUSS—for balloon-borne ultraviolet stellar spectrometer—gathered data on 16 separate stars, including Arcturus, a giant star in constellation Bootes; super-giant Antares (alpha Scorpii); Vega (alpha Lyrae); and Spica (alpha Virginis), super-hot star and one of the brightest observed during the flight. Of special interest was super-giant Deneb in constellation Cygnus, 1400 light years distant, whose light recorded by BUSS was emitted before the Anglo-Saxons settled in England; Deneb was so large that, if the sun were located in its center, the earth would orbit the sun entirely within the star’s outer limits. The BUSS payload was the culmination of a 3-yr international collaboration between JSC and the Space Research Laboratory of Utrecht in the Netherlands. Dr. Yoji Kondo of JSC was U.S. coprincipal investigator, with Dr. Thomas H. Morgan and Dr. Jerry L. Modisette of Houston Raptist University; the Dutch team was led by Dr. Cees de Jager. Purpose of the balloon flights in a series of star studies that began in 1971 was to evaluate the experiment systems for use on the Space Shuttle; the BUSS package was designed to obtain data on spectral variations of a variety of stars and aid scientists in determining their structure and evolution. Previous flights had obtained some information but only a fiftieth of the spectral range covered by the BUSS payload. The package was landed by a parachute about 26 m in diameter, similar to those used on the Apollo command module; the payload, chute, and balloon were recovered between Abilene and Ft. Worth by NASA engineers who returned the material to Houston. The data would be analyzed by the U.S. team and by the Dutch scientists, who had returned to Holland, in preparation for another balloon flight scheduled for the fall of 1976. (JSC Release 76-39)
Fred W. Haise, Jr., astronaut on the Apollo 13 lunar mission of April 1970 that nearly ended in disaster, would command the first free-flight test of the Space Shuttle, Johnson Space Center officials announced. A research pilot for NASA since 1959, Haise worked at Lewis Research Center and the Flight Research Center before his selection as a civilian astronaut in 1966. He was technical assistant to the manager of the Shuttle orbiter project from April 1973 to January 1976. With Haise on the test Shuttle flight would be Air Force Lt. Col. Charles G. Fullerton, appointed astronaut in 1969, who had never flown in space. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly piggyback in 1977 on a modified Boeing 747 jet transport, then in free-flight testing and landing after release at about 8-km altitude. Haise and Col. Fullerton would guide the Shuttle to an unpowered landing at the Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif, to demonstrate handling and reusability. (B Sun, 25 Feb 76, A-7; W Post, 25 Feb 76, B 5; NASA Release 76-35; JSC Release 76-17)
Physicians at Johnson Space Center were gathering data on female physiological performance and tolerance limits as a basis for establishing criteria in recruiting NASA’s first women astronauts. Women employees of the center were asked to volunteer for testing on a treadmill and in a lower body negative-pressure device, to see whether women responded differently from men of comparable age to treadmill exercise and to stresses on the circulatory system induced by decreased pressures on the lower body. On the treadmill test, researchers would monitor the subject’s heart rate and blood pressure as they varied the speed and tilt of the moving treadmill. The pressure device, encasing the subject from the waist down, would have the pressure reduced while researchers monitored the reaction of the cardiovascular system to the change in pressure. NASA had issued a call for at least 30 Space Shuttle astronauts (15 pilot candidates, 15 mission specialist candidates) in July 197 6, with a closing date of 30 June 1977. Selection would be completed by December 1977. (JSC Release 76-65)
The USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center operated in Tenn. by the Air Force Systems Command announced that it was using infrared equipment, designed in Europe to locate tumors in the human body, for studying heat patterns on the surface of the Space Shuttle manned orbiter vehicle under simulated flight conditions. Infrared cameras were known to detect a tumor because its heat-radiation characteristics differed from those of normal tissue. In the USAF tests, a model heated in a wind tunnel’s supersonic airflow produced infrared radiation received by a camera and transferred to a detector that could record infrared radiation from 7000 points in the field-of-view. Earlier Shuttle tests had shown the need for a protective system when the vehicle plunged into the dense atmosphere and for data on expected temperature levels, important to the selection of structural materials and to the design of internal parts. Ceramic-like tiles had been used in a scanning test to see the effect of a slight misalignment on the overall heat distribution on the orbiter’s underside; the resulting data had demonstrated advantages over more traditional methods. Standard procedures required the application of surface coatings—either a paint that changed from solid to liquid at a specified temperature, or compounds whose ultraviolet radiation changed with temperature—but such materials could create a surface roughness that would alter the results. Also the melting-paint technique required washing and repainting the model after each test. The infrared camera could transmit its findings to a computer for analysis within minutes, and could provide a permanent color record if required. Use of mechanical heat-measuring devices was limited by the number of sensors that could be installed, and the time required to do so. (Although the infrared system would minimize the need for mechanical instrumentation, tests calling for simultaneous temperature data from all portions of the model surface would still require installation of sensors.) About 90% of the system used at AEDC was off-the-shelf hardware; computer programs and methods of interconnecting components were devised by ARO, Inc., the center’s operating contractor. (OIP 114.76)
NASA announced selection of Hamilton Standard Division, United Aircraft Corp., for negotiations leading to award of contract for development and production of space suits to be used by men and women during Space Shuttle flights. The basic cost-plus-award fee contract would cost about $15 million through Sept. 1980. The suit system, consisting of a basic suit and built-in support system including breathing-atmosphere and cooling components, would be adjustable instead of custom-made for each astronaut (as in earlier programs) and would come in small, medium, and large sizes to fit candidates varying in height from 1.5 to 2 m. Hamilton Standard would provide hardware and spares needed for 7 suits and support equipment, as well as training, manpower, and equipment needed to support the program at NASA field centers. Johnson Space Center would have technical direction of the contract. (JSC Release 76-46)
NASA announced selection of three contractors to negotiate for provision of various subsystems for the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft. The SMM, scheduled for launch in the third quarter of 1979, would carry instruments to investigate solar flares; the spacecraft would be built on the modular concept, so that its instrumentation could be readily changed or replaced. Fairchild Industries, Germantown, Md., would negotiate to provide the communications and data-handling subsystem at a proposed value of $2.5 million, for one protoflight model with options for up to six additional. The C&DH subsystem would provide ground and onboard control of all spacecraft and sensor functions, and of retrieval of housekeeping and experiment data. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., East St. Louis, Mo., would negotiate to provide the power module subsystem for the SMM at a proposed value of $2.3 million, with options for up to six additional. The power module, an unregulated system operating from a deployable solar array, would provide 1280 w at the beginning of its operating life. General Electric Space Div., Valley Forge, Pa., would negotiate to provide the attitude-control subsystem at a proposed value of $3.5 million, with options for up to six additional subsystems. The ACS would include reaction-control devices as well as a high-performance gyro inertial-reference unit, a pair of fixed electronic-scanning star trackers, a three-axis magnetometer set, and sun sensors. The SMM spacecraft, a 381-cm-long cylinder weighing about 1740 kg, would be powered with solar panels and fit atop a modular spacecraft base; it would be capable of launch on a Delta and retrieval by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Releases 76-203, 76-204, 76-205)
MSFC announced that it had modified its Saturn facilities to accommodate Space Shuttle work, having completed remodeling of a giant test stand used in the 1960s for static test firing of the Saturn V first stages. The stand would be used in structural tests of the liquid-hydrogen tank portion of the Shuttle external tank; the hydrogen tank measured 29.3 m long and 8.5 m in diameter. Stand modifications included work platforms, changes in the stand structure including pressurization, and an instrumentation and control system. Holddown arms were removed and a flame deflector that channeled rocket exhaust away from the area was taken from under the stand. Liquid-oxygen storage facilities used for Saturn had been converted for liquid-hydrogen storage needed for Shuttle testing, instead of building new storage. The contract with Algernon Blair of Montgomery, Ala., by the Huntsville Div., Corps of Engineers, was for approximately $4 million. (MSFC Release 76-195)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced scheduling of further tests in October for prototype cloud-physics experiment hardware to be flown on the Space Shuttle to help researchers understand microphysical processes occurring in the atmosphere. The experiments would develop techniques for accurate prediction and control of weather (increase of snowfall or rain, dissipation of fog, suppression of lightning) to improve man’s environment. The Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) being developed by MSFC would use the low or zero gravity during Shuttle/Spacelab flights to perform experiments without contamination by supporting devices—wires, spider webs, blasts of air or electrical fields—used for test objects in earth laboratories. The prototype equipment was being tested in weightless periods provided by parabolic flights in the Johnson Space Center’s zero-gravity test aircraft. 0. H. Vaughn of the Aerospace Environment Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC, had been monitoring performance of the equipment during flights that began in September. (MSFC Release 76-186)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and the Singer Company’s Simulations Products Division for parallel negotiations, leading to award of a contract to one of the companies for maintenance, modification, and operational support of Johnson Space Center’s simulator complex to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle. The 2-yr contract beginning 1 July would provide for optional additional periods of 24 mo and 6 mo respectively. The training complex, consisting initially of a Shuttle procedures simulator and a crew procedures evaluation simulator, would have added to it an orbiter aeroflight simulator and a Shuttle mission simulator. General Electric and Computer Sciences Corp. also submitted proposals. (NASA Release 76-87; JSC Release 76-30)
A NASA study reported that relocation of crew training and mission-control activities from Johnson Space Center in Tex. to Cape Canaveral in Fla. would offer “no management, technical or budgetary advantages” and “would seriously affect a smoothly functioning, highly efficient organization” at JSC, delaying the Space Shuttle program by up to 2 yr. The study, requested in June 1975 by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of a subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that relocation would cost up to $842 million by 1983, and that the funds would not be recoverable. (ATT, 19 Sept 76, 24)
Johnson Space Center announced delivery of the first of 2 training aircraft to Ellington AFB, Tex., for JSC’s use in training Space Shuttle crews. The aircraft (STA) was a modified Grumman twin-engine Gulf-stream II jet designed to simulate flight characteristics of the Space Shuttle orbiter, using thrust-reverser engines and direct lift control to vary the jet plane’s dynamics to resemble those of the orbiter. After JSC personnel conducted a receiving inspection on the plane, it would be returned to Grumman at Bethpage, N.Y., for installation of an electric aileron-trim system; this modification should take about a week. The second STA, scheduled for delivery in late July, would remain at Bethpage to ensure that the plane could duplicate the various landing flight modes of the orbiter during the flight tests. Remaining tests would verify STA’s ability to match orbiter trajectory during the period from 10-11 km altitude through touchdown and would check out recent engineering changes. (NASA Release 76-108; JSC Release 76-38)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Martin Marietta’s Denver division of a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract for $9 282 667 to deliver parachute decelerator subsystems for recovery of 12 solid-fuel rocket boosters from 6 Space Shuttle flights. The contract, effective through Dec. 1980, covers design, development, manufacture, and refurbishment of the subsystems. Work was authorized to start 6 July at Martin’s plant in Colorado and at Pioneer Parachute Co. of Manchester, Conn., subcontractor. (MSFC Release 76-135)
Modifications of the test stand to be used at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories for static firing of the combined Space Shuttle propulsion system had been finished 2 wk early, MSFC announced. The stand had been built for tests of the Saturn V first stage and converted for use in the Shuttle program by Industrial Contractors, Inc., of Idaho Falls, Ida. In the tests, scheduled to be conducted late in 1977 by workers in Rockwell Inti. Corp.’s Space Division under MFSC direction, the main engines of the Shuttle would be connected to a structure resembling the orbiter; this simulator, using both flight and nonflight hardware, would be attached to an external tank, the Shuttle element containing liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen for the three main engines. Firing of this combination (known as the Main Propulsion Test Article) would be the first time the three main engines were fired as a system. Engineers would combine acoustic tests with the MPT A firings to obtain data for determining optimum vibration and sound levels; they would also use the data to check tanking procedures. Hardware for the tests would arrive at NSTL next summer. (MSFC Release 76-178)
Three space scientists at Johnson Space Center would begin a week-long round-the-clock test of experiments and procedures in a mockup of the Spacelab designed for the Space Shuttle. The team, headed by astronaut-physician Dr. Story Musgrave, would eat, sleep, and perform space-related duties in a mockup of the Shuttle orbiter crew compartment, and would carry out more than 20 experiments in space medicine and one in space physics inside the 6.8-m-by-4.06-m Spacelab mockup. The team inside would be in constant communication with flight operations engineers and scientists at control points outside the mockup, which had been equipped with both instruments and experiments just as the Spacelab would be. The team would demonstrate 14 operational tests whose results would serve in planning inflight crew activities, procedures, and scheduling, and in studying items such as personal hygiene, general housekeeping and special-purpose cleaning and maintenance, and functional utility of the orbiter aft deck from which many of the Spacelab experiments would be monitored. The simulation was also designed to evaluate ground-support procedures and data-handling techniques. (JSC Release 76-04)
MSFC announced completion of 2 of 8 major facilities for production of Space Shuttle solid-propellant rocket motors at Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Brigham City, Utah. Thiokol was selected as prime contractor by MSFC for development of the solid-fuel rocket motor, main element of the reusable solid-fuel rocket booster being developed by MSFC. The 2 completed units were a nozzle-bearing test facility, used to test a flexible bearing allowing the rocket-motor nozzle to turn up to 8° in any direction for thrust-vector control in steering, and an x-ray facility for inspecting propellant after casting into the motor-case segments. A case-preparation building, where motor cases would be prepared for propellant loading by sandblasting, cleaning, refining, and painting, was reported 95% complete. Three facilities for loading the propellants— casting pit 1, a casting house, and casting-pit covers—were about half completed. A case-refurbishment facility to handle the motor cases after recovery would be under construction shortly. (MSFC Release 76-151) 15 August: In an attempt to predict the weather on the planet Jupiter, Dr. Gareth P. Williams, researcher at NOAA’s Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at Princeton Univ., applied a computer model of earth’s atmosphere to Jupiter and found that it not only reproduced patterns known to exist there but also provided new explanations of visible features such as the Great Red Spot and horizontal stripes, as well as revealing a 4-yr cycle of heat transfer. Using a set of equations describing physical processes that produce atmospheric behavior on earth, Dr. Williams fed in conditions known to exist on Jupiter—the planet’s enormous size, amount of sunlight it receives, and rate of rotation (which dominated the behavior of the Jovian atmosphere)—and found that the basic behavior of atmosphere was “quite similar.” The purpose of atmosphere, he said, was to transfer heat from the equator to the poles; the terrestrial heat cycle took about a month, but the NOAA model revealed a corresponding cycle on Jupiter that took 4 yr. Whereas the earth received its heat from the sun, Jupiter received only 4% as much solar heat as earth, but the infrared measurements showed that the planet was warmer than it should be if its only heat source were the sun. Scientists believe that the planet generates heat of its own in an amount about equal to what it receives from the sun; this extra heat complicated the job of modeling Jupiter’s atmosphere because there was no way of telling how it might be distributed, but it also provided a confirmation for the model. Atmospheric motions on Jupiter tended to perpetuate themselves instead of dying out, as they do on earth because of interaction with the earth’s surface. Jupiter has no “surface” as we know it, Dr. Williams noted; “it just gets denser toward the interior and motions gradually dissipate downward....” Circulation patterns producing eddies in the planet’s atmosphere seem to be stable; the Great Red Spot had been apparent since the 17th century, when it was first sighted. The researchers hoped that Pioneer 11, now about halfway between Jupiter and Saturn, might provide a positive test of the Princeton model; “we think Saturn is like Jupiter, but we don’t know,” said Dr. Williams. “Maybe it has a red spot.” (NOAA Release 76-170)
Isaac T. Gillam IV, NASA Hq Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles, was designated Director of Space Shuttle Operations at Dryden Flight Research Center, effective 23 May. In his new position, Gillam would be responsible for development of test support facilities, institutional support of test operations, and flight and industrial safety for test operations in support of Shuttle carrier-aircraft testing and orbital approach and landing tests conducted at DFRC. Before coming to NASA Hq in 1963, Gillam served in the U.S. Air Force as pilot, missile launch crew commander, and ROTC instructor; he had done graduate work at Term. State Univ. while serving as assistant professor of military science. From 1963 to 1966, he was resources management specialist at NASA Hq and was then appointed Assistant Delta Program Manager in the Launch Vehicles Directorate. Named Delta Program Manager in Sept. 1968, he became Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles (including Delta and Scout) in June 1973. He received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work in the launch-vehicle program. (NASA Release 76-96)
Pilot training for the Space Shuttle would begin in October at White Sands Missile Range, the Washington Post reported, with instructors completing their training by mid-October. Two of the instructors—David Griggs and Ted Mendenhall—were scheduled to make practice approaches at the range 29 September; chief instructor A1 Manson and copilot Ed Rainey made a similar test in August. Aircraft used in the Shuttle training are modified Grumman Gulfstream II jets fitted with Shuttle orbiter controls and instrumentation. (WPost, 26 Sept 76, A20)
No immediate serious problem appeared to exist in modification of the stratosphere, according to a report released by an interagency task force on inadvertent modification of the stratosphere (IMOS) prepared by the Interdepartment Committee for Atmospheric Sciences (ICAS). Assessing presently postulated manmade modifiers of the stratosphere other than fluorocarbons, the report considered 6 kinds of possible hazards: nitrogen fertilizers, brominated compounds, other chlorinated compounds, particles, the Space Shuttle, and carbon monoxide. The report concluded that concern over modification of the stratosphere was so far speculative, and that it was based on compounds not yet released to the upper atmosphere in quantities believed sufficient to produce a hazardous effect. Although a large number of substances had been considered, only those appearing most potentially harmful were singled out. Also, cumulative effects from several substances might become significant later, the report said, even if the effect of any single substance were relatively slight. The report urged increased research into stratosphere modifiers and prevention of inadvertent modification now and in the future. (IMOS report, 30 Mar 76)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
The space share of federal R&D funding for FY 1977 would increase only slightly, according to a Natl. Science Foundation report, An Analysis of Federal R&D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969-1977. The 1977 estimate of $2940 million was considerably less than the 1969 level of $3732 million; the space share—13%—was much lower than the 24% for the earlier year. Manned space flight, always the leading subfunction, remained predominant with the Space Shuttle accounting for more than 40% of all space activities. Space science, with 20% of the total, reflected a decline from 1976 and showed effects of lower funding for NASA lunar and planetary exploration as Viking and outer planet missions moved into the launch stages. Space technology and NASA support activities would increase during FY 1977. (NSF, Space Science Resources Studies, 19 Aug 76, 1)
Calling the Space Shuttle “clearly . . . the. next logical step” in tapping the scientific and commercial possibilities of space, the Baltimore Sun said in an editorial that criticisms of the Shuttle program from an economic point of view should be balanced with the rewards that would come only from experience. The first Shuttle was never intended to be selfsupporting, the editorial said, and the rewards would include increased knowledge to serve as the basis for more sophisticated programs and the increased likelihood of constructing a permanently staffed permanently orbiting space station. Complaints from prospective users—ComSat and DOD—that Shuttle fees would be too high “before NASA even has announced these fees” were an obvious ploy to keep the fees as low as possible, the editorial said. (B Sun, 13 April 76)
The U.S. Air Force Systems Command announced that its space and missile systems organization (SAMSO) had completed tests at MSFC to define effects of sound waves and shock waves on the Space Shuttle during launch, using a 6.4% scale model of the launch pad proposed for Vandenberg AFB. The model launch pad, measuring roughly 13m long by 6.5 m wide by 2 m high and weighing more than 27 000 kg, underwent engine-induced overpressure and noise environments simulated by Tomahawk solid-fuel rocket motors and high-pressure gaseous hydrogen-oxygen engines. Shock waves from rocket-engine ignition interacted with exhausts on the launch pad to direct overpressure back to the launch vehicle; the flow rate also created an acoustic field causing turbulence in the surrounding atmosphere. The altered environments were modified during testing by altering the configuration to produce the most acceptable design of launch vehicle and payload. (AFSC Release OIP 170.76)
KSC announced award to Norflor Construction Co., Orlando, Fla., of a $284 000 construction contract for an airlock to provide a clean-room environment in the spin-test facility of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, to be used in preparing Delta-launched spacecraft and later for Space Shuttle payload processing. Construction would be completed within 160 days after contractor’s notification to proceed. The airlock installation would include a 5-ton crane, air conditioning, personnel airlock, and lines for electricity, vacuum, compressed air, and gaseous nitrogen. Present clean-room facilities were occupied by elements of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn spacecraft scheduled for launch in Aug. and Sept. 1977. Delta payloads scheduled for launch in the spring and summer of 1977 included Geos (ESA), April; Goes, May; OTS (ESA), June; Japan’s GMS metesat, July; Sirio, an Italian comsat, August; and Meteosat (ESA), Sept. (KSC Release 490-76)
The Hugh L. Dryden Flight Research Center, formerly the Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., was formally dedicated in a ceremony by NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first administrator of NASA from 1958-1961; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; and Mrs. Dryden, guest of honor, who unveiled a bust of her late husband that would be placed in the Center’s lobby. After the ceremony, visitors were invited to a display of aircraft in the main hangar, including the 747 aircraft that would be used for the Space Shuttle orbiter approach and landing tests next year. Center efforts to transfer space technology to industry were represented by a solar-energy display and low-drag truck exhibits. Dr. Dryden in 1947 had been named to the newly created post of director of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics; when Dr. Glennan, then head of the Case Institute of Technology, was selected as NASA’s first administrator, he insisted on Dr. Dryden as his deputy. When James E. Webb was chosen NASA’s second administrator, he also made the condition that Dr. Dryden remain as his deputy; he had served in that position until his death in 1965. (NASA X-Press, 26 Mar 76; program)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
A simple, inexpensive, and effective method of suppressing noise in windtunnel testing of space vehicles would be patented by two MSFC engineers, MSFC announced. While developing an acoustic environment for reentry of the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster, Paul W. Howard and Luke A. Schutzenhofer of MSFC’s Systems Dynamics Lab. found their acoustic data distorted by background noise reflected at transonic speeds from the walls of the wind tunnel, causing shock waves. The primary aerodynamic cause of the background noise was found to be the edgetone effect of high-velocity windflow over holes in the perforated walls of the tunnel; covering the perforated walls with wire screening minimized direct contact between the airstream and the edges of the holes, and the noise was greatly reduced. The temporary fix proved so successful that the screens were permanently installed, and the patent should be issued to the public by early summer. (MSFC Release 76-44)
The $6.2-billion Space Shuttle, “America’s only remaining space spectacular,” might come apart at the seams because of unsafe nuts and screws, Jack Anderson and Les Whitten reported in the Washington Post. Discussion at NASA as early as Apr. 1973 had centered on the menace of substandard screws; in July 1973, Johnson Gage—-a Bloomfield, Conn, firm-—had sent NASA a warning based on tests of individual screw and nut threads stating that the standards “provide for a loophole that allows [NASA to] accept outright junk.” Computer tests had revealed that millions worth of faulty threads reached Rockwell International Corp., principal Shuttle contractor, because of low standards and it was feared the inferior screws had gotten into Shuttle equipment. Although company engineers were worried about the standards and the resultant products, the company bought fasteners from outside suppliers and could not control quality from 6000 vendors in 47 states, company minutes said. Industry had fought to keep the low standards rather than pay the estimated $120 million cost of retooling; the American National Standards Institute, led by industry, had blocked every move for tighter standards, Anderson and Whitten charged. (WPost, 17 Apr 76, B—11)
First test firing of the second Space Shuttle main engine—Engine 0002, first to have a flight-type engine-mounted controller—achieved the programmed 1.5-sec duration, firing through a diffuser used for altitude simulation when production engines were throttled in testing. Engine 0002, a flight configuration that would not be flown, was a developmental engine instrumented for test purposes. It was fired on the National Space Technology Lab’s Stand A-2, used in Saturn V tests during the 1960s and modified and reactivated for the Space Shuttle program. NASA planned to fire each engine on the A-2 throttling test position before using it on a Shuttle flight. Stand A-l, the sea-level test position, had been used for about a year to test the first SSME, a test version known as the integrated subsystem test bed; A-l was also developed for the Saturn program and modified for Shuttle tests. (MSFC Release 76-57; Rockwell Release RD-7)
Johnson Space Center announced receipt of delivery on the second of two Space Shuttle training aircraft. The first had been delivered 8 June 1976. The modified Grumman Gulfstream II twin-engine jet, flown to Ellington AFB from the plant in N.Y., would simulate Shuttle Orbiter handling qualities, performance, and flight-control procedures during subsonic flight phase, from 10.6-km altitude to simulated Orbiter touchdown. Crew training for approach and landing tests of the Shuttle Orbiter would begin late in Oct. (JSC Release 76-58)
NASA announced selection of the initial crew of the Boeing 747 shuttlecarrier aircraft that would carry and launch the Space Shuttle orbiter in approach and landing tests. Pilots would be Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Thomas C. McMurtry, both of Dryden Flight Research Center; flight-test engineers would be Victor W. Horton, also from Dryden, and Louis E. Guidry, Jr., of Johnson Space Center. All the men chosen were civilians. The ALT flights, scheduled for early 1977, would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7.5 km, where it would separate from the 747 and the orbiter crew would pilot it to a glide landing. Unmanned and manned captive flights would precede initial free flights. (DFRC Release 3-76)
The House passed, 330 to 35, and sent to the Senate an authorization bill of $3.t billion for the nation’s space programs for FY 1977, slightly less than the administration request, but $ 133 million more than for FY 1976. Research and development authorizations totaled $2.77 billion, nearly $10 million more than requested. The Space Shuttle would use $ 1.29 billion in R&D money, plus $40 million for 8 construction projects. (W Post, 23 March 76, 6)
NASA announced successful static test firing of one of two Space Shuttle main engines for 650 sec at main-stage operating level (50% rated thrust level) at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., under the direction of MSFC. The firing, on 30 Sept., was the longest test firing of an SSME to date. Previous firings had aimed at testing engine-throttling control, engine start and shutdown sequence, and engine power balance. The current series of tests, conducted by personnel of Rockwell Intl.’s Rocketdyne Div., would obtain component- and system-operation data at increasing levels of power. The NSTL test program combined development and acceptance testing; each Shuttle engine would be fired at NSTL before being certified for flight. (NASA Release 76-162)
Forecasts of NASA activity in 1977 included plans to launch 19 missions, with a possible four backup spacecraft in case of trouble with current missions. The 19 included eight comsats (NAT0-3B; Palapa-B; OTS, an operational test satellite developed by ESA; Intelsat IVA-C; Sirio, an Italian experimental spacecraft; Intelsat IVA-D; FLTSATCOM, part of a Navy-Air Force operational near-global system for command and control of all DOD forces; and Japan’s CS, a comsat to be placed in synchronous orbit); six scientific satellites (HEAO-A, a high-energy astronomical observatory; CEOS, an ESA mission to study geomagnetic phenomena from synchronous orbit; MJS-A and -B, two Mariner spacecraft scheduled to fly by Jupiter and Saturn,’and possibly Uranus; ISEE, a two-spacecraft international sun-earth explorer mission developed by NASA and ESA; and IUE-A, the international ultraviolet explorer spacecraft also developed jointly by NASA and ESA); three metesats (COES 2, to be launched for NOAA into synchronous orbit; CMS, a Japanese geosynchronous meteorological satellite; and Meteosat, ESA’s synchronous-orbit weather spacecraft, scheduled for 0° longitude); one navigational satellite, the Navy’s Transit 19, with R&D modifications not common to other Transits; and one applications satellite, Landsat-C, third in its series of earth resources technology spacecraft. The backup launches to be scheduled only if replacements were needed were comsats RCA-C and a spare OTS; navsat Transit 20; and metesat ITOS E-2, on standby in case of trouble with Noaa 4 or Noaa 5, already in orbit. Of the 19 scheduled launches, all but two would be from Cape Canaveral, using 12 Delta rockets, 3 Atlas-Centaurs, and 2 Titan III-E-Centaurs. The other two launches, both from Vandenberg AFB, would use one Delta and one Scout rocket. MSFC forecast for 1977 that facilities for assembling and testing the Space Shuttle orbiter would be completed, as well as test firings of the Shuttle’s solid-fuel motors and main engines. (Av Wk, 13 Dec 76, 26; KSC Release 492-76; MSFC Release 76-218)
Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, pilot of the docking module on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been appointed to a newly created position as Deputy Director of Flight Operations for approach and landing tests of the Space Shuttle at Johnson Space Center, the Spaceport News of KSC reported. Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the shuttle approach and landing test project, under the Director of Flight Operations for the Space Shuttle project. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 5)
Johnson Space Center announced on 21 Sept, modification of a costplusaward-fee contract with IBM, Gaithersburg, Md., to cover software for ground-based computing and data-processing systems at JSC. IBM would develop computer programs for Space Shuttle vehicle management and flight operations, and related scientific and medical operations. Value of the modified contract would be $19 463 000. (JSC Release 76-59) —NASA contracted 22 Sept, with Aeronutronic Ford Corp. for support services for the Mission Control Center and other ground-based data systems at JSC, including data hardware and software systems engineering and maintenance, as well as logistics, reliability, and quality assurance. The cost-plus-award-fee contract would cost about $46 550 000 from July 1976 through 30 Sept. 1978. (JSC Release 76-60) —JSC announced 24 Sept, selection of Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. for negotiations leading to award of a contract for development and production of a portable oxygen system for Space Shuttle crew and passengers. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, costing about $1.9 million, would run from 13 Nov. 1976 to 13 July 1979. The system, designed to meet four special Shuttle needs (emergency oxygen in case of cabin-atmosphere contamination, prebreathing before spacewalks, life support during rescue, and emergency oxygen after landing in case of landing-area contamination), would be capable of operating independently or connected to the Shuttle oxygen'system. The contract would call for delivery of ten units and 50 recharge kits for NASA use in certification, training, and flight, plus ground-support equipment and manpower; it would contain options for 62 additional units and 310 recharge kits. (JSC Release 76-61)
A new device developed by the USAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at Edwards AFB, Calif., would permit an annual “physical examination” of the motors of intercontinental ballistic missiles while the missiles were still in the silo. The practice of removing the motors for inspection had resulted in high costs for handling and transportation as well as high risk of damage to the motors. The AF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) at Los Angeles asked AFRPL to find a compact, safe, and economical means of inspection, and acoustical holography was selected. The system when fully developed would be able to scan the outside of an intact missile top to bottom, probing the propellant inside its motors. The device worked much like sonar, transmitting high-frequency sound waves and registering reflected vibrations; the reflected waves, processed electronically, would reproduce any flaws in the propellant on a cathode-ray tube for instant viewing or photographing, and the information would be stored in a computer for later evaluation. Future uses of acoustical holography might be made in medical science, improving on current x-ray techniques. (AF Release OIP 174.75) the advantages of space environment—earth overview, zero gravity, vacuum, heat and waste disposal, and uninterrupted solar energy—for future uses, concluding with a prediction of a growing tourist industry in space. The symposium concluded 26 May at the annual banquet of the Ala. AIAA with an address on “Space Industrialization as a Concept” by Dr. Krafft Ehricke, science advisor for North American Space Division, Rockwell International Corp. Sessions of the symposium dealt with space habitation, space transportation, space processing of materials, and space power. The symposium was organized to disseminate recent information on expanded space operations after the advent of the Space Shuttle to all segments of the scientific and technical community; participants included NASA centers, other government agencies, industry and universities. (NASA Release 76-81; MSFC Release 76-64, 76-79; Disher text)
NASA asked scientists to submit proposals for scientific experiments to be carried on the first Spacelab mission in late 1980, according to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science. Primary objective of Spacelab 1 would be to verify performance of systems and subsystems and to measure the environment surrounding NASA’s Space Shuttle; secondary objectives would be to obtain scientific, applications, and technology data and to demonstrate Spacelab’s abihty to perform space research. The first flight would emphasize stratospheric and upper atmosphere research, but proposals from other scientific disciplines were also solicited. Objectives of the Spacelab 1 mission had been planned jointly by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA); the NASA announcement of opportunity would be sent to U.S. scientists and those in all other nations not members of ESA, and ESA would make a separate solicitation to its 11 member states. Responses would be coordinated between the two agencies. (NASA Release 76-49)
Despite lower profits in its work on the Space Shuttle and increased losses in business aircraft, Rockwell Inti, reported higher sales and earnings for both the last quarter and the full fiscal year ending 30 Sept. 1976. Earnings were $121.1 million, up 29% in fiscal 1976, and sales increased 8% to a record $5.2 billion. The figures did not include discontinued operations in Rockwell’s industrial components area, sold in Dec. 1975. Four of the company’s five operating areas reflected better management and lower interest costs: automotive operations, electronics operations, consumer operations, and utility and industrial operations. The aerospace operations figures reflected fewer award-fee opportunities, Rockwell said. (Rockwell Release R-40)
Johnson Space Center awarded a $96 000 contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. of Denver for a study of equipment needed to construct a solar-power satellite (SPS) in geosynchronous orbit, in or about 1990. The 9-mo contract called for conceptual design and system definition of equipment to support construction of large space systems in orbit, assuming use of the Space Shuttle, and for defining development and maintenance costs of such equipment. (JSC Release 76-62) —JSC selected Alpha Bldg. Corp. of Houston for negotiations leading to award of a $1 369 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract for construction support services at the Center, including minor construction and other site work—alteration of laboratory systems, facilities, utilities, roads, sewers, walks, etc.—required by space programs and normally for projects estimated at $10 000 or less. The contract would begin 1 December 1976 and end 30 November 1977, with the option for the government to extend the contract for two additional 1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-63) November 1976
First mainstage test of the Space Shuttle main engine occurred at the National Space Technology Laboratories in Hancock County, Miss., Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The engine—called the Integrated Subsystem Test Bed—was fired for 3.38 sec, reaching and stabilizing at its minimum power level: 50% of its rated power level of 1 668 075 newtons at sea level, or 2 090 654 newtons at altitude. Tests were conducted by the prime contractor for the engine, Rocketdyne Div. of Rockwell International Corp., under MSFC direction. (MSFC Release 76-29; Rockwell Release RD-2)
The European Space Agency announced plans for a NASA presentation on current status of the Space Transportation System to be held in Paris 12 to 14 May, for about 250 representatives of governments, national institutes and agencies, and industry of the ESA member states. Opened by Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, the program would be introduced by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Alfairs. Other NASA speakers would be John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight; Chester M. Lee, director of space transportation system operations; and Harold E. Gartrell, deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration'office. The Space Transportation System would include the U.S. Space Shuttle and the ESA Spacelab, as well as a new upper propulsion stage and a U.S.-developed tracking and data system. ESA representatives scheduled to present the Spacelab portion of the 3-day program would include Bernard Deloffre, director of the Spacelab program for ESA; Heinz Stoewer, Spacelab project manager; Jan J. Burger, Spacelab payload adviser; and Jacques Collet of ESA’s planning directorate. (ESA release 10 May 76)
Scientists all over the world had been invited to propose experiments for the second Spacelab mission, NASA announced, asking that they submit by 1 Oct. their letters of intent to propose, with actual proposals due by 3 Dec. Final selection of experiments would be made in Aug. 1977; proposals would be evaluated in the areas of space science (including life sciences), applications, and space technology. Primary intent of the second Spacelab mission would be to evaluate the laboratory’s system and subsystem performance, but space and resources would be available for experiments. Second objective of the The 26-m “Venus disk" at NASA's Goldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calif., in use with rectenna (in. background) for solar-energy conversion experiments. (NASA 76-H-685) mission would be to demonstrate the broad capabilities of Spacelab for scientific research, especially in astrophysics (astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar physics). Proposals should designate a principal investigator as the point of contact with NASA, to manage the efforts of any other persons involved in the experiments. As the second mission payload would not include a pressurized module as the design for Spacelab 1 did, instruments would be mounted on pallets exposed to space with a remote manipulator system available if needed. Experiments would be controlled remotely by persons at the payload-specialist station in the Space Shuttle orbiter’s aft flight deck. Power, data distribution, and thermal control would be available from flight subsystems in a pressurized igloo on the forward pallet. Spacelab, a reusable space laboratory, was under construction in Europe by the European Space Agency for NASA. Marshall Space Flight Center was the lead center for Spacelab development, as well as for the Shuttle main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster. (NASA Release 76-152)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
The DOD did not really want the Space Shuttle, charged Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and NASA had “conned Congress into buying a pig in the poke” in its efforts to obtain funds for Shuttle development. DOD had shown that it did not want the Shuttle by its actions, said Proxmire, citing DOD’s statement that it would “under no circumstance^” pay for the fourth and fifth Shuttle orbiters, and the DOD decision to go forward with a new satellite communications system (DSCS-IIl) “which will not capitalize on the unique advantages of the Shuttle . . . [but] is to be compatible with both the Shuttle and the present Titan III-C.” Proxmire charged that the DSCS decision was based not on a 9-mo wait for the Shuttle, but on the fact that “DOD has little confidence in a cost-effective operational Shuttle.” Proxmire also cited a General Accounting Office report issued in April that DOD would pay less to launch its satellites on expendable vehicles than on the Shuttle through 1990-1991, assuming that DOD did not plan to recover and reuse any of its satellites. (SBD, 24 Sept 76, 105)
The U.S. Air Force announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Corp., a unit of the Boeing Company, to design and produce an interim upper-stage (IUS) solid-fuel rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, to lift Shuttle craft from low earth orbit to higher mission altitudes. Boeing, chosen over Martin Marietta, Lockheed, and General Dynamics Corp., still had to negotiate a contract, estimated to be ultimately worth about $300 million. (ATT, 10 Aug 76, 45; WSJ, 10 Aug 76, .3)
Travelers aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter in the 1980s would use a unique space suit and rescue system, developed at Johnson Space Center. The Shuttle suit, a departure from the customized astronaut suits, would consist of a two-piece upper and lower torso cover in small, medium, and large sizes to accommodate all astronaut candidates or crews, including females. Only the pilot and mission specialist would be outfitted with the space suit; the commander and payload specialists would be provided with a personal rescue system nicknamed the “cosmic soccerball,” consisting of a container nearly a meter in diameter constructed of three layers—urethane, Kevlar, and an outside thermal protective layer, with a small viewing post of tough Lexan—containing its own simplified life-support and communications systems. During a rescue operation in space, a space-suited astronaut could transfer the rescue balls in one of three ways: using the handle to carry the enclosure like a suitcase from one vehicle to another; hooking a device like a clothesline between two spaceships and passing the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship to the other; or using the remote-manipulator arm in the orbiter’s cargo bay to pluck the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship and put it aboard the rescue ship. Materials to be used in the rescue ball and the Shuttle suit would provide longer shelf life, according to technicians who ran pressure and abrasion tests on them; use of the fabric to make joints in the space suits (instead of the Apollo and Skylab suit use of neoprene rubber molded into convolutes containing cables) would provide better mobility and reduce cost and weight of each suit. The new suit also featured a module construction that closed with a body seal at the waist, considered more reliable than the pressure-seal zippers used in the previous suits. The new suits also were designed with an integral portable life-support system as part of the rigid upper torso, instead of the bulky 34-kg package that previously had to be unpacked and connected to the suit. (NASA Release 76-56; JSC Roundup, 26 Mar 76, 1)
NASA selected 3 firms for negotiations leading to award of a single contract for assembly, checkout, launch operations, and refurbishment of the Space Shuttle solid-fueled booster, MSFC announced. The firms were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, and United Space Boosters Inc. of Sunnyvale, Calif., a wholly owned subsidiary of United Technology Corp. The contract would extend through March 1980 to include the first 6 development flights of the Shuttle, with option for renewal through Feb. 1982. The contractor would be responsible for assembling and checking out the booster (forward and aft skirts, attach structures, nosecone, and various subsystems) with the solid-fueled motor. Two solid-fueled boosters would be used to launch the Shuttle, in conjunction with the orbiter main engines; after launch, the boosters would be jettisoned, lowered into the ocean by parachute, retrieved, and returned to KSC for refurbishment and reuse. Work would be performed at MSFC and KSC except for the solid-fueled motor, which would be returned to Thiokol facilities in Utah for reloading with propellant. (MSFC Release 75-159)
Addressing the Utah Air Force Association’s Bicentennial program in Salt Lake City, NASA’s Deputy Administrator George M. Low gave a status report on ongoing projects such as Landsat, Viking, and the Space Shuttle, then speculated at length on accomplishments in space that might be celebrated on the occasion of the U.S. Tricentennial. Referring to “the beginning of the industrialization of space,” using the first-generation reusable space-transportation system called Shuttle to set up the first factories in space, he said “the real breakthrough” would come with energy collected from the sun and beamed down with microwaves to provide all the electrical needs of a major city. None of this technology, he added, was beyond today’s knowledge. He then forecast a cleanup of earth’s environment, communications applications of all kinds, and exploration of outer space made possible by discoveries using the Space Telescope, ending with descriptions of space colonies that would “become the real frontier.” He concluded by stating that “all of my projections are overly conservative” and could all become reality long before the end of America’s third century. (Text)
MSFC announced selection of the Bendix Corp., Teterboro, N.J., for negotiations leading to award of a $7 007 210 cost-plus-award-fee contract for installing, activating, disassembling, and removal of special equipment at MSFC for Space Shuttle structural and dynamic ground tests. The contract would run from 15 Nov. 1976 through Dec. 1979. MSFC responsibilities in developing the Space Shuttle covered three areas: the main engine powering the orbiter, which uses three of these engines; the external tank holding propellants for the main engines during launch and ascent; and the solid-fuel rocket boosters to be jettisoned after burnout and recovered by parachute for future use. MSFC would make structural tests of the external tank and boosters, development tests to prove design concepts of the main engine and external tank, and dynamic tests simulating flight conditions to be encountered by the Shuttle during launch. (MSFC Release 76-196)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of 2 contracts totaling $486 388 for fabrication and installation of 2 test towers to be used in structural load tests of the Space Shuttle external tank. One contract, awarded to the Lucey Boiler Co. of Chattanooga for $344 660, was for pickup from MSFC of government-furnished construction materials and fabrication and delivery by July 1976 of all sections and components of the towers. The other contract, awarded to Teledyne Brown Engineering of Huntsville for $141 728, was for installation of the towers by 30 Sept. (MSFC Release 76-69)
NASA would buy the Department of Defense’s 2 Space Shuttle orbiters if the administration would give NASA an extra $835 million or so for that purpose, Aerospace Daily reported after a meeting between George M. Low, departing NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, DOD’s chief of research and engineering. The 2 agencies reportedly agreed that the nation needed 5 orbiters—2 more than NASA had planned to buy—and that NASA should buy them. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld were reported ready to meet to “firm up a proposal” to the Office of Management and Budget and to President Ford; 0MB might contest the need for 5 orbiters, Aerospace Daily said. (Aero Daily, 21 June 76, 22)
A “tethered” satellite—suspended by a cable from the Space Shuttle orbiter’s cargo bay—could serve to deploy and control materials used in constructing a space station, or to transfer articles from one manned vehicle to another, said NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center. The orbiter could also “troll” a tethered satellite through a low-altitude earth orbit to explore the atmospheric region between 80 and 120 km above earth’s surface; previous exploration vehicles— sounding rockets and low-altitude satellites—could not remain in that region long enough for extensive studies before being forced back to earth by atmospheric drag and gravity. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory would aid NASA in system-dynamics studies for the tethered satellite system. MSFC would manage program development, integrate experiments, and support orbital operations. If the tethered system proved feasible, MSFC would begin spacecraft system design, and the first mission could be scheduled as early as 1980. (NASA Release 76-138)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, who had retired in 1972 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Long-Range Planning at NASA Hq, said in a Washington Star interview that he had been brought to Washington in 1970. to “lend clout to NASA’s ability to get its appropriations.” His assignment had been to present to Congress the program of a manned expedition to Mars; “so many national problems” had arisen that Congress would not commit itself to another multibillion-dollar space program, and the reusable space shuttle was the only element of the concept that survived. Dr. von Braun recalled that NASA’s resources were cut to about a third during his last 2 yr at NASA, and the new organization with which he was associated—the National Space Institute—was created to “reach large numbers of people” and broaden public support of basic science, “where it is much more difficult to predict the payoff.” “Remember,” he added, “nuclear energy, which ultimately was used in the hydrogen bomb, was discovered because some astrophysicists were interested in what keeps the sun hot.” (W Star, 20 Jan 76, A—1)
Aerospace contracts valued at about $1 billion were hanging fire as DOD and NASA struggled over which agency would ask Congress for funds (beyond those already appropriated for development and testing) to pay for 2 additional Space Shuttles, said the New York Times. NASA’s commitment of 1971 was to develop the Shuttle system at a cost of about $6.9 billion, to include 2 Shuttles, the start on a third, and a series of preoperational flights into orbit beginning in 1979. The NASA plan envisioned a total of nearly 600 Shuttle flights in the 12 yr beginning with 1980, with a fleet of 5 Shuttles averaging an annual 60 flights starting in the mid-80s. DOD had earmarked $1.5 billion for Shuttle expenses by 1981, including $700 million for refurbishment of Vandenberg AFB in Calif, for polar-orbit Shuttle launches and $190 million for facilities at Cape Canaveral, Fla., plus $178 million for development of an interim upper stage ( a solid-fuel rocket to be ordered by the Space and Missile Systems Organization of the USAF from Boeing Aerospace, for boosting Shuttle-payload spacecraft into extremely high orbit). DOD had been maintaining for 2 yr that it would not have money for the 2 final Shuttles; Dr. Malcolm Currie, DOD Director of Research and Engineering, told Congress during budget testimony 3 March that paying for the orbiters would exceed what DOD considered “cost effective” amounts for participation in the shuttle program. DOD’s refusal to pay had caused “consternation among planetary scientists,” the NYT said, because NASA might be forced to cut much of its scientific space program in the 1980s to pay for 2 more Shuttles within a fixed budget. However, the matter should be resolved within a few wk, the article added. (NYT, 24 Aug 76, 37)
The Michoud Assembly Facility operated for NASA by MSFC at New Orleans was nearing production capability for the Space Shuttle external tank, MSFC announced. Delivery of all required items to Michoud would require an estimated 225 trucks, about three fourths of them carrying loads classified as oversize. By the time all 225 trucks arrived, total “train” length would have reached more than 3 km. Getting the equipment from the suppliers located at faraway points such as Dallas, San Diego, Baltimore, and Nashville had presented problems because of the size of the loads; special escorts were required for oversized loads, and travel time at New Orleans for oversize loads was restricted to the period between 10 pm and 4 am. Tooling and fixtures being installed at Michoud would give Martin Marietta, prime external tank contractor, the capability needed to meet flight schedules; each Shuttle flight would require a new external tank, and NASA had planned more than 400 flights between 1979 and 1989. Launches should number 60 per year by 1984. (MSFC Release 76-60)
NASA announced signature of an agreement between the Universities Space Research Association (USRA) and the Langley Research Center to provide university participation in the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) space research program managed by LaRC, which would use the Space Shuttle to launch and retrieve an earth-orbiting multipurpose-experiment carrier starting late in 1979. USRA was established in 1969 through the National Academy of Sciences as a consortium of 50 universities in the U.S., through which the academic community could work with NASA on scientific and technological developments in the space program; its headquarters was at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. The agreement with LaRC called for USRA to solicit, select, and implement university experiments for each LDEF mission, with funds provided by the sponsoring organizations. NASA would also seek participants in the LDEF program through a formal announcement of opportunity inviting private companies, research and engineering institutes, and other government agencies to provide space experiments for LDEF missions. (NASA Release 76-99)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $2 250 000 contract to the Beech Aircraft Corp., Boulder, Co., for development of a Space Shuttle orbiter fuel-cell servicing system. An orbiter would carry 3 fuel cells using cryogenically stored hydrogen and oxygen to provide electrical power; each cell would connect to a separate power bus, but only 2 cells would be used during minimum power load. Peak or average power load would use all 3 cells. The contract called for Beech to design, fabricate, test, and deliver a complete cryogenic remotely controlled unit that would provide liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen for the fuel cells, delivery to be completed by 1 Dec. 1977. (KSC Release 333-76)
Johnson Space Center announced delivery and acceptance of the Sperry Rand computer system, Univac 110/46, that would drive the Shuttle mission simulators. Dr. Bruce B. Johnson, technical manager of the contract, said that JSC had tested the computer complex round the clock for 30 days before its acceptance, and that the complex had demonstrated reliability “far in excess of contractual requirements.” Completed 3 wk ahead of schedule, the Univac 1100/46 contained 10 processors, making it one of the most powerful digital computers built to date, with 900 000 36-bit words in the main memory and 2 billion characters in mass storage capacity. The computer would simulate a wide range of mission situations—prelaunch, ascent, aborts, orbit rendezvous and docking, entry, and landing—in the process of training flight crews and ground personnel in all phases of the Shuttle program. Total cost of the computer complex was $7 934 876. (JSC Release 76-47)
NASA announced plans for rollout of the first Space Shuttle orbiter on 17 Sept, at NASA’s Rockwell Inti. Space Div. at Palmdale, Calif. The ceremony was scheduled for 9:30 am PDT, and media representatives were alerted. (JSC Release 76-51)
A small-scale model of the Space Shuttle and its launch pad would be used in a test program begun at MSFC to reduce noise during a Shuttle launch. Sound energy could damage sensitive instruments or other payloads carried in the Shuttle orbiter, and reducing launch noise by modifying the launch facility would be more economical than redesigning the launch vehicle itself or its associated payloads to tolerate anticipated levels of noise. The model would test various designs that sprayed water into, above, and below the rocket exhaust; firing the engines into a water spray would convert acoustic (sound) waves into thermal energy, which would dissipate as steam. Use of the water technique had significantly reduced—but not eliminated—the damaging noise. (MSFC Release 76-33)
NASA announced selection of IBM Corp., Gaithersburg, Md., for award of a $24-million 44-mo cost-plus-award-fee contract to supply a Space Shuttle data-processing complex for the mission control center at Johnson Space Center. The complex would consist of 3 computers and peripheral equipment for support of the Shuttle program; work to be performed would include design, fabrication, delivery, installation, and checkout of the computer complex and associated software. Control Data Corp. of Minneapolis also submitted a proposal. (NASA Release 76-104; JSC Release 76-37)
NASA announced award of an $8.8-million extension for 1 yr of a contract with Northrop Services, Inc., of Houston for operation and maintenance of lab and test facilities at Johnson Space Center. Northrop had provided these services to JSC for the past 3 yr; the extension would bring the value of the contract to $37 416 742. Northrop had used 425 employes to maintain and operate the life sciences and engineering labs and the lunar curatorial lab. NASA also announced award of a $6.8-million extension for 2 yr of a contract with the Charles Stark Draper Labs., Cambridge, Mass., for technical support of Space Shuttle orbiter avionics software development. Draper had provided this support to JSC since 1974. The effort, employing 55 people, would include software design, verification, simulation, requirements formulation, and analysis as required for programming the guidance, navigation, and control computer for the Shuttle orbiter. (JSC Releases 76-12, 76-14)
NASA’s reusable Space Shuttle program would produce significant benefits for civil aviation, the agency reported in announcing the first operational tests of an advanced flight-control system for civil aircraft to be conducted by the Shuttle, together with advances in structural materials technology for aerospace manufacturers. Standard heavyweight mechanical backup flight-control systems had been required when reliability of electronic control systems was in question; however, aerodynamic requirements for the use of mechanical systems had hampered development of flight-efficient aircraft designs. Use of the advanced electronic controls would reduce weight, resulting in less fuel consumption, and a computer tie-in with ground navigation and mission controls would provide constant reliable communication and reduce traffic delays. Use of composites—strong lightweight combinations of metals and plastics—would reduce structural weight by more than 30% compared to aluminum. Developed by NASA and the Air Force in collaboration with industry, the composites would demonstrate in Shuttle testing the weight reduction and cost effectiveness needed for future designs. (NASA Release 76-58)
Gene Sivertson of Langley Research Center’s Space Systems Div. had developed a new idea for search and rescue' operations using passive reflectors with imaging or side-looking radar to locate persons in emergency situations. The passive reflectors could be rigid, inflatable, or erectable structures that would show up on a radar system as bright spots easily distinguishable from clutter signals of the terrain. The reflectors could be carried as standard equipment by aircraft, ships and small boats, earth vehicles, and individuals; different packages could be tailored to the user’s needs. The inflatable concept would use a balloon containing a reflector structure of aluminized mylar, with a small helium or hydrogen gas generator in the canister holding the mylar-saran balloon. Deployed in an emergency situation, the reflector would mark a distress site and provide a radar target. The concept had been field-tested in Mich, and Fla. with excellent test films as a result. Sivertson hoped to have the imaging radar on satellites with continuous global monitoring, and to test the system on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. (Langley Researcher, 9 July 76, 3)
NASA announced “an unusual agreement” with McDonnell Douglas Corp., under which the firm would build a solid-fuel upper-stage rocket as a commercial venture, to be available for use in future Space Shuttle missions. The firm would build and market the product using its own funding and initiative, at no direct cost to NASA or the U.S. government, except when the government might be a purchaser; NASA agreed that it would not knowingly fund or formally solicit development of competitive or alternate upper-stage systems. McDonnell Douglas would market the stage hardware and services either directly to users, or through NASA; NASA would not be committed to buy any hardware or services from McDonnell Douglas. The Delta rocket, workhorse of NASA’s expendable launch-vehicle program, which had carried most of the com-sats and metesats now in geosynchronous orbit, .would be phased out along with other expendable vehicles after the Space Shuttle became operational. After the Shuttle had carried payloads into low earth orbit, the upper stage would put the payloads (weighing up to 1110 kg) into a transfer orbit, where a kick motor would insert them into geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 76-198)
NASA announced that it would modify equipment and facilities used in the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz programs for use in future space programs, and that it would dispose of remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware that had no future application. Disposal would eliminate storage costs, free storage space, and make facilities available for ongoing programs, the agency said. The action marked the transition of U.S. manned space activity from use of expendable vehicles to use of the reusable Space Shuttle, scheduled to undertake its first mission within 3 yr. Although NASA, at the request of Congress, had kept its remaining Saturn-Apollo flight hardware since April 1975 in minimum-cost storage, to be able to restore it to flight condition if needed, the backup Skylab workshop and Apollo-Soyuz backup docking module had been transferred to the National Air and Space Museum; twenty-two H-l rocket engines from Saturn stages had been transferred for use in Thor-Delta vehicles. Much of the remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware would probably be turned over to the Smithsonian Institution, and other equipment would be screened for use in the Shuttle or other programs. (NASA Release 76-206)
The Marshall Space Flight Center announced 3 Sept, the start of hot-firing tests of the steering system for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB). First series of tests, which would continue into Oct., would confirm design of the thrust-vector control steering system developed by MSFC engineers as part of the center’s responsibility for SRB design and development. The system under test would provide power to move the nozzle of the SRB in any direction, steering the Shuttle in the first 120 sec of flight during SRB burn. Data from the first series of tests would be evaluated to refine the system design; after any needed modifications, a second series of tests would certify the system. Thrust-vector control units would be provided in 1978 to Thiokol Corp., MSFC contractor for the SRB solid-fuel rocket motor, for testing under actual firing conditions. (MSFC Release 76-163) —MSFC announced it had delivered the first production case segment for the SRB motor to Thiokol’s Wasatch Div. in Utah on 27 Sept., beating the schedule by 3 days. All case segments for the first motor were to arrive at Thiokol by the end of 1976. The delivered segment, almost 4 m in diameter and 4.2 m long, weighed more than 5990 kg. Eleven segments would be used in each motor; joined, the segments and nozzle would measure more than 38 m long, over three fourths of the total SRB length. (MSFC Release 76-173) —MSFC announced 30 Sept, that personnel of the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti. Corp., had fired a developmental test engine for the Space Shuttle for 650 sec, longest test to date. The same engine had been fired for 300 sec 2 days earlier. The tests, at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Bay St. Louis, Miss., would produce component- and system-operation data from extended-duration firings at increasing power levels. (MSFC Release 76-174)
NASA announced selection of United Space Boosters, Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., as assembly contractor for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket. USBI, a wholly owned subsidiary of United Technologies Corp., received a cost-plus-award fee contract for $122 million, to cover six design, development, and test and evaluation flights up to March 1980, with options for 21 operational flights extending into 1982. The contract would cover all booster assembly activities at MSFC and KSC; MSFC would supervise assembly, checkout, and refurbishment of the boosters, and KSC would supervise final assembly, checkout, launch operations, and postlaunch disassembly of the boosters. First of six orbital test flights had been scheduled for the second quarter of 1979, with operational flights to begin in 1980. At launch, the three main engines and two boosters of the Space Shuttle would operate together; upon burnout at about 43 km altitude, the boosters would separate and descend by parachute to the ocean for retrieval and refurbishment. The boosters were designed for use 20 times. (NASA Release 76-212; MSFC Release 76-215; WSJ, 21 Dec 76, 11)
Johnson Space Center announced that NASA had awarded the Singer Co. Simulations Products Division, Binghamton, N.Y., a $6.5-million 2-yr contract for maintenance, modification, and operational support of JSC’s simulation complex at Houston to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle program. Initially, the simulation complex would consist of the Shuttle procedures simulator and the crew procedures evaluation simulator; later, an orbiter aeroflight simulator would be added, followed by the Shuttle mission simulator. In addition to systems and hardware engineering, configuration control, installation and tests of modifications, and development, drafting, and illustration of software, the contract would require maintenance, servicing, and operational support of the equipment as well as documentation and logistics support. Extensions of 24 and 6 mo would be optional. McDonnell Douglas Corp. also negotiated for this contract (see 10 May). (JSC Release 76-48)
A U.S.-European Space Shuttle project starting in 1980 would recruit 30 more astronauts—including women and participants from the USSR—for the planned 200 flights in the project, U.S spokesmen said at a Paris news conference held at the end of a 3-day meeting between NASA and European Space Agency officials. John F. Yardley, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told newsmen that NASA was already training more than 30 astronauts for this program. Each flight, carrying 3 U.S. astronauts and up to 4 Europeans on space-science missions lasting between a week and a month, would cost between $18 million and $21 million; European scientists had expressed concern that the flights would cost so much that less money would be left for scientific experiments than they had hoped. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, when asked if the Soviets might be involved in the project, said, “We have made it clear in informal discussions that this would be available to them.” Those using the Shuttle would be expected to foot the bill, officials emphasized. {NYT, 15 May 76, 2; W Post, 15 May 76, A-15; W Star, 16 May 76, A-3)
A $4.5-million structural test data-acquisition system to be used for tests on Space Shuttle components was nearing completion of installation and checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center, MFSC announced. Developed by Avco Electronics, the system included a central facility with a computer system, 6 line printers, 5 graphics display units, a printer-plotter, 2 card readers, and 4 video hard-copy units; 4 data-selector units; and 24 static-input units. The central facility, to be located in MSFC’s Test Laboratory, was designed for a lifespan of 10 yr and would combine extreme accuracy with high reliability and ruggedness. Testing the external tanks, solid-fuel rocket booster, and other parts of the Shuttle for structural integrity would require monitoring up to 6000 channels of data simultaneously, fed into the computers from test hardware elsewhere at the Center. The Avco contract also provided for training MSFC personnel to operate the system when completed late in 1976. (MSFC Release 76-73)
A recently completed manipulator-development facility at Johnson Space Center’s Bldg. 9a laboratory would assist NASA engineers and technicians in studying Shuttle payload deployment and retrieval in space, JSC announced. The manipulating system, with a reach of 15.2 meters, was the largest known remotely controlled manipulator system. Sizes of payloads to be carried in the Space Shuttle would range from very small to a maximum length of 18.2 m and diameter of 4.5 m; objective of the facility would be to improve techniques of moving bulky payloads in and out of the orbiter’s bay in a weightless environment. The manipulator arm would be operated from inside the orbiter cabin by an astronaut using a pair of hand controllers and viewing the process through a window, aided by a closed-circuit TV system. The laboratory building also housed working models of orbiter components including a full-scale forward cabin section with cargo bay, manipulator station, and a large air-bearing table approximately 25 by 30m on which simulated payloads could be steered on a cushion of air by the remote arm. The air-be a ring table would also test the ability of astronauts to move over the smooth interior of the orbiter, using suction-cup shoes instead of cleats locking into grids. An engineer wearing suction-cup shoes and strapped into a cage-like apparatus on the air-bearing table could be familiarized with “walking like a fly” in the day-to-day work environment of the Shuttle. (JSC Release 76-66)
Tass announced the launch of the Salyut 5 orbital scientific station “under the program of studying the outer space.” Parameters were 260-km apogee, 219-km perigee, 51.6° inclination, and 89-min period. Control posts inside the Soviet Union as well as vessels of the USSR Science Academy “sailing in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean” were tracking the flight, receiving telemetry, and controlling the station, the announcement said. Although the official announcement did not mention manned flights as part of the Salyut 5 program, the Washington Post reported that a Western specialist in Moscow had predicted the new station would be manned “sooner or later.” The Washington Star noted that 2 visiting cosmonauts—Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, who lived aboard Salyut 4 for 63 days last summer—speaking at an international meeting in Philadelphia 2 wk ago said the new station would be able to accommodate 6 cosmonauts for as long as 3 mo, and would have 2 entry ports, so that 2 spacecraft could dock with it at the same time. The 2-mo flight of Klimuk and Sevastyanov set a Soviet record for time spent in space; however, the 84-day flight of 3 Americans (Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue) aboard Skylab 4 had set the overall endurance record in early 1974. A USSR manned mission would be the first launching of cosmonauts since the joint Apollo-Soyuz flight with the U.S. in July 1975; the last USSR orbital station, Salyut 4, was launched 26 December 1974 and was still performing experiments, according to official announcements. The Star said that the Soviets were directing their resources toward perfecting permanent stations in contrast to the U.S. approach of developing a reusable space shuttle. (FBIS, Tass in English, 22 June 76; W Post, 23 June 76, A-ll; WStar, 23 June 76, A-15)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a number of activities, centered on the Space Shuttle, including testing, procurement, and completion of facilities. —During July, MSFC awarded 14 contracts each of which totaled more than $50 000. (MSFC Release 76-155) —MSFC completed preparation of a 2.8% scale model of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) that would be tested in Ames Research Center wind tunnels (the 2 supersonic facilities and the 4.2m transonic facility). MSFC had used a 0.5% scale model in its smaller trisonic (over mach 3) wirid tunnel to develop preliminary environmental data; the smaller tunnel ft as cheaper to operate, and a smaller model was cheaper to alter. Data from the ARC tests would be use in SRB component vibration and acoustic design and in establishing qualification-test criteria, and finally for generation of data on the acoustic environment for reentry of an actual full-scale SRB. (MSFC Release 76-120) —Completing the first phase of acoustic testing that used scale models of the Space Shuttle with models of the Kennedy Space Center launch pad, MSFC announced that it had begun another test program using a scale model of the Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launch pad and a Shuttle model having working main engines and solid-fuel rocket boosters to the same scale. The Vandenberg launch pad differed from that at KSC, but MSFC said that much of the information obtained since Aug. 1974 in 150 test firings to evaluate different acoustic methods for the KSC launch pad would be useful in suppressing noise at the Vandenberg site. The tests were made to determine the best way to control noise and ignition overpressure when Shuttle engines and boosters were ignited at launch; uncontrolled pressures and acoustics could damage the Shuttle or its payload. Tests were scheduled for completion in Dec. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-117) —MSFC announced award of a $247 363 contract to Rockwell’s Space Div. for a 12-mo study of Shuttle booster and external tank options that could reduce cost per flight and increase payload weight capability. (MSFC Release 76-118) —MSFC announced that the first flight-configuration nozzle for the Shuttle main engine under development by Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Div. had been completed and successfully proof-tested. Completion of the nozzle represented a significant design and manufacturing achievement; the nozzle consisted of 1080 precisely formed tapering tubes brazed to a shell and stiffened by bands. It was about 3m tall and 2.7m in diameter, weighing about 454 kg. Attached to the main combustion chamber of the main engine, the nozzle would allow exhaust gases to expand to obtain maximum thrust, contributing to highly efficient burn. (MSFC Release 76-128) —MSFC announced completion of tests conducted with KSC to determine the effects of salty and brackish water on materials used in elements of the Space Shuttle. Recovery of 2 Shuttle boosters after each launch would require towing the boosters in the salty Atlantic Ocean and into the brackish waters of a Fla. river. The studies used an integrated test bed constructed from the same materials and covered with the same sealants and paints planned for use on flight rockets, carrying samples of electrical and electronic equipment and hydraulic systems being considered for Shuttle use. The test bed, shipped to KSC, was put into the ocean for 7 days and in the Banana River for 3 days, at a depth that closely simulated actual booster-recovery conditions. Returned to MSFC, the test bed had been subjected to study by engineers and technicians to discover the effects of the ocean and river environments, and to look for corrosion or marine biological growth. After this study, the refurbished test bed would be used again for tests in the ocean by KSC personnel. (MSFC Release 76-131) —MSFC announced it had requested bids from industry on development of range-safety receivers for the Space Shuttle. Each Shuttle’s 2 booster solid rockets would carry 2 receivers and the external tank 1, a total of 5 for each launch. The receivers would be part of a safety system that would let the range safety officer destroy the vehicle in case of a malfunction at launch. NASA planned to reuse the receivers up to 20 times, recovering and returning the equipment to the manufacturer for testing before it was shipped to the assembly contractor for reuse. (MSFC Release 76-132) —MSFC announced that assembly of the first Space Shuttle external tank had begun at the Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. Assembly should be completed and the tank delivered to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Miss., in mid-1977 for use in the test program for the main propulsion engine. The tests would use the tank, three Shuttle main engines, and other components in actual firings to verify the design and operation of the main propulsion system. The program would consist of 15 test firings, 11 at or near the full 8-min duration. (MSFC Release 76-137) —MSFC announced preparations for the arrival of the first Space Shuttle orbiter in mid-July for a series of tests at MSFC’s dynamic test facility. The orbiter would arrive at the Redstone airfield in 1978 atop a modified Boeing 747 and be off-loaded by KSC personnel. On the ground, the orbiter would become the responsibility of MSFC personnel, who would move it to the test facility and mate it with the rest of the Space Shuttle elements for vibration tests. This would be the first time all elements of the Shuttle were united. Tests were scheduled to run from spring to winter of 1978. (MSFC Release 76-141) —MSFC announced completion of tests on minitank 5, a small aluminum tank coated with a spray insulation that would be used to protect the Space Shuttle’s external tank and its highly volatile liquid hydrogen contents from engine exhaust or aerodynamic heat. This was the fifth of 13 such tanks to be tested at MSFC. The tests were to determine the effectiveness of Martin Marietta’s foam insulation against stress encountered during Shuttle launch and space flight. Besides acoustic and vacuum tests, the minitanks would undergo pressure, boiloff, and holding tests with liquid hydrogen; the hold test would determine the effect of a 7-hr idle period on a full tank’s insulation system. The test period of 7 hr was estimated to be the longest time a fueled Shuttle would have to wait on a launch pad before liftoff. %ISFC Release 76-142) —MSFC announced completion^, the only totally new structure built exclusively for testing the Space Shuttle external tank: the pneumatic test facility at Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans, which would accommodate the tank measuring 47 m long (more than half the length of a football field) and 8.4 m in diameter. Empty, the tank would weigh about 34 000 kg. The pneumatic facility would be used for proof tests and leak tests of the external tank’s liquid hydrogen tank; the proof test would pressurize the tank with gaseous nitrogen and apply a series of external loads with 9 hydraulic cylinders. The leak test would verify that no out-of-specification leaks existed. Martin Marietta Aerospace was prime contractor at Michoud for external tank production. (MSFC Release 76-143)
NASA issued a call for Space Shuttle astronaut candidates— 15 pilots and 15 mission specialists—to be selected by Dec. 1977. Applications would be accepted through June 1977, and candidates would report to Johnson Space Center in July 1978 for 2 yr of training. Appointment as an astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. Minority and women candidates were encouraged to apply. NASA spokesman Bob Gordon said the agency expected no problems if a woman were selected; the Space Shuttle was “designed to accommodate women astronauts... the waste management system is the only problem really and that has been designed for both males and females.” Since the astronaut program began in 1959, 73 pilots and scientists had been selected; 31 persons were available as Space Shuttle crew, 28 astronauts assigned to JSC and 3 holding government positions in Washington, D.C. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would maintain vehicle systems; mission-specialist astronauts would coordinate orbiter operations in flight planning, use of consumables, and management of the payload. (NASA Release 76-122; JSC Release 76-44; DOD Release 310-76; NYT, 8 July 76, 12)
NASA announced that a task team headed by Marshall Space Flight Center, and including representatives from Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, would assist the Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) in evaluating industry proposals for validating the development of the Space Shuttle interim upper stage (lUS). The IUS, an expendable solid-fuel rocket stage capable of launching one or more spacecraft, would be carried into low earth orbit in the bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter; after deployment, it would be fired to carry the spacecraft into orbits of from 800 to 35 000 km, or to earth-escape trajectories for interplanetary missions. The basic IUS developed to meet DOD objectives would be altered as needed to meet NASA-unique requirements (planetary missions, or economical delivery of several smaller satellites). MSFC would be responsible for establishing the NASA-unique requirements; its task team would be responsible for planning and coordinating NASA’s IUS activities; KSC would be responsible for IUS launch operations, and JSC for lUS-orbiter integration and flight operations. The Air Force was expected to award a contract for IUS development by Sept. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-89)
