The NY Times reported that the General Accounting Office, Congress’s investigative arm, had told the lawmakers to consider delaying completion of the Space Shuttle fleet, originally planned to include five ships. Two had been built so far. GAO said Congress should go ahead will building a third Shuttle but should put off construction of the other two until “there is sufficient confidence in the shuttle development program and more information is available on the space transportation system operations cost and plans for future space activity.” Today noted that this report was “the most sweepingly and harshly critical” of a number of negative assessments of the Shuttle issued by GAO. Among its charges were that the Shuttle would cause sonic booms over Calif, and Fla. upon landing; that its tires would blow out and cause a crash when it tried to land; that it could make too few orbits; that there was no proof it would reduce the costs of carrying cargoes into space; and that hardly anyone would want to use its services except DOD and NASA itself. GAO pointed out that other nations, led by Japan, had been developing their own launch vehicles and were likely to use them instead of paying to use the Shuttle; it also said NASA had erred in setting its fees low to encourage users to change over from expendable launchers. NASA’s plan to recover expenses later, when costs had fallen with increased use, might never be possible, the GAO said. Former NASA administrator James C. Fletcher said he disagreed with most of GAO’s comments: NASA would solve the technical problems as it had solved others, he said, and delaying acquisition of the fourth and fifth Shuttles would be wasteful. “If they are procured while tooling and assembly lines are in place, they unquestionably can be procured at far less cost than would be incurred by delay.” A 3-yr delay would run up the program cost by from $3 billion to $4.5 billion, he said. (NYT, June 5/77, 43; Today, June 4/77, 8A)
KSC announced it had awarded to Planning Research Corporation, McLean, Va., a $25 720 364 contract extension for engineering support services to the Space Shuttle program and other activities where the design-engineering directorate at KSC had design responsibilities. The 12mo cost-plus-award-fee extension through May 1978 had brought the value of the contract originally awarded in May 1974 to $72 616 061. The company employed more than 1100 workers at KSC and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Fla., and at DFRC and KSC’s Western Launch Operations Division in Calif. (KSC Release 111-77)
ARC announced that 7 U.S. biological experiments launched Aug. 3 on the USSR’s Cosmos 936 had landed by parachute in Siberia Aug. 22. The Soviet satellite also carried experiments from France, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and East Germany. Five of the U.S. experiments had followed up those on the first cooperative U.S.-USSR biological satellite Cosmos 782 launched in Nov. 1975; 4 of them had Soviet coinvestigators, and all of them used some Soviet scientific or technical assistance. The last U.S. biosat was Biosatellite 3, launched in 1969; without the Soviet flight opportunity, the U.S. biology experiments would have to wait for Shuttle flights in the 1980s. (ARC Release 77-37; NASA Release 77-169)
MSFC reported its engineers had prepared electronic simulations as dress rehearsals of Shuttle orbital missions set for 1978, with computers in the roles of major hardware. The simulations, carried out at JSC, would check out Shuttle avionics (electrical and electronic systems controlling the Shuttle during flight and sending signals to pilots and ground controllers monitoring the mission). MSFC’s engineers would deliver to JSC in Jan. 1978 the Marshall mated-elements system (MMES) simulating items for which MSFC was responsible: main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank. JSC would provide an orbiter , - simulator and a computer to simulate Shuttle dynamics, a system called SAIL (Shuttle avionics integration laboratory) able to simulate a Shuttle flight beginning 20min before launch under normal or abnormal conditions. The MMES could simulate failure of almost any MSFC element to see how the systems would react with one main engine out or if high temperatures or pressures should occur in vital areas. (MSFC Release 77-208)
The USAF announced it had issued contracts to Martin Marietta Aerospace at Denver and General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Divison at San Diego for design of a large space structure to be carried into orbit on the Space Shuttle and erected and deployed in space. The contracts, each for $750,000, called for conceptual design of a flight-demonstration model of an antenna-like structure to be assembled and deployed in a form exceeding the size of the orbiter cargo bay (60ft long by 15ft in diameter). Plans called for automated assembly in space with manned supervision. The flight article would also serve to verify the Shuttle’s ability to deploy other DOD craft that might require assembly in orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 77, 4)
NASA announced a yr-long schedule of test runs and captive-flight tests on the first-built Space Shuttle orbiter, Enterprise, that would take place at the Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Called approach and landing tests (ALT), the series of flights with a modified Boeing 747 serving as a ferry aircraft and airborne launch platform would begin with several taxiing tests with the orbiter atop the carrier; following would be six inert-captive flights in which the jumbo jet would carry the unmanned orbiter to a 7620m (25 000ft) altitude. Unmanned flights would verify performance of the two vehicles in mated flight. Then would come a series of captive-active flights with the orbiter’s systems powered up and the Enterprise manned by 2 astronauts. The first orbiter off the assembly line arrived at DFRC Jan. 31 from Rockwell Intl.’s Palmdale plant; upon completion of ALT, the carrier would take the prototype to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground-vibration tests. After these tests, NASA said, the Enterprise would return to Palmdale to be prepared for orbital flight in the early 1980s. The orbiter now under construction (OV-102) would be the first used in actual orbital-flight tests, now scheduled to begin in mid-1979; six test flights would demonstrate the orbiter’s capabilities in earth orbit before the start of operational flights, scheduled to begin in 1980. (NASA Release 77-16)
KSC announced it had awarded a $39 812 contract to Ky. State Univ. for continuing research on effects of prolonged exposure of experimental animals to variations in the atmospheric level of oxygen. Previous studies in the field had been on short-term exposure to 100% oxygen, but little was known about prolonged exposure to oxygen at low to moderate concentrations. Ky. State’s first grant for this work in March 1974 had exposed vinegar flies to higher levels of oxygen than normal and drastically shortened the life span, whereas exposure to lower than normal levels had greatly reduced reproductive capacity. This work had also suggested that certain individuals might prove better adapted genetically for survival in abnormal oxygen environments. The findings would be useful in planning atmospheres for long-term manned space missions aboard the Space Shuttle or on space colonies. (KSC Release 91-77)
NASA announced it had awarded RCA Astro-Electronics Division of Princeton, N.J., a $10.5 million fixed-price contract for a closed-circuit television system to support the Space Shuttle program. The contract, running from Jan. 1978 through June 1982, would cover design, development, production, qualification, and delivery of CCTV systems for training, certification, and flight. It would include hardware for the first orbital test vehicle design, with options for TV equipment on additional orbiters and for Canada-built remote manipulator systems. Cameras and monitors would fly in the crew compartment and the payload bay, and on the arm of the remote manipulator. JSC would provide technical direction. (NASA Release 77-259)
NASA and ESA announced that 6 U.S. and 4 European candidates were finalists in the competition for 2 payload specialist positions, 1 U.S. and 1 European, on the first flight of ESA’s Spacelab scheduled to go on the Space Shuttle in 1980. For the U.S., Byron Lichtenberg of Natick, Mass., Ph.D. candidate at MIT, and MSFC’s Ann Whitaker, M.S. at the Univ. of Ala., were the only non-Calif, finalists. The others were Craig L. Fischer, M.D., of Indian Wells; Michael L. Lampton, Ph.D., of Berkeley; and Robert T. Menzies and Richard J. Terrile, both Ph.D.s from CalTech (Terrile employed there and Menzies at JPL) and both from Pasadena. ESA’s 4 were electronics engineer Franco Malerba of Italy; physicist Ulf Merbold of West Germany; and 2 from the Netherlands, astronomer Claude Nicollier and physicist Wubbo Ockels. (NASA Release 77-255; MSFC Release 77-229; ESA Release Dec 22/77)
NASA officials, assuming a constant purchasing power for the agency over the next 10 to 15yr, had made plans for some 560 Shuttle flights between 1980 and 1991, averaging 60 flights per yr between 1985 and 1991, Nature reported. Assuming a maximum payload of about 29 500kg, Shuttle users (including NASA, DOD, other government agencies, private industry, and foreign organizations) would pay fees from $3000 for a simple automatic payload to $20 million for the entire cargo bay. NASA had claimed a 40% savings in launch costs for the Shuttle compared to expendable rockets; a higher discount for U.S. users would increase its cost-effectiveness. Nature said early Shuttle critics, like space scientists who viewed it as a competitor for limited NASA resources, were now supporting the Shuttle as a research tool. (Nature, Apr 7/77, 489)
The Apollo program was a tough act to follow, Space Shuttle pilot Lt. Col. Charles Fullerton said in a Today wire service report. Acknowledging the declining public interest in space, Fullerton noted that, after Apollo, “Everything else has to be anticlimactic.” {Today, Apr 4/77,1A)
NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA Release 77-44)
NASA announced it had identified about 40 payloads to be carried on 11	Space Shuttle flights in its first yr of operation, beginning in 1980. Three civilian firms had deposited “earnest money” with NASA for payloads on 8 flights; NASA had plans for 5 payloads, and DOD had plans for one. Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA also had forecast 12	non-NASA civilian payloads, 10 NASA payloads, and 4 DOD payloads for launch during 1980 and 1981. Allocating the payloads to specific flights would not be firm until about a yr before launch, he noted. A working model for Shuttle traffic in the first 12yr, totaling 560 Shuttle flights, would show NASA flying about half the missions on its own; 20% would be DOD missions; 6%, other U.S. government agencies; 12%, commercial firms; and 12%, foreign customers. (NASA Release 77-175)
JSC announced award of a $2 752 000 contract to Hamilton Standard Division of United Technologies Corp., Windsor Locks, Conn., for development and production of a Space Shuttle portable oxygen system for use independently or connected to the orbiter’s oxygen system. Consisting of a face mask, rebreather loop, heat exchanger, oxygen bottle, and recharge kit, the system would operate during emergencies and for prebreathing before spacewalks to denitrogenize the crew’s circulatory systems. (JSC Release 77-18)
MSFC announced that United Space Boosters, Inc., the firm that would assemble and check out the solid-fuel rocket for the Space Shuttle, had begun a manpower buildup that would eventually include about 150 employees. The present contractor work force of about 60 had been housed in Bldg. 4666 at the center. The firm, a subsidiary of United Technologies Corp. of Sunnyvale, Calif., had received in Dec. 1976 a contract for work at both MSFC and KSC to include stacking, launch operations, and refurbishing the reusable rockets. Responsibilities would include designing tools for applying thermal-protection materials to the boosters, electrical and instrument-verification testing, and installing instrumentation on the booster structure and on the booster aft skirt for tests scheduled at MSFC and at the Thiokol plant in Utah. Employees of USB doing MSFC work at KSC later in 1977 would number from 150 to 200, but the contractor would keep a cadre of about 80 at MSFC through the Shuttle test period. (MSFC Release 77-26)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $918 523 contract to T.H. Taylor Construction Co., Montgomery, Ala., for construction of permanent and semipermanent steel working platforms on the modified dynamic test stand. The stand would hold an entire Space Shuttle assembly during mated vertical ground-vibration tests scheduled for 1978. (MSFC Release 77-54)
NASA announced award of what Aviation Week called “the largest NASA contract ever issued for an unmanned space program” to Western Union Space Communications Co., TRW Systems, and Harris Electronics Systems Div. for development of the tracking and data-relay satellite system (TDRSS) aimed at replacing present ground stations by offering orbital-communications coverage for 85 to 100% of spacecraft orbit, compared to 15% coverage now available from ground-based facilities. The system would consist of two specialized relay spacecraft in synchronous earth orbit plus a ground terminal at White Sands, N.M., supporting 20 or more satellites orbiting at up to 5000km altitude. The lOyr contract at $79.6 million per yr would include work on spacecraft and ground stations, as well as all operating costs. TRW would be prime manufacturer under subcontract with WU to build six spacecraft plus components for a seventh, using technology developed for the FltSatCom spacecraft and hardware used in WU’s Westar domestic comsats; Harris Electronics would build the White Sands station and provide antenna components. Missions using the TDRSS would include scientific, applications, and manned satellites such as Space Shuttle, Spacelab, and Shuttle-launched spacecraft scheduled for the 1980s. (A v Wk, Jan 3/77, 14; NASA Release 76-213)
MSFC announced a $1 046 100 amendment of a contract with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Inti. Corp., Canoga Park, Calif., contractors for the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME). The amended contract, totaling more than $66 million, would include equipment to build SSME. (MSFC Release 77-37)
NASA announced it had selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., and Perkin-Elmer Corp., Danbury, Conn., to negotiate contracts totaling more than $131 million for two major elements of the Space Telescope. Lockheed would design, fabricate, and integrate the telescope support-systems module, provide systems engineering and analysis, and support NASA in ground and flight operations. Perkin-Elmer would design, manufacture, and deliver the optical assembly and equipment, including systems engineering, support of the launch, verification of the orbit, and plans for mission operations. The 8ft-diameter telescope, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 1983, would offer an astronomical capability beyond anything possible from the earth’s surface or any telescopes launched so far because of its improvements in resolution, power, light sensitivity, and wavelength coverage. It would be refurbished periodically in orbit or could be returned to earth on the Shuttle for repair or upgrading. The support module would provide electric power, communications, data processing and storage, attitude sensing and control, and environmental control to the telescope assembly and up to 5 additional scientific instruments accommodated by the telescope. MSFC, which had overall project management responsibility, would manage the contracts for the support module and the optical assembly; GSFC would manage scientific instrument development. (NASA Release 77-153)
The possibility of teleportation-transfer of objects from one place to another by radio waves came closer with the announcement of a new way to create identical copies of a three-dimensional object by using a sculpture-photography system based on the same principles of chemistry and electronics now used in making printing plates. As reported in the Chicago Tribune, Wyn Kelly Swainson, a young man with a degree in English literature and some training in science, had obtained his first patent on a device being developed with the help of the Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio. Swainson began with the idea of reproducing great works of sculpture without painstaking handwork: a plastic material hardened by light rays would be targeted by intersecting laser beams, controlled by a computer programmed with the image of the object to be copied. Swainson said IBM had already produced an instrument to record computerized shapes, convert the electronic data into light rays, and feed them through the lasers scanning a container of plastic. Where the beams intersected, they would cause a chemical reaction hardening the plastic; washing off the unhardened material would leave an exact copy of the object previously computerized. In theory, a three-dimensional hologram of an object even of complex metals could be analyzed for its precise composition, converted to electronic data, transmitted, and reproduced as often as desired. (C Trib, Jan 30/77, 1-5) Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, with tailcone covering engine-nozzle location, moves on a 90-wheel rig January 31 from the Rockwell plant to DFRC 3 5mi away in preparation for approach and landing tests. (NASA 77-H-77) January 30—February h Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle, towed atop a 90-wheel trailer from Rockwell Intl.’s plant in Palmdale, Calif., made its first trip to Edwards AFB 57km away. Escorted by a convoy of security and patrol cars, the Enterprise moved at 8kph and drew hundreds of spectators to view its configuration (24m wingspan and 21m vertical tailfin). Tests of the 38m-long space vehicle would begin Feb. 18 with a series of “captive” flights; first manned flight to an unpowered landing would occur July 22. (WStar, Jan 30/77, A-7, NYT, Jan 31/77, 12; W Post, Feb 1/77, A-3) ORIGINAL PA&E IZ OF POOR QUALITY	n
MSFC announced award of a $279 714 contract to Sperry Support Services, a division of Sperry Rand Corp., Huntsville, Ala., for design, construction, and delivery of equipment for the mated vertical ground-vibration test (MVGVT) of the Space Shuttle, scheduled for 1978. The test would confirm the theoretical model used in dynamic analyses of the Space Shuttle, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters. (MSFC Release 77-39)
NASA announced a successful 60-sec firing of the Space Shuttle main engine on Mar. 12 at rated thrust conditions of 2 082 560 newtons. Employees of the Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell Inti. Corp., contractor for the SSME, conducted the test at NASA’s Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA Release 77-54)
President Carter’s first budget proposal contained additional funds for NASA, Nature magazine noted. The new administration had recommended $13 million for studies of potential missions to Mars after Viking; the previous administration had requested $5 million. Planetary scientists, pleased with the increased budget request as well as with Carter’s recent remarks on the Space Shuttle, viewed these actions as presidential support of the space program. (Nature, Mar 3/77, 5; Spaceflight, Mar 77, 8)
MSFC announced arrival June 24 at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories of a huge steel structure to simulate the Space Shuttle or-biter in main propulsion-test article firings later in 1977. The article would include the simulator with an aft fuselage, an external tank, and three Shuttle main engines; first test would take place in Dec. The simulator, about 29m (95ft) long and weighing about 110 000kg (243 0001b), had moved from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans to NSTL in Miss, on the barge Pearl River, having traveled from Calif, to Michoud via the Panama Canal on the NASA barge Poseidon [see May 10]. (MSFC Release 77-118; NASA Release 77-132)
JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement with Rockwell Inti. Corp. Space Division deleting two items from the Space Shuttle orbiter contract: a neutral-buoyance trainer, and vibroacoustic tests on the aft fuselage of the orbiter. This work had been scheduled for Rockwell’s plant in Downey, Calif., with support from JSC and KSC field offices. The decrease of $25 334 750 had lowered the value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract with Rockwell to $3 013 971 603. (JSC Release 77-38)
Two giant crawler-transporters that had ferried Saturn V rockets to the launch pad at KSC and were scheduled for similar work in the Space Shuttle program had been designated National Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks, Today newspaper reported. At ceremonies held Feb. 3 beneath one of the vehicles, more than 100 persons watched the unveiling of a plaque noting the creation of the 18th national landmark identified since the Am. Society of Mechanical Engineers began singling them out in 1973. Present at the ceremony were KSC employees who had helped build the pair of 2.7-million-kg platforms; ASME officials and members from across the U.S. on their way to a national meeting in southern Fla.; and former astronaut Donn F. Eisele, who had been command-module pilot on the 1968 Apollo 7 flight that resumed moonshots more than a yr after the fatal fire in an Apollo training exercise. Eisele had since become a manager for Marion Power Shovel Co., the Ohio firm that built the transporters at a cost of $14 million. Ray Clark, KSC director of design engineering, accepted the plaque from Dr. Stothe P. Kezios, presidentelect of ASME, with the comment that the transporters were “barely broken in” with mileage on each at just over 800km; they might accumulate 10 times that amount carrying Shuttle equipment during their second yr of operation, he added. (Today, Feb 4/77, 10A)
Central Florida officials who had counted on Space Shuttle employment to stimulate the local economy hoped it would differ from the boom-and-bust cycle of the Apollo program, the NY Times reported. The Apollo program had brought about 26 000 employees to KSC, but the economy declined with layoffs when the missions ended. NASA had estimated an 11 000-employee strength at KSC for the first Shuttle mission; the Shuttle program should continue for at least 5yr, agency officials said. (NYTApr 26/77, 13) April27: A series of Stanford Univ. experiments had apparently verified the existence of quarks, hypothetical fundamental pieces of matter possessing fractional electric charges, the NY Times reported. Dr. William Fairbank, professor of physics at Stanford, described the findings—first evidence of quarks since their theoretical exposition in 1964—at the Am. Physical Society annual meeting in Washington, D.C. If matter consisted of protons, electrons, and neutrons (carrying charges of +1, -1, and 0, respectively), quarks—the building blocks of these particles—would have fractional charges of +1/3, -1/3, +2/3, and -2/3. Fairbank emphasized that the results were not final, and that the university had scheduled follow-up tests. (NYT, Apr 27/77, A18)
JSC announced it had signed a $40 million letter contract with Rockwell Inti. Corp. Space Division for modifications to the first Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise and for starting design of a third orbiter. Funded in part by the Economic Stimulus Bill, the contract had been directed at generating more employment opportunities. (JSC Release 77-37)
Kennedy Space Center reported that NASA had awarded the Univ. of Ariz. a $50K contract extension to continue studying thunderstorm electrical fields and other phenomena in the Spaceport area. Total value of the contract, awarded in April 1974 and now extended to Jan. 15, 1978, would be $116 000. Under the direction of Dr. Phillip Krider of UA’s Inst, of Atmospheric Physics, scientists working with UA graduate and undergraduate students would use KSC’s sophisticated instrumentation during summer thunderstorms to study electrical-field changes and recovery curves created by lightning under varied conditions, and would create computer programs to determine and display the location of lightning discharges and thunderstorm characteristics. Techniques resulting from the study would help make Space Shuttle vehicle-processing, launch, and landing at KSC safe and efficient even in marginal weather. The U.S. studies would supplement a program known as TRIP (thunderstorm research international program), cosponsored by the Am. Geophysical Union and the Am. Meteorological Society, under which teams of atmospheric scientists would conduct research at KSC between 1976 and 1978. (KSC Release 33-77)
The Washington Post reported that NASA had asked Congress to let it use $100 million of Space Shuttle production funds to pay for higher costs and delays in developing the first two Shuttles. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA Administrator, told the appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that $65 million would bring production up to schedule and the other $35 million would go into contingency reserves that had run between $100 and $150 million; they were “down near zero right now,” Frosch said. Associate Administrator John ip. Yardley said the rocket to put the Shuttle into orbit was 5mo behind schedule; also running behind were computer controls and fuselage parts. Asked why NASA requested a fund shift that might cause problems in the future, instead of a supplemental appropriation, Frosch noted that twice when NASA had asked Congress for supplemental budget increases, it had had to wait until the next fiscal year for approval. (W Post, Dec 2/77, A-2) •
MSFC announced it had awarded to Contractors Cargo Co., South Gate, Calif., a $227 120 fixed-price contract for moving the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise eight separate times during its testing at MSFC in 1978. Now in the midst of approach and landing tests (ALT) at DFRC, Enterprise would fly on its Boeing 747 carrier to MSFC on March 17, 1978, to be mated with an external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters and erected on a dynamic test stand for vertical ground-vibration testing. The contract called for design, testing, and delivery to MSFC of an orbiter ground-transporter to travel about 6 km between the airfield and the pretest-preparation building, a trip to be completed within 2hr on March 18, 1978. The “prime mover,” a 480-hp tractor with 10 wheels, would be attached to 2 rear dollies each having 32 wheels and a forward dolly with 16 wheels. The segments would be joined by a “strongback” construction, and the entire rig would weigh about 24 000kg (52 9001b). Length of the transporter would be nearly 50m (about 160ft), the width of about 24m would accommodate the orbiter’s wingspan, and the height from ground to top of a vertical stabilizer would be about 16m (about 54ft). For an operating demonstration before the arrival of the orbiter at MSFC, the transporter would carry a weightload of nearly 100 000kg (220 0001b), half again the weight of the orbiter. Contractors Cargo was the same firm that had moved Enterprise from the Rockwell plant at Palmdale, Calif., to DFRC in Jan. 1977. (MSFC Release 77-106)
MSFC announced award of a 15-mo contract worth $99 663 to Desert Research Institute — part of the Univ. of Nevada system—for development and fabrication of a prototype particle generator for possible use in the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL), a payload scheduled for an early Shuttle or Spacelab flight. The generator would form nuclei with diameters of a hundredth to a thousandth of a micron (one thousandth of a mm) upon which water would condense to form clouds. Researchers would use the zero-gravity environment on Shuttle flights to perform cloud-physics experiments leading to an understanding of microphysical processes in the atmosphere, and to eventual prediction, alteration, and control of weather. (MSFC Release 77-19)
NASA reported KSC was preparing its facilities for next yr’s Space Shuttle arrival and prelaunch work, more than 3yr after it last launched a Saturn rocket from Complex 39. In Oct. 1978, Shuttle orbiter 102 would fly in from Calif, on its Boeing 747 carrier, with the main engines, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters due in Nov. and Dec. for assembly and test before launch March 1979. KSC’s orbiter landing strip had been completed in Aug.; support facilities to be completed by April 1978 would include a device to unload the orbiter, plus a microwave landing system to guide it to an automatic landing. An orbiter-processing facility to store fuels and handle payloads was the only new construction except the landing strip, the rest being modifications of Apollo facilities. (NASA Release 77-253)
MSFC announced it had completed modifications of the Saturn test stand used in the 1960s for static-test firings of the first stages of the Saturn 1 and IB and scheduled for structural tests of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster. The tests would use a short-stack SRB (lacking two center segments, measuring 18.3cm less than the actual boosters) to simulate prelaunch, flight, and recovery reactions. Each Shuttle launch would need two SRBs each simultaneously generating 11.79-million newtons (2.65 million lb) of thrust at liftoff; separating at burnout from the external tank, the casings would parachute into the ocean for recovery and reuse in as many as 20 flights. (MSFC Release 77-95)
A cryogenically cooled infrared telescope carried aboard the Space Shuttle would become the major infrared research instrument in space, AvWk reported. NASA studies had indicated such a telescope could gather spectroscopic data on objects 1000 times fainter than now visible. (AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)
KSC reported that the number of visitors in the first 3mo of 1977 was 283 734; the number in March, 114 845, highest so far this yr was 2.8% below the March 1976 level. The 3mo total was 9.3% less than the first 3mo of 1976. The visitor center had displays, exhibits, space science lectures, and space movies, plus a new hall of history opened in 1976. Visitors could see the vehicle assembly building for Space Shuttle preparations and the Apollo Saturn on display nearby, drive around Pad A where Shuttle operations were in progress, and visit the Cape Canaveral Air Force station. (KSC Release 87-77)
DFRC announced that a malfunction during a June 2 test of the Space Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power system would delay the orbiter’s first manned captive flight from June 9 for 1 or 2 weeks, depending on successful completion of ground tests. (DFRC Release 22-77)
MSFC reported NASA’s Michoud assembly facility had shipped the first of four major pieces of test hardware for the Space Shuttle external tank, an intertank structural-test article scheduled to arrive by barge at MSFC about Mar. 5. It would go from New Orleans to Huntsville by way of Mississippi, Ohio, and Tennessee Rivers, the route NASA had used to ship Saturn stages for testing during the Apollo program. The other test articles (liquid-hydrogen tank, liquid-oxygen tank, and another intertank) would arrive later in 1977. The external tank, one to be used for each Shuttle mission, would hold containers for liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen, connected by the intertank; the combined assembly would measure about 47m long. Test data would serve to verify the intertank’s structural integrity before static test firing of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories later in 1977. The test firings would use a full-size external tank, three Shuttle engines, and an Orbiter aft-structure simulator, attached to the test stand through the intertank. (MSFC Release 77-30)
JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement with Rockwell Inti. Corp. for engineering-change orders on the Space Shuttle orbiter. The supplement, valued at about $226 million, would bring the value of the Rockwell contract to about $3.2 billion. The supplement would cover changes such as addition of lightning protection, payload and systems integration, avionics changes, provision of spares, and support of the carrier aircraft during ALT. (JSC Release 77-76) JSC announced it had signed a contract modification with Ford Aerospace covering hardware and software systems engineering, plus maintenance and operation of JSC’s mission control center and other ground-based data systems. The modification, valued at more than $1.4 million, would bring the value of the Ford contract to about $51.3 billion. (JSC Release 77-77)
NASA belt-tightening measures that might cut pay for about 60 high-ranking JSC employees might have the same effect at KSC, Today newspaper reported. The Houston Post reported earlier that the JSC employees had heard their Civil Service job grades would be reduced, with possible loss of $5000 to $10 000 in annual pay to follow 2yr later. A JSC spokesman said the grade reductions had resulted from a slowdown in space programs requiring reorganization of the center. Similar grade reductions were a possibility for KSC, which had been told by NASA Hq to cut its operating budget from $119 million to $109 million. KSC Director Lee Scherer had ordered a freeze on new hiring to allow a complete review of operations and consideration of measures to save money. KSC’s director of public affairs, Charles Hollinshead, said activities subject to possible funding cuts after Oct. 1 would be “things we can cut that don’t impact the launch schedule [for expendable rockets] or Space Shuttle preparations.” (Today, June 3/77, 16A)
NASA announced it had established a fare structure for Space Shuttle payloads on flights scheduled to begin in 1980. Depending on the weight and volume of cargo, the price would run from less them $10 000 to more than $21 million. Other factors would be the optional services desired and whether the payload would go on a reserved basis or as a standby. Costing $10 000 or less would be the “getaway special” (GAS), a small research package weighing less than 2001b, self-contained, with a volume of less than 5ft3, flying on a space-available basis. The $21-million fare would be for a payload using the full capacity of the Shuttle on a reservation basis by non-U.S. government customers. Lesser charges would apply to customers sharing flights with other customers; those willing to fly on a standby basis; and those having made a substantial investment in Space Transportation System development (e.g., The European Space Agency, its member nations, and Canada). Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA had set the prices to encourage Shuttle use by making costs attractive but still recovering operating expenses. Commercial and foreign users would pay fees covering depreciation of facilities and equipment, and amortization of or-biters. The pricing plan would undergo review in 3yr to make any necessary adjustments, Lee said; it contained provisions for cost increases due to inflation. NASA prices would include space in the Shuttle, with standard services such as design review, safety review, flight plans, transmission of payload data, and services of a 3-man crew. Optional services, costing more, would include special training, upper stages and services, special mission kits, revisit or retrieval of satellites, or any special equipment. (NASA Release 77-173)
MSFC reported that the number of visitors to the center in 1976 had increased 11 °7o over the previous yr to a total of 95 529, representing each of the 50 United States and several foreign countries. The guided bus tours of the center, cosponsored by MSFC and the Alabama Space and Rocket Center, last year added new items and increased activities at some of the former Saturn test sites. The tour stop presenting the story of the Space Shuttle and its payload had added a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle main engine. Tourists could also enter a full-scale mockup of Skylab to see how the astronauts lived in orbit; and the east and west test areas being converted for Shuttle testing were now available for viewing. The Redstone test stand already on the tour route had been refurbished and was added to the Natl. Register of Historic Places. (MSFC Release 77-3)
MSFC reported it had fired for 2min the largest solid-fuel rocket motor ever developed, at Thiokol Corp.’s installation 24mi from Brigham City, Utah, and 2mi from the nearest occupied building. The Thiokol motor, the propulsive part of the Space Shuttle booster, contained 302 454kg (more than 1.1 million lb) of propellant, half again as much as the next largest motor ever fired at the site. A composite fuel, mixed and poured into the 4 segments of the SRM, had been cured for 4 days before the segments were joined horizontally at the test site by special handling devices. The segments would go by rail to KSC for vertical assembly. Each Shuttle launch would use two of the boosters, designed for reuse up to 20 times. (MSFC Releases 77-125, 77-133; NASA Release 77-142)
NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERNO of Bremen, W. Germany, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload). Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif. Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)
KSC announced award of a $95 025 000 contract to the Space Division, Rockwell Inti. Corp., Downey, Calif., for activation of the Space Shuttle facilities and systems, and for Orbiter support during checkout, launch, and postflight operations, in the first six Space Shuttle missions. Rockwell would also support postflight operations at the DFRC landing site for the first four missions. (KSC Release 92-77)
Kennedy Space Center reported it had loaned its hyperbaric chamber to the Univ. of Fla. College of Medicine at Gainesville, for use in research. KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or recompression) chamber in its operations and checkout building to treat astronauts affected by decompression sickness (the “bends”) during manned altitude-chamber tests of the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms, carbon monoxide poisoning, or gas gangrene might require administration of hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber) for periods up to 24hr. The end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975 had ended NASA’s immediate need for the altitude or the hyperbaric chambers, but KSC had kept them for possible use in Space Shuttle training. (KSC Release 101-77)
Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division and Autonetics group had won an Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) design competition for a Teal Ruby sensor to detect and track aircraft targets from space, AvWk reported. The DOD sensor, using up to a quarter million mosaic infrared detectors with charge-coupled processors, would fly on the Space Shuttle in 1980. A Lockheed-Grumman team had also competed. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 13)
JSC announced that NASA and the Soviet Academy of Science would send representatives to a meeting Nov. 14-17 in Moscow to discuss a joint program for the 1980s using the flexible delivery and large capacity of the Space Shuttle and the Salyut’s longer stay time in orbit. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, would head the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Boris Petrov, chairman of the academy’s Intercosmos council, would head the Soviet delegation. (JSC Release 77-78; NASA Release 77-234; FBIS, Moscow Dom Sv in Rusn, Nov 18/77)
The Washington Post reported that NASA would try to save the Skylab space station “which is moving closer to earth and may fall in bits and pieces over the next few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch a “remote-controlled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new orbit, where it would be available for future astronaut visits. The 118ft Skylab launched in 1973 had been circling the globe every 1,5hr at a 200mi altitude. It had been home for three 3-man crews for as long as 12wk at a time; its last 84-day manned mission in 1974 was still the world’s endurance record for time in space. (W Post, Oct 30/77, A-10)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Corp. allowing the company as a commercial venture to design, manufacture, and test an upper-stage system, including integration services, for Space Shuttle missions having payloads weighing up to 2000kg. Carried into low earth orbit on the Shuttle, the upper stage called SSUS-A (for spinning solid upper stage, Atlas Centaur class) would take payloads into transfer orbit where a kick motor would put it into a circular geosynchronous orbit 35 900km above earth. A similar agreement last yr with McDonnell Douglas was for an upper stage called SSUS-D (for Delta class) suitable for use with payloads weighing up to 1100kg, like those being orbited on Delta vehicles. NASA had planned to procure SSUS-A systems only from firms with which it had such an agreement; under the agreements, firms would be free to sell stages either to NASA or directly to customers. The agreements would specify performance requirements, define a delivery schedule to meet NASA’s Shuttle schedule, and establish unit ceiling prices and a ceiling profit. (NASA Release 77-29)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that, as part of the Solar Sail Development Project, it had awarded 6 contracts to build a spaceship powered by solar wind. The craft, using large extremely thin ORiGiftAL RASE- 53 OF POOR QUALITY Artist’s concept of solar sail making rendezvous in 1982 with Hatley’s comet. Launched from an orbiting Space Shuttle, an SOOm-sq structure could carry an 800 to 900kg spacecraft on such a mission. (NASA 77-H-128) metallic sails to capture the energy of solar photons, would tack like a sailboat into the “wind” to head toward the sun or would use photon energy to head for the outer planets. Speed of the ship would vary with distance from the sun, following the inverse-square law that solar intensity would decrease as the reciprocal of the distance from the sun, squared. Cost of the contracts for fabricating sail material and designing sails, booms, and navigation systems would total $800 000. (NASA Release 77-39)
Marshall Space Flight Center director William R. Lucas announced that the teleoperator retrieval system project assigned by NASA to the center would be headed by John H. Harlow, who had been deputy manager of the Space Shuttle main engine project since 1976 and served previously as assistant manager in the Shuttle Projects Office. (MSFC Release 77-206)
The NY Times reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, testifying at the Senate hearing on confirmation of his nomination as NASA administrator, had told the committee that no U.S. manned landing on Mars could occur before 1990. If NASA had an operating Space Shuttle by 1980 that could be used to assemble a vehicle in space and to store the fuel needed for a trip to Mars, work on a manned Mars ship could begin in 1984 or 1985 at the earliest, Frosch said, with completion a year or two later. (NYT, June 7/77, 13)
NASA announced it had awarded Computer Sciences Corp. a $41 million contract for support services to communications and instrumentation at KSC, the major site for Space Shuttle launches beginning in 1979. Services would be in 2 categories: the first, covering 3yr, would include modification, installation, operation, and maintenance of an operational intercommunications system, operational TV system, and checkout-control-monitor subsystem. The second category, lyr with 2yr option to renew, would cover KSC work on communications, measurements, telemetries, computer services, data storage and retrieved, program planning, and reliability and quality assurance. (NASA Release 77-104; KSC Release 104-77)
ARC announced selection of 10 women volunteers aged 35 to 45 with nontechnical backgrounds as test subjects in an experiment to help set medical standards for future Space Shuttle passengers. The experiment, ope of a series using varying ages and sexes, would require 9 days of total bedrest to simulate weightlessness, and occasional spins in a centrifuge to simulate Shuttle reentry. Results would show whether or not age and gender affected the ability to cope with spaceflight. (ARC Release 77-15; NASA Release 77-61)
Fifteen yr almost to the day after the U.S. placed its first man in earth orbit, NASA would begin flight tests of the Enterprise-first Space Shuttle orbiter off the assembly line—to be carried piggyback on a Boeing 747 on Feb. 11, 1977, for its first trip through earth’s atmosphere. The flight of Marine Lt. Col. John H. Glenn on Feb. 20,1962, lasted less than 5hr; since that flight, the U.S. had accumulated 22 504 man-hours in space by using 43 astronauts on 31 separate manned missions that included 9 trips around the moon, 6 moon landings, and 3mo earth-orbital missions on Skylab. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft Friendship 7 weighed only 1315kg, with barely enough room for the pilot and a few instruments, and had parachuted into the Atlantic after its one-time use. The orbiter would weigh 67 500kg empty, could carry up to 7 crew members, and was designed to land on a runway and be prepared for another flight within weeks. In contrast to Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, Spacelab missions carried by the Shuttle might last from 7 to 30 days. First of 6 orbital tests of the Shuttle was set for 1979, and operational flight for 1980. (NASA Release 77-21; NASA pre-ALT rept Feb 11/77)
NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise successfully went through its fourth free flight with its streamlined 57001b tailcone off, increasing drag and reducing the altitude achievable by its 747 carrier (to about 18 000ft) as well as the distance it could glide after separation. Three previous free flights, tailcone on, had lasted about 5.5min each; this time the Enterprise, fitted with 16 0001b of dummy engines with nozzles 8ft in diameter, wide enough for a man to stand upright in, would have a glide time of only about 3 min. Pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly, alternating at the controls of the orbiter, brought it to a stop on a runway at Edwards AFB after recording a touchdown speed of 212mph and 5000ft of landing roll. NASA’s goal had been no more than 9000ft of landing roll, showing that the orbiter could land at any major airport in the world. Fitzhugh L. Fulton, pilot of the 747 carrier plane, said the aerodynamic resistance created by the dummy engines had caused “heavy shaking” on both the orbiter and the 747 during the hr-long ascent to launch altitude. Tom McMurtry, copilot of the 747, said the turbulence resembled “what you might get in a commercial airliner . . . only we couldn’t change altitudes to get away from it as an airline pilot does.” NASA officials said the last free flight, scheduled for Oct. 26, would end with the microwave landing system controlling the touchdown. (DFRC Release 31-77; postflt rept, free fit 4, SpSh orbiter ALT; NYT, Oct 13/77, A18; WPost, Oct 13/77, C-ll; LA Times, Oct 13/77,1; JSC Roundup, Oct 14/77, 1; W Star, Oct 13/77, A-10; C Trib, Oct 13/77, 1-13)
A Space Shuttle orbital-maneuvering system engine had completed acoustic environment testing at JSC, and a second engine had fired 1000 times in life-cycle testing at the White Sands, N.M., test facility, Aviation Week reported. The latter achievement demonstrated the engine’s ability to perform 100 missions, a project requirement. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 13)
Two main items in NASA’s $4 billion budget request for FY 1978 — the Jupiter-orbiter mission and the Space Telescope—had met with strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported in the NY Times. The items were two of three major new starts sought by the agency; the third, a new earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C), had not been opposed, nor had additional funding for Space Shuttle development. NASA officials had not expected opposition to the Jupiter project, which had the endorsement of numerous scientists and the White House and had been authorized for eventual development by both houses of Congress. However, Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) had persuaded the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which he chaired, to block funds for the Jupiter project in view of charges by many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of its funds on planetary science rather than on deep-space astronomy, which would be the aim of the Space Telescope. The House Appropriations Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote accordingly. NASA had concentrated its Jupiter appeal on the Senate appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime critic of NASA spending, who had nevertheless been impressed by JPL officials who argued that the Jupiter project should receive immediate funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982 when Jupiter would be relatively close to earth, which would not occur again until 1987. Without the new start, JPL would have to lay off 300 to 400 scientists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch of two Voyagers this summer. If the Senate should approve the Jupiter project and reject the telescope, a conference committee would have to settle the matter; NASA might have to choose between the two projects, or to start both with greatly reduced first-year funding, Wilford noted. (NYT, June 10/77, A-17; Nature, June 23/77, 659)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded to the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti., a contract modification for additional work and services to the Space Shuttle main engine program, covering long leadtime hardware and material procurement to provide follow-on engines. Each engine, designed for use up to 50 times before overhaul, would be capable of 1 668 075 newtons (375K lb) of thrust at sea level and 2 090 654 newtons (470K lb) at altitude. (MSFC Release 77-78)
MSFC announced award of a $110 096 contract to General Dynamics Convair Div., San Diego, Calif., to study and define ideas for an automatic structural-beam fabrication machine for use in the Space Shuttle [see Mar. 1]. The beams, made of a composite material, would support large scale space structures and act as electrical and thermal insulators. (MSFC Release 77-72)
The Washington Star reported that U.S. and European scientists were planning a two-spacecraft mission to an unexplored area of space to get a first look at the sun and its solar system from a new perspective. No spacecraft had as yet ventured off the so-called plane of the ecliptic (the solar equatorial plane) by more than 15° latitude relative to the sun. Using two spacecraft, one below the plane of the ecliptic and the other in the usual latitude relative to the sun, scientists could learn more about solar physics and conditions responsible for variations in earth’s climate. The mission would use two unmanned spacecraft weighing 6S0 to 8001b each, launched by a Space Shuttle. The report said NASA would request funds for the “solar polar” (or out-of-ecliptic, OOE) project in its next budget, giving engineers time to meet a favorable 10-day launch period in Feb. 1983. ESA, whose members included most western European nations, was said to be ready to share in the mission; it would build one of the vehicles, the U.S. the other. JPL would manage NASA’s part of the mission, estimated to cost about $141 million. (WStar; Oct 31/77, A-6) During October: The USAF reported that the first two-seater F-16 airplane, a fighter-trainer version known as F-16B, had made a successful first flight at General Dynamics Corp.’s Ft. Worth, Tex. facility. The test flights were to evaluate the handling of this version, weighing 6001b less than the standard single-seat F-16 when fueled, and to use rear-cockpit controls to put it through takeoff and landing, formation flying, and roll and pitch. The one- and two-seat versions of the F-16 were almost identical in size and appearance, each 48ft long with a 300ft2 wing area, but the F-16B had a larger canopy to cover the second pilot and would carry 1100 fewer gallons of fuel. Development of the new plane, first fighter designed to withstand forces up to 9g, was managed by the Aeronautical Systems Division at Wright Patterson Air Force Base. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 77, 1) •
MSFC announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Aerospace’s Denver division a $928 217 contract for construction work on a test stand for the Space Shuttle program. Modification of the giant hydrodynamic support system last used for Saturn V dynamic tests in the 1960s would allow mating all elements of the Shuttle for vertical ground tests scheduled to begin in 1978. The complete vehicle (orbiter, external tank, and two solid fuel rocket boosters) would occupy the stand together for the first time. (MSFC Release 77-79)
NASA announced it had selected 5 materials-processing experiments to be flown on an early orbital-test flight of the Space Shuttle beginning in 1979. The Materials Experiment Assembly (MEA) would offer scientists an interim opportunity to conduct studies before Spacelab missions began; it would be automated and unattended, containing its own power source and a minicomputer to collect data. Principal investigators and their experiments were Dr. J. Bruce Wagner, Jr., Ariz. State Univ.—solid electrolytes containing dispersed particles; Ralph A. Happe, Rockwell Inti.—containerless preparation of advanced optical glass; Dr. Herbert Wiedemeier, Rensselaer Polytechnic Inst.—vapor growth of alloy-type semiconductor crystals; Dr. John W. Vanderhoff, Sinclair Laboratories, Lehigh Univ.—large-particle-size monodisperse latexes; Dr. S.H. Gelles, Gelles Associates, Columbus, O.—liquid miscibility gap materials. (NASA Release 77-222)
During confirmation hearings, Dr. Frank Press, President Carter’s nominee as director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, had stated that NASA should broaden the scope of its technology-transfer efforts and its planned use of the Space Shuttle, AvWk reported. The administration should continue funding planetary exploration and space science (areas adaptable to the Shuttle’s unique capabilities), but should also make NASA’s technological knowledge available to industry. Press, former chairman of MIT’s Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, had specialized in earthquake research and detection of underground nuclear tests. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 21)
DOD would request $2.77 billion for space-related activities in FY 1978, $478.5 million more than its FY 1977 appropriation, Defense Daily reported. The increase, resulting from procurement of the Navstar global positioning satellite system and increased DOD activity on the Space Shuttle, would include costs of ground security at JSC and KSC for defense-related Shuttle payloads. DOD had planned to use the Shuttle for critical manned military observations, and had agreed on a formula to reimburse NASA for launching military payloads. (DD, Mar 15/77, 57)
DFRC announced that the first manned test flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter, previously scheduled for May 26, had been postponed to a date no earlier than June 9, depending on successful completion of orbiter ground tests. The manned test would begin the second phase of Shuttle approach and landing trials to verify aerodynamic and flight-control characteristics of the orbiter. Cause of the postponement was delay in orbiter systems checkout and verification testing after completion in March of the first flights of the orbiter linked to its 747 carrier. (DFRC Release 18-77)
The Washington Star reported that the first Space Shuttle fuel tank emerged from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans on its way to tests at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Miss. NASA contractor Martin Marietta had built the 520 OOOgal tank, half as long as a football field, at a cost of about $2.5 million. If successful, as many as 500 similar tanks would be built during the next 15 to 20yr. The 153ft-long tank, almost 30ft in diameter, was built of aluminum alloy and was disposable, designed to fall away and disintegrate in the atmosphere just before the Shuttle reached orbit. Shuttle flights would cost about $10 million each, as compared to $150 million each for earlier launches. (W Star, Sept 10/77, A-3)
NASA announced it would conduct the third “manned inert” flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about July 26 at Dry den Flight Research Center. At the controls of the orbiter atop its Boeing 747 carrier would be astronauts Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton, making their second piggyback run in this test series. They had made the first captive flight June 18; the second, on June 28, had Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. In the first flight, lasting 56min, Haise and Fullerton had checked out the orbiter flight controls at low altitude and low speed. For the third test, the 747 would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7895 meters (25 905ft) where it would “push over” in a practice separation; the orbiter and 747 crews would go through all the motions except actual separation. The flight would be a dress rehearsal for the first free flight of the orbiter, scheduled on or about Aug. 12. (NASA Release 77-146; JSC Release 77-41)
Nature magazine reported that the NASA budget had met unexpected opposition in Congress, endangering 2 major scientific missions: the large space telescope, long regarded by space scientists as NASA’s top-priority project, and the Jupiter orbiter probe planned as a twin launch in 1982 of craft to orbit the planet and send probes into its atmosphere. Lobbying by NASA and the scientific community might rescue the projects, but loss of either would be a serious blow to the agency’s program. Nature said this yr’s efforts would be crucial because space science money had been squeezed out of NASA’s budget for 4yr to pay for the Space Shuttle, and further delay would probably kill future chances for approval of these missions. (Nature, May 19/77, 196)
MSFC reported that its homemade Shuttle orbiter [see Nov. 23] had made its practice run through the center and had played stand-in during practice hoists into the 430ft (131m) test stand where the Enterprise would be mated to the other Shuttle components for the first time. Werner H. Rubel, supervisor in MSFC’s product planning branch, said the idea and design for the stand-in orbiter had originated in his group, where Jerry B. Bennich and John L. Ransburgh had done the engineering work; the mockup and prototype assembly branch had performed final assembly. (MSFC Release 77-232) MSFC announced successful completion of the first loading test of the Space Shuttle external tank to ensure that tne test article, test facility, and hardware could handle the super cooled propellants (liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen) to be used by the Shuttle main engine. (MSFC Release 77-234)
NASA announced it had awarded a cost-plus-fee contract worth about $43.5 million to McDonnell Douglas Technical Services, Inc., Spacelab Integration Division, Huntsville, Ala., for Spacelab integration. The contract, lasting from March 1977 through Dec. 1983, would include design, development, manufacturing, and operational testing of NASA’s Spacelab components. NASA planned to provide all operational services including flight operations, crew training, and maintenance, after the European Space Agency delivered the lab. Spacelab would remain in the Space Shuttle cargo bay to perform earth observations and experiments in materials science, physics, life science, communications, navigation, and space systems. (NASA Release 77-47)
The United States planned to orbit in 1983 a 9080kg 645cm telescope that would observe images almost to the edge of space and the beginning of time, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. “Without the blurring of the atmosphere,” said Dr. John Bahcall of Princeton Univ.’s Institute for Advanced Study, “we would be able to see things that are 10 times smaller than we have seen, or 10 times farther away. It would be like reading the writing on a quarter that we could only tell was round before.” If approved by Congress, the $435 million Space Telescope would be carried from earth by astronauts manning the Space Shuttle. The telescope would investigate quasars radiating thousands of times the energy generated by ordinary stars of the same size, and would observe the birth of stars, map nearby planets and galaxies, and compute distances to the nearest stars. In addition to optics half the size of Mount Palomar’s, the Space Telescope would carry lenses and instruments to scan ultraviolet and infrared spectra not accessible to earthbound telescopes because of atmospheric blockage. The telescope would relay its views to earth using geostationary satellites over the U.S. NASA would send Shuttle astronauts to the telescope every 5yr to replace wornout or damaged parts. (W Post, Jan 21/77, C-24)
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert A. Frosch, and Hans Matthoefer, minister for research and technology for the Federal Republic of Germany, had signed a memorandum of understanding for participation in a Jupiter orbiter/probe mission to be launched by the Space Shuttle in 1982. The mission would send an orbiter and a probe on the most detailed investigation to date of the environment and moons of Jupiter, the first opportunity for 114 investigators to measure Jupiter directly as well as remotely from various orbital positions over a long period of time. The orbiter, carrying 10 instruments, would circle Jupiter for at least 20mo; the probe, carrying 6, would plunge into the atmosphere. West Germany would provide a retropropulsion module to inject the orbiter into its path around Jupiter, as well as the scientific instruments and the services of 14 German investigators in preparing the two spacecraft and analyzing their data. JPL would manage the U.S. project, ARC the probe, JSC the Space Shuttle. An office in West Germany would manage FRG’s share. (NASA Release 77-211)
Spacelab, ESA’s manned reusable space laboratory scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments in life, physical, and materials science, Nature reported. Although Spacelab’s multinational management and unique financing scheme (ESA members would pay for the laboratory on a voluntary basis) could limit its scientific potential, participants would receive a proportionate share of construction contracts and experiment facilities. Management problems included the question of apportioning payment of NASA’s $10 million launch fee. (Nature, April 7/77, 491)
Project Halo (high-altitude large optics), a space-based system proposed by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency to detect and track foreign missiles and aircraft, would require 6 Space Shuttle payloads to orbit its structures and equipment, AvWk reported. ARPA’s Halo research had focused on systems analysis, infrared focal planes, optics, cryogenic cooling, power sources, data utilization, and phenomenology. CAvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
MSFC reported successful completion of structural tests on the Space Shuttle external tank’s intertank section, carrying the attach points for the Shuttle’s two solid-fuel rocket boosters and subject to heavy loading both on the launch pad and during flight while the boosters were thrusting. MSFC engineers would now proceed with vibration tests on the forward portion of the external tank, the liquid-oxygen container, attached to the intertank. Structural tests would follow later in 1978. (MSFC Release 77-212) •
NASA announced it had issued proposals to buy 6 spinning solid fuel upper stages (SSUS) for boosting spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle into higher orbits. The decision was the first step following agreement earlier this yr with McDonnell Douglas and Boeing Aerospace, allowing them to design, build, and test the devices and market them independently of NASA. The agency as part of a procurement agreement would normally bear cost of development and production; the current bidding would be limited to the 2 companies that had agreed to develop the stages with private funds. The purchase would include hardware, analyses, logistics, and services needed to put a spacecraft into higher orbit after launch and orientation by the Space Shuttle. The contractor would build the vehicle, provide services, and operate the systems. First delivery in Dec. 1979 would be a flight demonstrator; 3 others would launch advanced Intelsat V comsats; the other 2 would serve for other missions. (NASA Release 77-101; MSFC Release 77-90)
JSC announced that three life sciences specialists would begin a 7-day simulation of a typical Spacelab mission planned for the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Living aboard a high-fidelity mockup of the Spacelab and Shuttle-orbiter crew deck would be physician Dr. William E. Thornton, mission specialist, and Dr. Carter Alexander, payload specialist, both of JSC, plus payload specialist Dr. Bill A. Williams of ARC. Dr. Thornton would perform medical monitoring and health services for the simulation crew. ARC had shipped a rack of 20 life sciences experiments to JSC for the simulation, and JSC had provided 6 other experiments. Life sciences payloads like the simulation experiments would be flown on the Spacelab missions to show the effects of space on living organisms, improve health care for the crews of actual missions, and help in designing life-support systems for space and earthbound clinical research and health care. (JSC Release 77-32) May IS: NASA announced the expected arrival of a USSR research ship off the Virginia coast near Wallops Flight Center about June 1 to participate in a series of rocket launches to investigate ionization sources in earth’s upper atmosphere. The research ship Professor Vize would operate offshore as the Soviet launch platform. The joint American-Soviet particle intercalibration (JASPIC) project would compare techniques used by both nations to measure the intensity of electrons and protons entering the lower ionosphere, and to define the role of these particles in nighttime ionization of the lower ionosphere in the midlatitudes, thought to cause high-latitude auroras. The researchers would base comparisons on results of 4 sounding-rocket launches from Wallops and 5 Soviet MF-12 rocket launches from the ship. One of the NASA rockets would release a chemical cloud that might be visible over the east coast. A similar joint activity in Aug. 1976 had launched 22 pairs of rockets over a 2wk period. U.S. and Sov et scientists had decided in 1975 that discrepancies shown by the scientific literature in measurements of ionosphere energetic particles might arise from instrumentation differences, and had agreed to joint measurements and subsequent comparisons at the same time and place. (NASA Release 78-71)
NASA announced that the largest Space Shuttle component—its external propellant tank—would roll off the assembly line in New Orleans Sept. 9. The huge tank would then go by barge to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories in Miss, for the first static firing of the Shuttle main engines. The external tank consisted of 2 propellant tanks and an intertank structural connector; the forward tank would contain liquid oxygen, the larger aft tank liquid hydrogen. It would be the main structural member carrying the orbiter and the two solid-fuel rocket boosters. At launch, the tank would feed cryogenic propellants to the three main engines on the orbiter; the solid-fuel rocket boosters on each side of the external tank would use their own fuel and would separate about 2min into flight for later recovery. The mated orbiter and external tank would thrust for another 6min, separating just before the Shuttle reached orbital velocity. The complete external tank was 47m (154ft) long; the Shuttle orbiter it would carry was 37.2m (122)ft long. (NASA Release 77-179)
NASA reported that MSFC had received 119 proposals for experiments in materials processing to be performed on Space Shuttle and Spacelab flights. As lead center for the Spacelab program, a cooperative venture of NASA and ESA, MSFC had been given project management responsibility for the first three Spacelab payloads. An MSFC team had evaluated the proposals, and the center would announce selection of between 10 and 20 experiments by the end of July. (NASA Release 77-103; MSFC Release 77-91)
Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR, late in Dec. to begin training for flight positions on Soyuz/Salyut missions. Flight candidates from Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania were to arrive for training at the center during 1977. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9) February I: NASA announced it had received 1147 applications for its Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least 15 pilot and 15 mission specialist candidates. Deadline for applications would be June 30, 1977. Those selected would report July 1, 1978, to Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; appointment as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of the course. NASA had mailed 11 822 applications to persons outside the agency, and another 350 to employees at NASA centers. All the applications received so far had been from civilians; the astronaut selection board would receive applications from members of the military services just before the deadline. Most of the applications were for the mission specialist category: 922 for that group, 225 for pilot, and 118 for both. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would be responsible for vehicle systems. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in areas of consumables usage, experiment operations, and crew activities. Crews would number up to seven: commander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists (who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors of the payload being flown). Payload specialists would operate specific payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to recruit qualified minorities and women as Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 77-18)
NASA announced that MSFC had issued requests for proposals from industry to make studies of, and supply data for NASA to use in developing techniques for packaging, transporting, fabricating, erecting, and operating large structures in space, in preparation for a major demonstration in space in 1983 or 1984. An early Shuttle flight would carry an automated beam-fabrication module to make aluminum structural members; later flights would demonstrate use of both aluminum and composite materials. After a few beams were manufactured on early flights, later missions would perform limited assembly, culminating in fabrication and erection of a large structure for continuing use, such as a lOOkw solar-power facility to supplement onboard Shuttle power for various experiments. The capacity demonstrated in these missions would aid in creating a more complex assembly as part of a space-construction base in 1985 or thereafter. The proposal called for completion in 9mo and another 2mo to prepare a report. MSFC would receive proposals until Mar. 18, 1977, and would manage the study project for the Office of Space Flight. (NASA Release 77-35)
MSFC announced it had awarded a $276 597 contract to Bryson Construction Co., Decatur, Ala., for modification of the Redstone Arsenal airfield to accept the Space Shuttle and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft. The contractor would install a concrete pad 75m long and 55m wide for a derrick to unload the orbiter from the 747. (MSFC Release 77-56)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its first free flight at Edwards Air Force Base in Calif, with a “flawless landing” on a runway in the Mojave desert 53min 51sec after taking off at 8am local time (11am EDT) and 5min 22sec after release from its 747 carrier. Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Charles Gordon Fullerton were the Enterprise pilots; veteran test pilots Thomas C. McMurtry and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew the Boeing 747. Spectators, estimated to number about 70 000, had begun arriving the previous night (Thursday, Aug. 11) to cheer the landing just after 9am local time with the desert temperature nearing 100°F. The orbiter had separated from its carrier 3min late because the heat of the air had slowed the climb. The 747 had “strained its engines” to carry the 73ton Shuttle as high as possible; it had climbed to 27 000ft (8100m) before it started downward, in order to gain speed. The 122ft-long orbiter, released at 22 100ft (6738m) altitude, had soared one way, the 747 another, to ensure separation. Pilots of the T-38 chase planes following the flight had assured the crews of the 747 and the orbiter that they were clear of each other. “Thanks for the lift,” Haise told the 747 crew as the craft separated. Haise had rehearsed the free flight the previous day in a small twin-engine jet modified to behave like the Shuttle. Actual separation, which could not be rehearsed in advance, was the only way to prove that the Shuttle would lift cleanly over the tall vertical tail fin of the 747. Separation had occurred without difficulty, however, and both pilots reported themselves delighted with the orbiter, which had handled in unORIGINAL PAGE- 53 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 QF POOR QUALITY Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise separates from its Boeing 747 carrier in first free flight, August 12, 1977. (NASA 77-H-552) powered flight as easily as design engineers had predicted. It was “a lot like flying a Concorde,” according to Haise, and Fullerton described it as a "very crisp, very stable airplane.” On the orbiter’s way down, Haise had pulled up in three inflight “flare” maneuvers to test its landing characteristics. One of the identical redundant computers on the orbiter had failed at separation, cutting off flight-control accelerometers, without affecting the flight. The Enterprise landed like a glider, without engines, relying on its battery of computers and “the most advanced control system ever installed in a spacecraft.” It had approached the ground at an 11° angle, more than 3 times as steep as a commercial jetliner’s approach, and at a speed of 338kph (210mph) compared to a typical 747 landing speed of 170mph. The orbiter had touched down a mile in front of the aiming point, because Haise underestimated its glide capability; it had rolled another 2mi before stoppping. For this first free flight, the orbiter wore a tail cone over its three aft rockets; on the fourth flight, scheduled for Oct., NASA would remove the cone, causing the orbiter to land more steeply (as it would upon returning from space). In regular use, the Shuttle as a weight-saving measure would have no power after firing its rockets to deorbit, no airbreathing engines for maneuvering in the atmosphere; it would be slowed by air friction only and would glide down at 200mph or more to a landing. For the actual spaceflight early in 1979, the Shuttle would ride into orbit pushed by solid-fuel rocket motors on a giant external tank and by the liquid-fuel rockets on its tail. Purpose of the free flight exercises was to verify the orbiter’s subsonic airworthiness, the operation of the integrated system, and the pilot-guided vs. automatic approach and landing capabilities. The ability to land at an airport instead of parachuting into the ocean gave the Shuttle the “versatility and economy required to make space operations routine in the next decade,” according to the W. Star. (NASA Release 77-160; NASA Actv., Aug/77, 2; NYT, Aug 13/77, 1; WPost, Aug 13/77, Al; WStar, Aug 13/77, A-3; B Sun, Aug 12/77, 7; C Trib, Aug 13/77, 1-1; Time, Aug 22/77, 64)
MSFC reported plans to request another $18 610 000 in NASA’s FY 1978 budget for construction or modification of facilities to be used in building the Space Shuttle external fuel tank (ET) at the Michoud assembly facility (MAF) near New Orleans. With addition of a chemical waste-treatment plant and alterations of the manufacturing, vertical-assembly, final-assembly, and checkout buildings, MAF could produce 28 ETs each yr. (MSFC Release 77-35)
The $500-million Space Shuttle with no crewmembers aboard took its first ride over the Calif, desert, carried piggyback on its converted Boeing 747 for a 2hr test at nearly 5km altitude. Operating the 747 were veteran NASA test pilot Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr.; copilot Thomas C. McMurtry; and flight engineers Victor W. Horton and Lewis E. Guidry, Jr. The Enterprise, prototype of the reusable craft designed to carry cargo and scientists into space in the 1980s, was secured to the 747 by mounts at its nose and tail; the combination craft stood almost 20m from the ground to the top of the orbiter’s tail. The explosive bolts provided to separate the two craft in free flight were armed during this first test, in case of emergency. NASA officials said the weight of the Enterprise (about 65 000kg) did not strain the capacity of the 747, which weighed nearly 200 000kg empty and had carried much greater loads in cargo and passengers. “Most of the time we couldn’t even tell the Shuttle was here,” Fulton said after the flight, which reached speeds of about 450kph as the crew turned and banked the combined ships, shut down some of the 747 engines, and performed other maneuvers to check stability. The Enterprise would be unmanned during the next 5 combined test flights; in May, a 2-man crew would conduct 6 more tests of the 747/orbiter combination, and in July the orbiter would be released from its carrier for a series of unpowered flights. (W Post, Feb 19/77, A3; W Star, Feb 19/77, A-8)
The Washington Post said NASA was looking for “someplace else to land the space shuttle.” Its second free flight had been postponed when Hurricane Doreen turned the planned landing strip (a dry lakebed at Edwards AFB) into a “mud puddle.” A NASA source said officials had investigated other sites for the flight, tentatively rescheduled to Sept. l.(W Post, Sept 1/77, A-27)
NASA announced it had scheduled the second free flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about Sept. 13 at DFRC with astronauts Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. The free-flight test series called for 3 more flights before the orbiter would go to MSFC for vibration tests early in 1978. (NASA Release 77-186)
MSFC reported on the first meeting of a science working group for a proposed earth-orbiting system called Advanced X-Ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), to study stellar structure and evolution, large-scale galactic phenomena, active galaxies and galactic clusters, and cosmology. Chaired by Prof. R. Giacconi of Harvard Univ. and representing universities and government laboratories working on x-ray astronomy in the U.S. and Europe, the group would define the scientific requirements. The 12.8m (42ft) craft weighing about 9000kg (20 0001b) would be designed for Space Shuttle launch and repair or retrieval in orbit. (MSFC Release 77-227)
MSFC announced that a special hammer developed in the 1960s for Saturn fabrication had solved a major problem of manufacturing external tanks for the Space Shuttle. Martin Marietta Aerospace, prime contractor for the tanks, in welding four large sections of a liquid-oxygen container at the Michoud assembly facility, had found that peaking of the weld joints left some areas as much as 5° out of tolerance. The special tool MSFC had created for removing distortions in component welds would not impact a surface in the usual sense but, when in contact with the metal, would send a hydrodynamic force uniformly into the thickness of the metal when an electrical charge dumped into the hammer’s coil created an expanding magnetic field. The field would exert an evenly distributed three-dimensional force that would remove the distortions without leaving hammer marks on the target. After Robert M. Avery of MSFC’s Materials and Processes Laboratory showed how to use the tool at the Michoud facility, the contractor was able to remove most of the distortions during the week of demonstration. Two working hammers would remain at the plant for future use. (MSFC Release 77-21)
MSFC announced it had selected General Electric Co. of Valley Forge, Pa., to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for a prototype Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) to be flown on a number of Spacelab missions carried by the Space Shuttle [see June 22]. The prototype with software and spares was due for delivery to MSFC by Oct. 1, 1979, and to KSC for Shuttle launch by Jan. 1, 1980. (MSFC Release 77-124)
JSC announced award of a $5 189 500 supplement to an existing contract with Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division, Downey, Calif., covering 8 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter to accommodate the European-built Spacelab in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. (JSC Release 77-26)
JPL announced that NASA had followed its recommendation and selected a 12-bladed spinning solar sail spacecraft as a candidate for the automated interplanetary shuttle to be used within earth’s solar system in the 1980s and beyond. Also known as a heliogyro, the set of extremely long blades or sails made of reflective aluminized plastic would be deployed in two tiers of six each by centrifugal force after its spacecraft had been launched from the Space Shuttle late in 1981. The spacecraft and its scientific payload, mounted at the center of the heliogyro, would be propelled by photon radiation from the sun to rotate once every 3min. The spinning-sail concept had been chosen by program engineers and designers for development as being more feasible than a square-sail concept that would have used an 850sq.m (half-mile square) sail configuration. NASA would choose in mid-Aug. between the heliogyro and a proposed ion-drive (solar-electric propulsion) spacecraft for a Halley’s Comet mission in 1986. JPL had been working with other NASA centers and a dozen industrial and research groups on parallel efforts to develop low-thrust long-life spacecraft for the 1980s. (JPL Release 826)
U.S. aviation experts had changed their minds about the USSR’s MiG-25 “Foxbat” interceptor plane and now considered it superior to western planes of its type, the Chicago Tribune reported. New Scientist magazine had quoted aviation experts who had examined the Foxbat flown to Japan last Sept, by defecting pilot Viktor Belenko; their conclusions were completely opposed to earlier assessments that described the Foxbat as crude and outdated. Shortly after its landing in northern Japan, the Foxbat had been described as a “manned rocket” less advanced than previously thought. The magazine said that U.S. officials now considered it unsurpassed in ease of cockpit maintenance and a masterpiece of standardization unmatched in the U.S. The experts said they were impressed not only with the speed and rate of climb, but also with the electronics on the Foxbat, now believed to have the most powerful airborne fire-control radar in the world as well as a highly sophisticated computerized flight-communications system that could perform most of the missions without the pilot [see Jan. 26]. U.S. and Japanese experts had examined the Foxbat for 2mo before returning it to the USSR; Belenko, now in the U.S., was still being debriefed. (C Trib, Feb 7/77, 1-2) Orbit parameters reported Feb. 8 were: 281km apogee, 218km perigee, 89.2-min period, 51.6° inclination. This first manned launch of the year was part of a USSR program of earth-orbital research using the Soyuz capsules on a one-mission basis, according to NY Times reporter Christopher S. Wren, who noted that the USSR had continued manned flights while the U.S. was waiting until the Space Shuttle became available in 1979 or 1980. Thomas O’Toole reported in the W Post that the cosmonauts might stay in orbit as long as 2mo; both pilots had been trained for space walks, and the choice of an all-Air Force crew indicated that Soyuz 24 might be a military mission. Tass reported successful docking and occupation of the Salyut 5; it later described housekeeping and biological experiments, plus communications with ocean-going vessels, studies of crystal growth and surface tension, and use of an infrared radiometer for long-distance nighttime observation of earth’s surface and temperatures. The cosmonauts continued exercising with special equipment to measure body functions. On Feb. 21, they tried a new system for recharging the space station atmosphere: Tass said the air was satisfactory, but the test would verify the system for future prolonged flights. A multifunctional system would supply compressed air to control stabilization or to compensate for leaks in the compartments. Tass announced Feb. 23 that the crew had begun preparations for leaving the station. (The unexpectedly early termination of the Soyuz 24 mission recalled reports that the Soyuz 21 mission ended ahead of time because the Salyut 5 environmental-control system had produced an “acrid odor” that “became unbearable” [A&A 76, Oct 18].) A commentary recorded by Gen. Shatalov for broadcast Feb. 24 on the Moscow Domestic Service noted “a whole series of cyclones and strong winds with snow” over the landing site in Kazakhstan. However, the cosmonauts landed safely at dusk Feb. 25 on a farm near Arkalyk on the Kustanay steppe, and were brought to the local airport by helicopter and flown from there to Baykonur. They held a press conference at Baykonur Feb. 24, in which Glazkov called the Salyut 5 spacecraft “a fine old work horse” that had brought them home safely. (NYT, Feb 9/77, 11, B6; WPost, Feb 8/77, A16; Feb 9/77, A12; C Trib, Feb 9/77, 1:12; FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7-26/77; Moscow Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 10-25/77; Moscow Inti Svc Rusn, Feb 9-25/77; W Star, Feb 25/77, A4)
MSFC reported that NASA had issued a request for proposals to integrate mission payloads, in preparation for the first three Spacelab missions and the sixth Space Shuttle orbiter flight test. Integration would include combining a number of experiments into a compatible payload; controlling the configuration during instrument development, testing, and flight operations; and disassembly of the payload after the mission. Proposals, due Aug. 15, would be reviewed by a source evaluation board. (MSFC Release 77-131)
MSFC announced it had requested price quotations on designing a space spider (a device capable of building large-scale structures). The spider, containing prefabricated materials, would attach itself to the core of a planned structure and spin a larger structure, of any diameter, around the core. MSFC engineers had sought estimates of costs and data on the best size of spider to fit inside the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 77-62)
NASA announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for the 30 to 40 openings as Space Shuttle astronauts after a yr-long recruiting effort. Candidates selected would report in 1978 for a 2yr training period at Johnson Space Center. Of the 8037 applicants, 6735 were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot; 1142 of the applicants were women. NASA would announce selections in Dec. 1977. (NASA Release 77-145; JSC Release 77-39)
A 25-article series in Science News by Jonathan Eberhart on the Viking mission won the 1976 AAAS-Westinghouse science writing award Feb. 22, Science reported. Henry S.F. Cooper’s New Yorker article on the Space Shuttle received honorable mention. (Science, Mar 4/77, 864)
NASA announced that four customers had signed up for “getaway special” payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle on a space-available basis beginning in 1980. The small self-contained payloads must weigh no more than 90kg (2001b) each, measure no more than 0.15m3 (5ft3), and require no services such as electrical power or deployment into space. Owners of the research and development packages were R. Gilbert Moore of Utah, a private citizen who offered half his payload to Utah State Univ., which in turn would make the space available to high school students who submitted proposals to fly their own experiments; Dr. L.R. Megill, chairman of the space science experiment committee at Utah State, who funded a payload as a follow-on to Moore and also planned to invite student proposals; and Reiner Klett, representing independent West German researchers, who signed for two payloads, one biological and one for space processing. (NASA Release 77-4)
MSFC announced plans for a teleoperator retrieval system (a retrievable reusable low-thrust stage for maneuvering payloads in low earth orbit) to fly on the Space Shuttle in the early 1980s, its first use probably a Skylab-orbit adjustment to permit revisiting or control its reentry over an open ocean area. Riding into orbit on the Shuttle, the TRS would be deployed and remotely operated by an astronaut aided by a television image from a camera mounted on the TRS. It could also maneuver to higher orbit and return, using its own guidance and computer systems, to be remotely controlled again for retrieval into the Shuttle when it came within range of the TV signal. MSFC would manage development of the TRS, and Martin Marietta would be responsible for vehicle integration. (MSFC Release 77-201)
JSC announced selection of John C. Stonesifer as head of the center’s new life sciences experiments program office, which would manage planning, development, and operation activities at JSC, ARC, and KSC for all such experiments to be carried on the Space Shuttle and other missions in the future. Stonesifer would continue to act as chief of JSC’s bioengineering systems division until designation of a replacement. He had joined NASA at LaRC in 1957 and transferred in 1962 during the Mercury project to the space task group; he had been chief of JSC’s recovery branch before becoming head of bioengineering systems. (JSC Release 77-72)
MSFC officials had said the Space Shuttle main engine might cost nearly twice the original estimate, Today reported. In 1972 when Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Division got the contract to build the engine and deliver 24 units, the estimated cost was $500 million; latest estimate was $450 million more. Project director James R. Thompson and his deputy John Harlow said the increases had resulted not only from design problems and inflation but also from delays and changes ordered by NASA and Congress. {Today, June 25/77, 6A)
MSFC announced it had issued requests for proposals to build a tethered satellite system for launch on an orbiting Space Shuttle. The idea had been to provide long-duration measurement, observation, or performance time in earth’s atmosphere between 80 and 120km altitude, where density would be insufficient to support the flight of aircraft or balloons, but too thick for free-flying satellites. Exploration here had been limited to short-term flight of sounding rockets or low-level satellites. One concept had been to use a 100km cable to “troll” a tethered satellite from an orbiting Shuttle; the pull of gravity, with constant tension on the cable, would keep the captive craft at the end of its string, oriented toward earth. Typical missions for a tethered satellite would be global mapping of earth’s magnetic or gravity fields; cargo transfer between space vehicles; retrieval of satellites or space debris without Shuttle maneuvering; transfer of large amounts of energy to a remote experiment, or from a remote (possibly hazardous) power source to a space station. MSFC would manage tethered satellite activity for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-82)
MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon was on its way to Seal Beach, Calif., to pick up a Space Shuttle orbiter simulator and deliver it to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Mo., to stand in for the orbiter during firings next year of the main propulsion test article, consisting of the simulator with an external tank and thrust structure covering 3 main engines. MSFC had used the Poseidon in the 1960s to move stages of Saturn rockets. (MSFC Release 77-84)
MSFC announced that on Jan. 28 NASA had invited industry to submit proposals for supplying design, development, and manufacture of Space Telescope support systems module and optical telescope assembly. The telescope should permit observation of about 350 times the volume of space now acessible to ground-based telescopes. MSFC said it expected award of contracts by Oct. or Nov. 1977 if Congress authorized the mission and appropriated the necessary funds. The 2.4m telescope, included in NASA’s FY 1978 budget recently submitted to Congress, would weigh about 10 tons. The Space Shuttle would carry it as a payload in 1983, launching it to orbit at about 500km altitude at an inclination of 28.8° to the equator. Once there, it could serve for a decade as an in-space observatory operated remotely from the ground, but would be designed for maintenance and servicing by a space-suited astronaut or for retrieval and return by Shuttle for overhaul and subsequent relaunch. NASA would announce to the scientific community in Feb. an opportunity to submit proposals for scientific instruments to be carried on the Space Telescope for its initial launch. (MSFC Release 77-16; NASA Release 77-19)
