Kennedy Space Center announced it had awarded Planning Research Corporation (PRC), McLean, Va., a $23 626 661 contract extension for engineering support services. Under the 12-mo cost-plus-fixed-fee extension, PRC would continue through May 19, 1979, its design engineering of Space Shuttle equipment and other tasks for KSC’s design-engineering directorate, including design of new and modified ground-support equipment and minor facilities-design support for all KSC programs. The Spaceport and Cape Canaveral in Fla., Vandenberg AFB, and Dryden Flight Research Center had received support under the contract. The extension brought the total contract amount since the original award in May 1974 to $97 306 220. (KSC Release 53-78)
Work on the dynamics test stand had begun in preparation for the next series of Space Shuttle mated vertical ground-vibration tests, the Marshall Star reported. After changing the configuration inside the stand from a “hanging” to a “sitting” arrangement, MSFC engineers would adjust the platform to fit the vehicle assembly. For the first series of tests, the orbiter and external tank had been suspended from airbags on a truss structure high in the stand, to simulate the Shuttle after the solid-fuel rocket booster had separated and before external-tank jettison. The next series would test the ET, orbiter, and SRBs mated in the liftoff configuration; the SRBs would sit on a hydrodynamic support system to which the ET and orbiter had been attached. (Marshall Star, Aug 2/78, 1)
NASA announced it had tentatively selected 4 more experiments for its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) scheduled as a major Space Shuttle payload in 1980. The four scientific experiments—to study hazards to man of ion particles in space, the chemistry of micrometeoroids, the interstellar wind, and cosmic-ray nuclei—would join 23 technology experiments selected for LDEF earlier in 1978 [see Jan. 9]. LDEF, an unmanned reusable free-flying facility carrying technical and scientific experiments mounted in special trays, would offer an easy and economical way to expose primarily passive experiments to the space environment during 6 to 9 mo of LDEF orbit. Selected experiments and principal investigators were: free-flyer biostack experiment, Dr. Horst Bucker, Universitat Frankfurt-am-Main, W. Germany; interstellar gas experiment, Dr. Don Lind, Johnson Space Center; high-resolution study of ultra-heavy cosmic ray nuclei, D. V. Domingo and Dr. K. P. Wenzel of ESA (the Netherlands), and Prof. C. O. Ceallaigh, Dr. D. O’Sullivan, Dr. A. Thompson of the Dublin Inst, for Advanced Studies, Ireland; and chemistry of micrometeoroids, Dr. Fred Horz, JSC. (NASA Release 78-20; LaRC Release 78-5; JPL Universe, Feb 3/78, 1; ESA newsletter, Feb 78, 3)
NASA announced selection of 16 experiments in space technology for the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) mission, scheduled as payload for the first Space Shuttle operational flight in 1980. LDEF, managed by Langley Research Center, was a reusable unmanned free-flying structure carrying various technical and scientific experiments in special trays, providing an easy and economical means to conduct primarily passive experiments in earth orbit. NASA had selected the 16 experiments from 190 candidates that responded to an opportunity notice distributed in June 1976. Investigators selected to date represented 6 universities, 6 private organizations or research institutes, and 5 NASA centers. Seven experiments were from France, 2 from England, and 1 from Canada. R&D value, compatibility with LDEF and other experiments, and effort cost had been selection criteria. Technical areas included materials, thermal-control coatings, detectors, power, micrometeoroids, electronics, lubrication, optics, and space-debris detection. Eighty percent of LDEF’s experiment trays had been filled; the remaining space would contain micrometeoroid-detection panels. LDEF would remain in orbit 6 to 12mo for experiment exposure to space environment. The Space Shuttle orbiter would retrieve and return it to earth; experiments would go to their investigators for data analysis. (NASA Release 78-1)
The JSC Roundup reported on a 2-day conference, “Meeting Our Energy Needs Today and Tomorrow,” with Dr. Peter Glaser, commonly thought of as the initiator of the solar-power satellite concept, as featured speaker. Glaser, designer of three instruments deployed on the lunar surface by the Apollo astronauts, had proposed a solar-power-satellite concept in 1968 before the days of concern with an energy shortage. He said the scientific community had slowly become aware that solar energy “shines brighter than ever as the major energy source.” Glaser summarized the advantages of collecting the solar energy constantly available in space, as opposed to disadvantages of any terrestrial energy source: absence of gravity and weather; avoidance of thermal pollution and waste; and the ability to direct a beam of collected energy to any location on earth, sunny or not, having usable land or not, close to the user or not. Solar-energy development would depend on development of the Space Shuttle, he noted, and was an idea becoming economically attractive and socially acceptable. Microwave and laser beams could transmit this energy to earth; directing a microwave beam accurately had been demonstrated. As for safety, Glaser pointed out that one cannot concentrate microwaves into a weapon system, whereas lasers could be lethal, so that all nations would have to agree that the laser method would never be used as a weapon. Glaser described the phased-array transmitting antenna already constructed on a 5-story-high project in the Aleutian Islands. He estimated 84% solar-power satellite efficiency in producing 30kw of power, as compared to current power plants with an efficiency range of about 40%. (JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 4)
MSFC reported that a new 0.8km (0.5mi) antenna range had operated satisfactorily in testing Space Shuttle antennas for range safety. The new range had a 27.4m (90ft) transmit tower and a 22.8m (70ft) model test tower. Antenna tests had begun in May on a 1/15-scale model of the Space Shuttle orbiter, external tank, and two solid-fuel rocket boosters installed in the tower. Engineers had measured radiation patterns of the six range-safety antennas (two on the ET and two on each of the 2 SRBs) to ensure that a signal from the range-safety officer would reach the vehicle at any altitude. The range-safety antenna system was interconnected to immediately relay to the ET and both SRBs a destruct signal received on any one of the six antennas. Future Shuttle tests possibly requiring antenna-pattern measurements included the teleoperator retrieval system, 25kw power module, large space structures, and satellite power systems. (Marshall Star, June 28/78, 1)
INTELSAT announced it would hold open its offer of a new satellite system for world maritime communications, since its board of governors had authorized continued development of a maritime communications package to be carried on a number of its Intelsat V international comsats as well as further discussions on provision of maritime services by a global-satellite system of three modified Intelsat V satellites and three European MARECS satellites, beginning in 1981. Observers expected that the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT), after its formal establishment, would eventually take over maritime communications. The board also had authorized Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp. to continue studies on maritime-communications equipment sets for its fifth, sixth, and seventh Intelsat V satellites. Although the packages could not increase international communications capacity, they would offer the equivalent of 30 voice circuits for maritime shore-to-ship and ship-to-shore communications and would improve the quality of on-demand voice, telex, telegraph, and data communications. Aerospace Daily reported that the choice between NASA’s Space Shuttle and ESA’s Ariane to launch Intelsat V had been put off until Dec. The board had apparently voted on at least two options, one of which was a compromise using both launch vehicles. The board had deadlocked, because of “a lot of abstentions,” said one source. (INTELSAT Release 78-27-1; A/D, Sept 25/78, 110)
Av Wk reported that Congress might override President Carter’s decision not to fund a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in NASA’s FY79 budget. Congressmen of both parties had said that a 4-orbiter fleet would limit the development of a civilian space program, making the U.S. extremely vulnerable in strategic use of space. Officials who considered addition of a fifth orbiter inevitable had pointed out that Carter’s decision to defer acquisition would increase Shuttle program cost by $235 to $250 million if the administration should later change its mind. Some congressmen had also expressed displeasure with the administration’s apparent inability to provide stated goals and directions for NASA’s space capabilities and with the attempt to cut NASA advance-planning funds. {AvWk, Feb 27/78, 20)
MSFC announced it had awarded RCA Government Systems Division an $880 000 contract to develop and deliver three video-instrumentation tape recorders for use on Spacelab 1 and subsequent missions. Under the contract, RCA would deliver three STAR-4 units before April 1980 for integration into Spacelab program equipment before the first launch planned for 1981. Spacelab crew members would use the units to record visual and analog data during communications blind spots, while the Space Shuttle was out of contact with NASA ground stations. The information would be played back for transmission when communications were reestablished. The units, capable of about 500 record-playback operations between tape changes, could record for 45min simultaneously on one video and two audio channels under computer control. Video bandwidth was 5MHz, audio bandwidths 50 to 8000hz. The instruments would undergo rigorous testing for high performance and reliability, and to ensure equipment compatibility with the manned-spacecraft environment. NASA would install two STAR-4s as part of the Spacelab 1 payload and keep the third as a spare. {Marshall Star, Nov 29/78, 4)
NASA announced it had selected Global Associates, Oakland, Calif., to provide operating services at the Michoud Assembly Facility, New Orleans, La. Services provided under the contract would support NASA program activity and missions of the Depts. of Agriculture, Defense, and Commerce tenanted at the Michoud facility, as well as refuse collection and telecommunications services at Slidell Computer Complex, Slidell, La. MSFC managed both facilities. Under the 1-yr cost-plus-award-fee contract, with four 1-yr options for extension, Global Associates would provide management, personnel, and materials for plant engineering, maintenance, telecommunications, and property and supply, as well as mail, transportation, medical, and food services. Proposed cost over the 5-yr period was approximately $26.5 million. NASA’s primary program at Michoud was manufacture and assembly of external tanks for the Space Shuttle, including those for service as test articles, on test flights, and on operational missions. (NASA Release 78-192)
NASA announced plans to develop hardware systems to support materials-processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle in mid-1981. The materials-processing in space (MPS) program would take advantage of near-weightlessness in earth orbit to eliminate sedimentation in liquid materials and to reduce movement of liquid caused by heat, allowing precise control of processes such as casting and crystal growth. MSFC had asked industry to submit proposals by Feb. 23 for support of 8 materials-processing experiments. on 1981 Shuttle/Spacelab missions, specifically a fluids-experiments system and a solidification-experiments system using a high-temperature furnace; other hardware systems to be developed would support individual experiments and related earth-based systems. The fluid-experiments system would use an area in the Spacelab for optical observation of fluid phenomena; it would accommodate a variety of cells for use in a broad range of experiments. The solidification experiments system would require a multiuse system for processing metals, alloys, eutectics, semiconductors, crystals, ceramics, glasses, etc., in orbit by melting, refining, and resolidification in near weightlessness. Scientists at MSFC’s ground control laboratory would process “control samples” under conditions identical (except for gravity) to those on the spacecraft. (MSFC Release 78-20; Marshall Star, Feb 22/78, 2)
MSFC announced successful completion of the first test of the Space Shuttle external tank, a major milestone leading to firing tests of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system. The Dec. 21 test assured that the main propulsion test article (the test facility and associated hardware) could handle super-cold propellants, liquid hydrogen, and liquid oxygen used by the Shuttle main engine. Propellants used to fill the external tank had flowed through connecting piping to the 3 engines until stopped by the main-engine valve; test engineers then made sure the engines had cooled down to operating temperature, several hundred degrees below zero. A series of static firings of the external tank, a simulated orbiter with a flight aft fuselage, three main engines, and associated piping would validate system operation. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 4)
For 4yr, the LaRC Space Systems Div. and Flight Dynamics and Control Div. had analyzed the Space Shuttle orbiter’s entry guidance and control system at the request of JSC, the Langley Researcher reported. The system had been designed to control the orbiter from deorbit until landing, regulating both the aerodynamic surfaces and a reaction control system (RCS) composed of small rocket thrusters such as those on Apollo spacecraft, so that orbiter control had turned out to be a hybrid between aircraft and spacecraft control. Onboard computers could direct the entire orbiter entry without pilot input, or a pilot could take over control if necessary. A primary tool in the LaRC analysis had been a reentry flight dynamics simulator (RFDS) that permitted evaluation of the onboard-control system in both the automatic and the manual modes. It had also aided in developing alternate control systems to be used by the pilot if the main control system could not handle a situation. The simulator cockpit, though not an exact representation of the orbiter cockpit, did contain all the instruments and controls necessary to simulate flight: cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) showed displays identical to those on board, changing guidance information automatically as the orbiter entered various flight regimes. Push buttons and toggle switches would permit the pilot to take over any of the control functions. LaRC investigators had found that the system was dangerously sensitive to possible sensed angle-of-attack errors in the automatic mode at hypersonic speed. Shuttle astronaut Col. Henry Hartsfield had been unable to maintain vehicle control in the manual mode. This and other problems had led to major system redesign that had been tested at LaRC and found to solve the sensed angle-of-attack problem. Investigators had then begun work on other system problems. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 1)
Cosmonaut Valery Kubasov had spoken of the possibility of joint experimental flights by the USSR’s Salyut-type orbital station and the U.S. Space Shuttle, according to a Tass report. Kubasov noted that such flights could use the joint approach and docking procedures worked out for the Apollo-Soyuz test project and tested during the joint Soviet-U.S. flight of Apollo and Soyuz in July 1975. A new agreement between the USSR and the U.S. on cooperation in space research for peaceful purposes had came into force the previous May, Kubasov pointed out. He added that millions of Americans, like the citizens of the USSR, had viewed the Soyuz-Apollo program as a display of goodwill by the two nations and the beginning of great cooperation between nations in space. However, Av Wk reported that any U.S. Space Shuttle/Soviet Salyut space station joint mission was in deep trouble, if not already dead, because of increased U.S. concern over technology transfer to the Soviets and the current abrasive political climate between the two countries. A NSC interagency committee had reevaluated the entire joint mission idea, while U.S./Soviet discussions on the project were in limbo. The project probably would have been discussed during a planned technology-oriented trip to the USSR by presidential science adviser Frank Press, but the White House had canceled the trip in disapproval of the Soviet treatment of dissidents. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, July 12/78; AvWk, July 17/78, 13)
NASA announced that fabrication and testing of components was continuing at various locations throughout the U.S. in preparation for a scheduled first manned orbital flight of the Space Shuttle September 28, 1979. NASA had accelerated production and installation of thermal protection system (TPS) tile for Orbiter 102, had increased staffs at both the Rockwell facility and the Lockheed plant where the tiles were made, and had obtained new tile-inspection equipment. Testing of the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME) continued at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories; between Sept. 10 and Oct. 12, two engines had been test-fired for a total of 3794sec. Ten of the tests reached rated power level (RPL), accumulating 3096sec. Engine firings through Oct. 11 totaled 350 for 26 530sec total time, including 8909sec at RPL. NASA had scheduled full-duration testing of the three-engine cluster forming the main propulsion system for early in 1979, when the first manned orbital-flight configuration engines would become available. The third static-test firing of a solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) motor occurred Oct. 19 at Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s test site near Brigham City, Utah. Early data indicated the test firing and gimbaling of the motor nozzle were satisfactory. MSFC had mated all the Space Shuttle elements—two SRBs, an external tank, and an orbiter (101)—for the first time in vertical vibration testing to verify that the structure would perform as predicted during various stages of flight. (NASA Release 78-162)
If research now in advanced stages went well, Space Shuttle orbiter crews would enjoy tasty and nutritious meals served in an attractive manner, NASA announced. Menus would be well balanced (3000 calories a day) with hot entrees, “reasonably cold” fruit beverages or dessert, and plenty of condiments. A typical daily menu on the Space Shuttle might be: breakfast—orange drink, peaches, scrambled eggs, sausage, sweet roll, cocoa; lunch—cream of mushroom soup, ham and cheese sandwich, stewed tomatoes, banana, cookies, and tea; dinner-shrimp cocktail with sauce, beefsteak, broccoli au gratin, strawberries, pudding, cookie, and cocoa. Many of the foods (breakfast bars, for example) would come off supermarket shelves. All meals would be prepared with variety in mind, so that a crew would have a different menu for sue successive days; on the seventh day the cycle would begin again. Dining would be from a food tray at a table in the galley, or the tray could be held in the lap or affixed to the wall. Ordinary eating utensils would be used. Foods planned for Shuttle crews included (thermostabilized) thermal/heat-processed foods canned or packaged in laminated foil pouches, such as cheese spread, tuna, beef with barbecue sauce; (intermediate moisture) foods preserved by controlling the available moisture, such as dried apricots, peaches, breakfast bars; (rehydratable) dehydrated foods reconstituted with water, such as scrambled eggs, beef patty, chicken and noodles, all beverages; (irradiated) foods exposed to ionizing radiation to effect preservation, such as bread, rolls, and beefsteak; (freeze-dried) foods with all water removed to be rehydrated, or eaten as is with saliva acting as the moistening agent, such as strawberries, shrimp, bananas; (natural form) foods such as nuts and cookies. All this was far from the space meals of an earlier era, when Mercury and Gemini astronauts had to squeeze various kinds of food into their mouths from tubes, or when floating crumbs had to be recaptured before they got into the instruments. Some of the same people who had pioneered space food preparation were still working at JSC putting together the Space Shuttle food systems. From the beginning of the national space effort, the topic of food had captured the attention of both observers and participants. On short spaceflights, food was not too important; it became a more serious consideration, then a vital one, as crews began to range farther and stay longer. First menus had included only the tubes of paste-like food served at room temperature, lukewarm dehydrated cubes, or a few freeze-dried items. By the time of the long-duration Apollo flights, the types of and systems of preparing space food had become more sophisticated, and new means of heating and cooling had brought improved palatability. A breakthough came during Apollo 8 when the crew was surprised with a home-cooked Christmas dinner: pieces of turkey with most of the trimmings, eaten with a spoon rather than squeezed from a container. The turkey and gravy was a thermostabilized product packaged in a laminated foil pouch, leading to the development of a “spoon-bowl” plastic pack for rehydratable foods into which water was injected through a valve. Contents were spooned out through a zippered opening. Main differences between Space Shuttle food and that served on earlier flights would be greater variety and larger amounts, more efficient handling of food, and more comfortable natural dining arrangements. (NASA Release 78-176)
NASA announced successful completion of the second full-duration ground-static firing of a huge solid-fuel rocket motor to be used in Space Shuttle flights beginning in 1979. Thiokol Corporation’s Wasatch Division, prime contractor for MSFC development of the motor, had conducted the firing at Brigham City, Ut. The 125ft-long (38.1m) motor on the test fixture had fired for more than 2min, reaching a thrust level of 28321b (12 596 736 newtons). The test firing had used 1 102 4001b (500 048kg) of propellants. The contractor had gimballed the motor nozzle early in the test and again later in the firing for about half the total burn time; the solid-fuel rocket booster’s motor nozzles during Shuttle launches would provide directional control for the entire Shuttle assembly. MSFC had scheduled the next test for early summer. (MSFC Release 78-6; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1)
Space platform studies by NASA’s Office of Space Science (OSS) had raised questions about the extent to which OSS would use Spacelab during the 1980s, Aerospace Daily reported. During the next yr or so, users would evaluate cost-effectiveness of the modular Spacelab being developed by ESA to fly in the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay against that of free-flying satellites and larger undefined space platforms. In the meantime, experiments and instruments for Spacelab would be selected partly on the basis of their adaptability to later missions aboard free flyers. Operating-cost estimates and the outlook for funding had tempered earlier OSS optimism about using Spacelab [see Nov. 30]; the platform studies would likewise curb optimism if they substantially described activity that might be carried out better or cheaper on free flyers. A member of the NASA Advisory Council’s space science advisory committee noted at a Spacelab review that NASA could develop two Explorer-class free flyers at about the same cost as a few Spacelab flights. The space platform studies also had some political dangers: NASA had sold Spacelab previously as an integral part of the space transportation system, and would lose credibility if it backed off. However, Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, pointed out to the committee that the platform studies were intended to avoid the Spacelab situation, which had handed science and applications researchers a facility they had little if any role in defining. If NASA proceeded with a platform, Hinners said, it would be because mission requirements had been identified, “not because somebody who likes to build things says, ‘Here it is.’ ” (A/DNov 4/78, 144)
DFRC announced it had begun a 2 wk flight program with Calspan Corp., using the total inflight simulator (TIFTS) to investigate advanced flight-control systems like those used in the Space Shuttle. TIFTS, a small twin-engine commercial passenger aircraft with the nose modified to include an additional pilot’s cockpit, was one of the largest airborne simulators equipped with variable stability and 6 deg of freedom. Test pilots had flown the simulated mission from the nose cockpit (with safety pilots in the normal cockpit) to improve understanding of the flying qualities of advanced craft when landing, especially in actual touchdown under differing pilot-task conditions. (DFRC X-Press, June 30/78, 2)
The USAF had budgeted $664 million for space procurement in FY80, up from $379.6 million in FY79, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Major increases were in the defense support program (early-warning satellite by TRW and Aeroject), up $48 million; the satellite data system (Hughes), up $80 million; the defense satellite-communications systems (DSCS), up $65 million; and the Space Shuttle (Rockwell Inti.), up $73 million. The USAF had planned to buy five satellite systems in FY80: an RCA defense meteorological satellite program (DMSP) spacecraft; a defense support program spacecraft; a satellite data system spacecraft; and two DSCS spacecraft. One spacecraft to be purchased in FY79 would be a DMSP. The Air Force had last purchased boosters (three Martin Marietta Titan Ills) in FY78 and planned none for FY79 or 80, “assuming Shuttle stays on schedule,” a USAF official said. (D/SBD, Aug 10/78, 188)
NASA reported successful static firing of a Space Shuttle main engine Oct. 30 at the National Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss. The firing lasted for more than 13min, testing its ability to return the Shuttle orbiter to a landing site in case of mission abort during launch. The main engine operated continuously for 823sec, longest burn time an engine should require during an actual mission. A Shuttle orbiter would use 3 main engines having a normal burn time of about 8min. (NASA Release 78-173)
MSFC announced it had begun preparations for stress tests of the Space Shuttle orbiter at Lockheed-Calif.’s 430ton (390 metric tons) steel test rig at Palmdale, Calif. The 6-story “reaction frame” rig had more than 350 hydraulic jacks exerting loads on the orbiter to simulate those to be encountered at launch, during spaceflight, and on reentry into earth atmosphere. Lockheed would perform the tests under contract to Rockwell Inti., builder of the orbiter. (Marshall Star, May 17/78, 2)
AvWk reported that the third instead of the fifth Space Shuttle mission would attempt to raise the orbit of the abandoned Skylab space station, bettering chances of Skylab’s remaining in orbit until the Shuttle could come to the rescue. NASA had scheduled the third Shuttle flight for Oct. 1979; the fifth, for Feb. 1980. A Martin Marietta teleoperator propulsion unit carried on the Shuttle to boost Skylab to a higher orbit would be left in space for retrieval by the fifth Shuttle flight. MSFC would build a solar panel for the teleoperator to keep it in orbit for as long as necessary. (AvWk, Jan 23/78, 22)
NASA announced it had selected four American scientists as payload specialists for the second Spacelab mission scheduled for 1981. Those named were Dr. Loren Acton of Palo Alto, Calif., research scientist at Lockheed’s Palo Alto research laboratory; Dr. John-David Bartoe of Reston, Va., and Dr. Dianne Prinz of Alexandria, Va., both research physicists at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory; and Dr. George Simon of Alamagordo, N.M., chief of the solar-research branch at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory. Two of these scientists would be selected to fly on the orbiting space laboratory to operate the scientific experiments; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and assist the two in orbit. The Spacelab investigators’ working group (IWG), composed of Spacelab 2 principal investigators having experiments on the mission, had selected the payload specialists, each of whom was a coinvestigator on one Of the Spacelab 2 experiments. Scientific investigations on Spacelab 2 would be mainly in astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar-physics research, with others in plasma physics, botany, medicine, and space technology. Scientific instruments on the mission would be “pallet only,” exposed to space in the orbiter’s cargo bay. Payload specialists would operate their experiment equipment from the orbiter’s crew cabin, working in shifts to run the experiments 24hr a day. The mission, scheduled for launch from KSC in 1981, would orbit at an altitude of about 450km (250mi) for 9da. MSFC had been responsible for payload specialist training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission. (NASA Release 78-120; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1) August 4\ MSFC announced it had awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., a $2.7 million contract to develop and deliver a flight experiment solar-array wing by May 1980 for a Shuttle orbital-flight test in November 1980. A significant step toward producing large amounts of power in space, the experiment would verify structural and dynamic characteristics of the solar-array wing, its electrical performance, and the readiness of solar-array technology for planetary- and earth-orbit Space Shuttle payload applications. The solar-array wing, 32m (105ft) long and 4m (13.5ft) wide, folded and stored in the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay during launch, would be extended to its full length and retracted several times during the test. When its solar-cell surface was fully extended, the array’s 82 panels would convert solar energy to produce 12.5kw of power. Only three of the panels would be active in the experiment flight. The experimental solar-array wing would demonstrate that use of this technology to augment power for Shuttle and Spacelab could extend mission duration and lead to a solar-electric propulsion stage. Solar-array technology could have Shuttle-payload applications such as space-base construction, satellite power systems, and power modules. NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology had directed the solar-array program as part of a larger effort on solar-electric propulsion for long-term missions in the mid-1980s. (NASA Release 78-123; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1; DSFC X-Press, Aug 11/78, 4; A/D, Aug 4/78, 151; AvWk, Aug 14/78, 15)
After 2 decades as key booster in NASA’s space program, the Atlas Centaur would remain “old reliable” for a variety of planetary, commercial, and military payloads launched in the 1980s, Lewis News reported. The Centaur project had begun in November 1958 when DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) awarded the first contract to General Dynamics after a study recommending a high-energy upper stage for the Atlas launch vehicle. Before the study, Pratt and Whitney had received a contract for a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Since Centaur would be the first space-launch vehicle to use a liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen combination, a whole new technology was needed for handling materials, behavior, fabrication, and testing of liquid hydrogen in a space environment, not only to make Centaur a success but also because this fuel was to be used for the upcoming Apollo program. In 1958 Centaur received its first mission assignment, definition of geosynchronous orbit, and in 1960 its first deep-space mission. The creation of NASA resulted in transfer of the Centaur program from ARPA to NASA in July 1959. LeRC, which had pioneered research in hydrogen technology and had fired an experimental liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine with 50001b thrust as early as 1953, received technical management of Centaur in 1962. The first successful flight of an Atlas Centaur in Nov. 1963 included the world’s, first inflight ignition of a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Centaur had proved its operational capability in 1965 by successfully injecting a dynamic model of the Surveyor spacecraft into a prescribed transfer trajectory, resulting in a simulated lunar-target impact. After successfully launching Surveyor (for the first soft landing on the moon) and Pioneer 11 (for a flyby of Jupiter), NASA in the mid-1960s had directed its efforts to integrating the Centaur with the USAF Titan booster. General Dynamics had built an improved Centaur adaptable to both the Atlas and the Titan boosters; Martin Marietta had conducted studies for NASA on integrating the Titan booster with an improved Centaur, and on modifications needed to the Titan launch facility at ETR. Atlas Centaur missions had included earth-orbiting spacecraft such as the applications technology satellite, orbiting astronomical observatories, Comstar, high-energy astronomical observatories, and FltSat-Com. Atlas Centaur, used for future missions with HEAO and FltSat-Com spacecraft, would remain one of NASA’s prime launch vehicles until the Space Shuttle became fully operational. (Lewis News, July 21/78, 1)
The NYT reported that the Soviet Union had built and bombers drop-tested a new manned space vehicle similar to the U.S. Space Shuttle. The delta-winged reusable vehicle had been dropped from a Soviet Tupolev TU-95 Bear bomber in atmospheric tests of the spacecraft’s aerodynamic and handling qualities, like recent tests of the Space Shuttle. No known space testing of the delta-winged vehicle had occurred, although the Soviets might have begun orbital tests with a second new manned-flight craft with space-tug capabilities. Design characteristics of the test vehicle were apparently similar to those of both the U.S. Shuttle orbiter and the lifting-body research vehicles flight-tested earlier by the U.S. Air Force and NASA. The vehicle strongly resembled the USAF/Boeing X-20 DynaSoar concept, which had been viewed as a space station resupply vehicle before the program was canceled. The Soviet spacecraft was described as smaller than the 150 0001b NASA Shuttle orbiter, but larger than the Soyuz expendable manned transport. The NYT said the new vehicle indicated the USSR believed it had the technology to proceed with building reusable manned spacecraft. (NYT, Mar 21/78, 12)
LaRC reported on its Jan. 17-19 seminar on Large Space Systems Technology (LSST) attended by more than 200 persons who had exchanged ideas on the technology needed to build large space systems in the future. The group had tried to guess what research and technology the multimission needs of the Space Shuttle would be in 1985 to 2000; NASA had scheduled no definite programs for 1985 to 2000, but wanted to ensure performance of economical and well-organized future missions. Seminar subjects included predictions of structural behavior in space, particularly under loads and stresses; advanced materials and techniques for joining various kinds of structures; distribution of controls for large structures; and electronics equipment needed for operation and control of structures. Those attending had represented six NASA centers, 24 aerospace firms, 8 universities, and 4 DOD centers. To continue cooperation between government agencies and industry, LaRC planned to hold a similar seminar yearly. (LaRC Release 78-3; Langley News, Jan. 27/78, 1)
The U.S. Army had devised a charged-particle beam weapon using negative hydrogen neutralized through an exchange cell as an antisatellite-kill mechanism, AvWk reported. The program had been code-named Sipapu, an American Indian word meaning sacred fire. Its application to ballistic-missile defense would be as an accelerator with small angular divergence; an antisatellite version with a range of several thousand km could destroy enemy vehicles without maneuvering to intercept. AvWk said that a smaller adaptation of the device, requiring lower power levels, could be orbited in 2 or 3yr, probably by NASA’s Space Shuttle. The Accelerator Div. at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory had worked on Sipapu for the Army, with USAF participation; the Army’s Ballistic Missile Defense Command would spend $4.3 million this year and $5 million in FY79 for charged-particle beam weapons, and $3 million in the coming yr for high-energy laser weapons. {AvWk, Mar 20/78, 13)
NASA announced it would rotate the Skylab space station 180° in its orbit Nov. 3 because of low temperatures encountered by one of the control moment gyros (CMG) as a result of periodic long-term shading from the sun. The sun angle was a function of the orbit inclination (in Skylab’s case, 50° relative to the equator), the position of the earth around the sun, and certain other seasonal factors. When the CMG, essential to Skylab’s holding a stable attitude, was in shadow for ^xcessive periods, the bearing temperature dropped, interfering with lubrication and increasing friction on the bearings that could lead to possible CMG failure. Turning the Skylab in its orbit before mid-November would expose the CMG to more sun and maintain normal bearing temperatures. The reversed position was not expected to change Skylab’s orbital-life predictions significantly. The maneuver would use none of the remaining nitrogen thruster fuel now on reserve for docking with the teleoperator-retrieval system, planned for the second Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 78-172; Marshall Star, Nov 8/78, 2; JSC Roundup, Nov 10/78, 1; WPost, Nov 4/78, A-6; AvWk, Nov 13/78, 65)
NASA announced Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. biotechnologists and engineers would use frogs on the Space Shuttle as research subjects to study inner-ear balance as the cause of space sickness that had afflicted some astronauts. Under a 6mo contract with Ames Research Center, Lockheed researchers would first study the behavior in space of the frog’s otolith nerve bundle, which closely resembled man’s. Microelectronic sensors inserted in the frogs would periodically feed data into recorders on the ground and in space. Preflight ground-based tests using a centrifuge would furnish baseline data to compare with information obtained in weightlessness. (JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 4; NASA Act, May 78, 10)
NASA reported it had halted MSFC preparations for vibration tests of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise May 12, when the upper dome of the prototype liquid oxygen tank buckled inward while being filled with water. Pressurizing the tank to lib later removed the wrinkles. The tank implosion would delay Enterprise vibration testing, but the program office would have to review delay of the overall Space Shuttle program. (JSC Roundup, May 26/78, 1; Marshall Star, May 10/78, 1)
NASA announced it had made several personnel changes. Richard Smith, deputy director at MSFC, had been appointed deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Hq for a one-yr tour of duty beginning August 15. Smith had transferred to NASA in 1960 from the rocket research and development team at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal, when the development operations division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency had become the nucleus of MSFC. He had managed the Saturn program, and in January 1974 had become director of science and engineering, and later deputy director, of the center. Smith had received NASA’s exceptional service medal for contributions to the Apollo and Skylab programs as well as the medal for distinguished service. (NASA Release 78-112; NASA anno July 19/78) NASA had named Harry Sonnemann deputy chief engineer at Hq, responsible to the chief engineer for managing program assurance, safety and environmental health, and the systems engineering divisions. Sonnemann had come to NASA in October 1977 from the office of the assistant secretary of the Navy, where he was special assistant for electronics and special assistant for antisubmarine warfare and ocean control from 1968 to 1977. He had also worked on the development of large seismic arrays as assistant director for field engineering in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency’s nuclear test detection office from 1964 to 1968. (NASA anno July 20/78) Scientist-astronaut Dr. Joseph Allen had returned to active flight status at JSC’s astronaut office. From August 1, 1975, until his return to JSC, Allen had been director of the office of legislative affairs at NASA Hq; and he would continue those duties in addition to his astronaut duties until a replacement was named. He had returned to JSC as senior scientist-astronaut and was eligible for selection as a Space Shuttle crewman. NASA had selected Allen as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; he had completed the initial academic training and a 53-wk course in flight training at Vance AFB, Okla. Allen had been mission scientist as a member of the astronaut-support crew for Apollo 15, and was staff consultant on science and technology to the President’s Council on International Economic Policy. (NASA Release 78-33) NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Edward Ifft chief of international programs policy at Hq. Dr. Ifft had been a U.S. Foreign Service reserve officer, whose last assignment was director of the State Department’s office of disarmament and arms control. While a graduate student, Ifft spent a yr at Moscow State Univ. under a U.S.-USSR cultural exchange program doing research on low-temperature physics. He had joined the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1967; then moved to the State Department where he had been deputy chairman of the U.S. delegation that negotiated the threshold test-ban treaty in Moscow in 1974; and had participated in negotiations with the U.S. and USSR for a comprehensive test ban. (NASA Actv, July 78)
A simulated Space Shuttle orbiter had represented the Enterprise during practice hoists into the tall tower where the latter would soon be tested, the Marshall Star reported. The real orbiter had recently completed a series of landing tests in Calif, and would next undergo a series of tests at MSFC to see how the orbiter and other Shuttle components would maintain guidance and control under vibration during launch and powered flight. MSFC engineers would use the simulated orbiter to rehearse tests; for example, they had towed the simulator along center roadways to check clearances. The team had then practiced hoisting the simulator into the 131m (430ft) test stand. After completing tests at MSFC, the simulator would go by barge to KSC to check out procedures for launch. Vandenberg AFB had asked to borrow the simulator for its Shuttle launch facilities. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Bethpage, N.Y., plant of Grumman Aerospace Corp. had almost completed fabrication of an automatic device for forming continuous structural beams in space. MSFC had developed the “beam builder” to demonstrate techniques for fabricating large structures in space; the device would form triangular beams from flat rolls of very light materials, a complete section of the beam being easily supported with one hand. Housed in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle in earth orbit, the machine would form continuous miles-Iong beams for building large structures such as satellite power systems and service platforms. (Marshall Star, Apr 12/78, 1)
LaRC reported the White House had issued a statement July 20, 1978, commemorating the ninth anniversary of man’s first walk on the moon. The statement read in part: “Nine years ago today, the world paused to watch two brave men tread the surface of the moon. It was a moment without precedent in human experience, a moment when terrestrial life reached out to touch another world. It is a source of pride for us that those men were Americans. Today, the lunar surface is criss-crossed in a half dozen places with the footprints of American astronauts and implanted with a variety of American scientific instruments. “The Space Shuttle, our next major manned space project, will begin regular, routine economical operation in the early 1980s. ... In the deeper reaches of space, we will continue to seek to expand our knowledge of the solar system and the universe of which we are a part. “As time and technology take us ever more deeply into the space age, it will continue to be our policy to conduct operations in space as required for our national well being and to support the right of all nations to do likewise. In so doing, we remain committed to the underlying principle of the exploration and use of space for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of all mankind.” (Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2; Spaceport News, July 21/78, 1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 4; DFRC X-Press, July 28/78, 4)
NASA announced it had officially designated Space Shuttle orbital flight tests (OFT) as Space Shuttle 1 (SS-1), Space Shuttle 2 (SS-2), etc. Following orbital flight tests, the same designation system would continue for Space Transportation System operational flights. For example, if the OFT phase had consisted of six flights, the next flight (first flight of the STS operational phase) would be Space Shuttle 7 (SS-7). John Yardley, associate administrator of STS, had requested that emphasis be placed on a gradual conversion to the new official designation system. (NASA anno Aug 22/78)
AvWk reported that NASA had been struggling with institutional and funding arrangements for launching a Hughes-built corn-sat, Syncom-4, without giving Hughes the unfair advantage of a free Space Shuttle launch. The problem required prompt attention, because NASA had to make decisions within a few weeks if Syncom-4 was to fly on an early Shuttle mission. Hughes had designed and offered Syncom-4 specifically to fit the Space Shuttle payload-bay design, since NASA had wanted to deploy a test spacecraft on a Shuttle orbital mission. Under the Hughes proposal, the spacecraft would have no significant communications capability, and NASA would launch the unit free of charge; however, the satellite-user community (the state of California, Agency for International Development, and the Interior Dept.) had asked that the spacecraft include some communications capability instead of merely verifying a design. NASA had to decide who would pay for the added capability and whether Hughes would have an unfair advantage. Without a decision, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch said the whole exercise could revert to the original concept, with no significant communications channeled through the satellite. NASA might decide to run an open competition for systems to demonstrate Shuttle-launched communications spacecraft in the same manner as Syncom-4. However, Frosch was concerned that in an open competition Hughes could be “competed out of it in a way that is not quite proper,” since the Syncom-4 concept had been a Hughes innovation. “As it has developed,” Frosch explained to a House appropriations subcommittee hearing, “it is not completely clear that there is a proper solution to this dilemma.” (4v-Wk, Feb 20/78, 60)
NASA announced that Dr. Lo I. Yin, a scientist at GSFC, had demonstrated his invention of a hand-held x-ray device at the annual convention of the National Medical Association in Washington, D.C. The Lixiscope (low-intensity x-ray imaging scope), a gun-shaped instrument weighing about 0.67kg (1.251b), was powered by a single penlight 2.7v battery and a small radioactive source. Although Dr. Yin had not claimed his invention could replace x-ray equipment, he saw its value in mobility—in military situations or sports, for example. Dr. Yin had done this work under NASA’s technology utilization program, aimed at identifying and transferring aerospace technology benefits to the general public. NASA had patented the Lixiscope, and the license would be available at no cost. (NASA Release 78-127) GSFC reported that 100 representatives from U.S. industry and research institutions had met there to discuss possible applications of the Lixiscope, which had originated out of a need for single-photon imaging in x-ray astronomy. The sensitivity of the Lixiscope was so great that it could significantly reduce the dose of radiation received by a patient. Pulling a trigger on the device would unshield the radioactive source and send into the object being examined a low dosage of x-rays to be absorbed by a phosphor screen that would convert them to visible light. Six companies had applied for a license to manufacture or distribute the Lix-iscope, not yet commercially available. NASA had estimated the cost of a mass-produced instrument composed entirely of existing technical components at about $5000. NASA was considering use of the device on the Space Shuttle. (Goddard News, Aug 16/78, 1)
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'
NASA reported that DOD had lent it 5 Navy divers to support simulated weightlessness tests in the Space Shuttle program. The divers, all fleet-salvage men selected for their expertise in erecting or dismantling underwater structures or equipment, had been assigned to the neutral buoyancy simulator at MSFC. Working underwater in full-scale segments of the Space Shuttle, they would assist test engineers with contingency procedures, equipment operation, evaluation of space-construction techniques, and other activities scheduled for Shuttle and Spacelab missions. (NASA Activities, Jan 78, 5)
MSFC had been responsible for a variety of ground tests around the U.S. to prove flightworthiness of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster, the center newsletter reported. Each Shuttle mission would use 2 of the 578 097kg (6Q0ton) SRBs, 45.46 meters (149ft) long and 3.7 meters (12ft) in diameter, each providing 12 232 550 newtons (2.75 million lb) of thrust for about 2min from the launch pad to burnout and separation at an altitude of 45.3km (27mi). Tests at MSFC had put loads on a “short” version of the booster to duplicate load conditions encountered on the launch pad, in flight, during parachute deployment, and in water impact and recovery. Other MSFC engineers had tested the flight system designed to gimbal (or swivel) the motor nozzles at the lower end of each booster to guide the Shuttle on a proper course. Engineers at United Technologies Corp.’s Chemical System Div. near San Jose, Calif., had tested 8 small solid-fuel booster-separation motors, fired simultaneously to separate each SRB and move it away from the Shuttle during flight. Each end of the two boosters would carry 4 motors, a total of 16 on each flight. These would have about 88 960 newtons (20 0001b) of thrust and would fire only about 1 sec each to accomplish separation. The separation motor had completed development testing; the Calif, test series would qualify it for flight. Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. near Brigham City, Utah, had run full-duration full-thrust static firings on the SRB; high-speed sled runs in New Mexico had tested one phase of the SRB’s parachute-recovery system (deployment of the pilot chute only) to see whether the nosecap of the system, when ejected, would clear the vehicle without becoming entangled; and the National Parachute Test Range at El Centro, Calif., had conducted airdrops of the entire parachute system. Other tests of SRB’s electrical system and prelaunch checkout system were in progress. (Marshall Star, Mar 8/78, 4)
The Natl. Academy of Sciences released a report of the ad hoc committee for review of the Space Shuttle main-engine development program. This review was requested by Senators Adlai E. Stevenson (D-Ill) and Harrison L. Schmitt (R-NM) in Dec. 1977 as an independent assessment by Natl. Research Council of the safety of the main engine during both orbital-flight and operational phases of the Shuttle program. The review was to be completed by the end of Feb. 1978 for consideration during FY 1979 NASA authorization hearings. The committee reported that it saw “no reason to suggest that a safe and reliable main engine cannot be developed ultimately for the manned orbital flight tests and the later operational flights,” but submitted a number of recommendations: first, since the flight schedule was not ready yet, the critical milestones should be reviewed later in 1978. Other recommendations included allowance of “adequate time to analyze root problems . . . rather than selecting technical ‘fixes’ to sure symptoms,” as well as a complete tear-down inspection of the main engine after the first and sixth flights (which had not been envisioned in the schedule). At a March 31 hearing before the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space, with Sen. Stevenson as chairman, Dr. Eugene E. Covert of the NRC described the ad hoc committee’s activities and the reasons for its recommendations, expressing appreciation for the cooperation of NASA and its contractors during the review. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, then summarized “the NASA reaction” to the report and its recommendations; Sen. Stevenson commended NASA’s prompt and positive response, but proceeded with further questions on schedule and funding. In addition to NASA staff (including associate administrator John Yardley, MSFC engine project manager J.R. Thompson, Shuttle program director Dr. Mike Malkin, and deputy director Roy Day, and comptroller William Lilly), the Rocketdyne engine project manager Dominic Sanchini was on hand to explain administrative and technical problems encountered with the main engine. The Senate committee report would contain all the testimony, the text of the ad hoc committee report, and further information on specific questions asked by Sen. Stevenson. (Text, hearing report 95-87, Sen Comm Cmte Mar 31/78; “Technical Status of the Space Shuttle Main Engine,” Natl Res Cncl, March 78)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology reported that Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) had called for hearings on the current status of NASA programs. Convened by the subcommittee on space science and applications and chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), the hearings would review NASA projects, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle and the tracking and data relay satellite system. Fuqua said it had been subcommittee practice to hold hearings in the fall before considering NASA requests for new and continuing work in the next year’s budget. John Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems, and William Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would testify Sept. 25. Dr. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, and Dr. Noel Hin-ners, associate administrator for space science, would testify Sept. 26. Dr. James Kramer, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, and Raymond Kline, associate administrator for management operations, would both testify Sept. 27. (H Comm on Sci & Tech Release 95-114) The USSR had launched Venera 12 Sept. 14 with a design and purpose similar to those of Venera 11, Tass announced. Onboard systems were functioning normally, and trajectories of both stations were close to original calculations. Venera 12 would also reach the vicinity of Venus in Dec. 1978. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 14/78)
NASA announced it had appointed Robert Allnutt associate deputy administrator. AUnutt, currently acting assistant general counsel for legislation at DOE, had been deputy assistant administrator for the Energy Research and Development Administration, responsible for program areas including procurement, personnel, labor relations, and construction. Following a career both inside and outside the executive branch, Allnutt in 1970 had been appointed associate general counsel to the congressionally-established Commission on Government Procurement to improve governmentwide policies, procedures, and legislation. In 1973 Allnutt had been appointed staff director and counsel of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, with jurisdiction over federal aerospace research and development activities including all NASA programs. NASA had named Isaac Gillam, IV, director of DFRC, where he had been acting director since the departure of David Scott in Nov. 1977; he had been deputy director there since Aug. 1977. Gillam, an associate fellow of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and a senior member of the American Astronautical Society, had joined NASA Hq in 1963 as a resource-management specialist and had gone to DFRC in 1976 as director of Space Shuttle operations. Before joining NASA, Gillam had served in the USAF. Lt. Gen. Duward Crow (USAF-ret.), assistant to the deputy administrator of NASA, had announced plans to leave NASA Sept. 1, 1978. Gen. Crow had begun NASA service in 1974 as assistant administrator for DOD and interagency affairs. In Oct. 1975 he had become associate deputy administrator of NASA, assuming his present duties following a reorganization in Nov. 1977. Crow had graduated in 1941 from the U.S. Military Academy and had served in the China-Burma-India theatre of operations. He had become comptroller of the USAF in 1969 and was assistant vice chief of staff from Oct. 1973 to July 1974 when he retired. He had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work on the NASA launch vehicles program. (NASA anno June 13/78)
Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
Mechanical failures during tests of the Space Shuttle main engines had threatened to delay the whole program, although the first orbital launch had been scheduled for next year, AvWk and Nature reported. Turbine blades in the engine’s high-pressure fuel pump had failed in 3 separate tests: twice the blades fractured or cracked, the third time a fire that followed the malfunction destroyed the evidence. Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, said that the setbacks had not lessened agency confidence in the basic engine design and that the Space Shuttle program should proceed on schedule; however, he admitted that chances of launching the first manned orbital flight in Mar. 1979 were “considerably less than 50-50.” A committee from the Natl. Research Council had begun in Jan. to assess the nature of engine failures and related problems, and to advise NASA and the U.S. Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space on the engine-development program, according to the NRC News Report. The study centered on the safety and reliability of the engines and had included evaluation of engine design, materials, fabrication, and testing. The Senate subcommittee had requested a report of the study in time to use it in considering NASA’s authorization request for FY79. (Nature, Apr 6/78, 482; AvWk, Apr 3/78, 18; NRC News Report, Apr 78, 1)	'
NASA announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Corp. a $32 million contract to develop a teleoperator retrieval system (TRS), a reusable TV-equipped propulsive device for use by Space Shuttle crews to deliver, stabilize, and recover satellites in orbit. Managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the contract called for delivery of flight hardware by September 1979. The TRS, a low-thrust box-like spacecraft operated from the Space Shuttle by remote control, could be carried in the orbiter cargo bay or left in space after completion of a mission for retrieval by the next Space Shuttle. First mission for the TRS would be a docking with Skylab to boost it into higher orbit or to aid a controlled reentry; a camera on the forward end of the TRS would permit an astronaut to maneuver it for rendezvous and docking, or for other purposes. The TRS would return to the Space Shuttle using its own guidance and control system. (NASA Release 78-96; Marshall Star, July 5/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, July 14/78, 2; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1)
Almost all major structural elements and systems of the first two flight-model solid-fuel rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle had either been delivered to KSC or were scheduled to arrive shortly, the Marshall Star reported. Delivered elements included eight booster-separation motors for one SRB, with eight for the other SRB due within the wk; all major components of the thrust-vector control (TVC) subsystems except the actuators, which were to arrive on Nov. 23; frustums and nosecaps for both boosters; the forward and aft skirts for the left-hand SRB (the aft skirt for the right-hand booster was en route by rail, and the forward skirt was scheduled for delivery Nov. 20); and most of the electrical-systems components. The parachute-recovery subsystem for the left-hand booster was at KSC; the system for the right-hand booster was due Nov. 22. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 4)
The Marshall Star announced it had begun ground-vibration tests of the Space Shuttle, using a computerized shaker system turned on by engineers in instrumentation trailers located near the test stand. The shaker system, the Shuttle modal test and analysis system (SMTAAS), had applied vibration cycles and force inputs and had acquired response information from the vehicle suspended inside a tall stand and canted 9° from vertical. In upcoming months engineers would use SMTAAS to “tune in” to the vehicle’s various vibration modes, comparing responses to mathematical predictions. Results of the tests would allow engineers to verify predictions of Shuttle reaction to the much more severe vibrations expected during launch. (Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78, 1; DFRCX-Press, June 16/78, 2; AvWk, June 19/78, 75)
NASA announced it would physically integrate ail Space Shuttle/ Spacelab experiments at Kennedy Space Center. Extensive analysis and cost studies had confirmed an earlier tentative decision to do the work at KSC rather than at centers managing the Spacelab mission. “Physical integration” consisted of installing experiments on Spacelab’s racks and pallets. After Spacelab operations became routine in the mid-1980s, physical integration should require about 100 civil service and contractor man-yrs per yr at KSC. The analyses required to integrate experiments for each mission would continue at assigned Spacelab management centers. (NASA Release 78-186)
MSFC had designed a geostationary-orbit platform that could perform the functions of more than a dozen domestic communications and weather satellites serving North America, AvWk reported. As early as 1986, NASA could use the Space Shuttle to assemble the platform, first U.S. large space structure in synchronous orbit. NASA would assemble the platform over the course of three Space Shuttle missions, using technology under design at MSFC and JSC. Analysis had predicted that over a platform’s 15-yr lifetime it could save 50% of the cost of operating communications and weather systems now scheduled to be placed in synchronous orbit during that period. Institutional rather than technical barriers had delayed completion of the platform project, but MSFC had reached agreement among common carriers and hardware manufacturers on the savings possible by using the platform. One concern of NASA planners was that grouping communications systems on a single platform would make them more vulnerable to Soviet attack; however, MSFC planned to issue an RFP of about $500 000 for major systems studies in FY79 and FY80 that would constitute Phase A evaluation of typical platform requirements; phase B would require about $1 million for FY80 and FY81 for system design concepts. (AvWk, June 19/78, 67)
NASA announced it had asked scientists to propose experiments for a 1984 mission to obtain a first global view of the Venus surface. Launched by the Space Shuttle, the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) spacecraft would circle the planet for at least 7mo taking radar pictures and measuring the atmosphere and the surface. It would be the most detailed scientific examination to date of the surface of Venus, perpetually covered by clouds. Announcing the solicitation, Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for Space Science, said: “NASA is engaged in a continuing program of space exploration, a major part of which is directed at the solar system. The VOIR program is a key step in that endeavor . . . While considerable knowledge of Venus’s atmospheric properties will be forthcoming from the Pioneer Venus mission, and while the Soviet Venera missions have provided valuable data on surface properties at three localities, information regarding the surface morphology on a global scale and all of the insights that this scientific information provides is lacking. A major technical goal of the VOIR mission, therefore, is to obtain global radar imagery with sufficient resolution to address fundamental questions regarding the origin and evolution of the planet, and to lay the groundwork for subsequent more detailed investigations of the surface and interior.” Hinners emphasized that VOIR had not been approved but said that early selection of scientific participants and investigations would assure a well-defined program upon approval. Under present plans, in 1984 NASA would launch one spacecraft from the Space Shuttle to Venus with a typical trajectory beginning in Dec. 1984 to arrive at Venus in May 1985. The spacecraft would remain in an elliptical parking orbit around Venus through May and June 1985, while the Deep Space Network was occupied with the Galileo project [see Nov. 10]. In late June or early July a propulsion maneuver would put VOIR into a near-polar orbit at an altitude of 300km (180mi). Radar mapping and other science gathering would begin in July and continue for 5mo. VOIR imagery should verify the presence or absence of continents, ocean basins, mountain belts, rift valleys, fault belts, or volcanoes, and might reveal the nature and time sequence of plate tectonic activity, as well as any relationship between this and volcanic episodes in the history of the planet. If impact craters were present (as suggested by earth-based radar observations), the mission might determine their size and frequency. The VOIR orbiter, weighing approximately 5000kg (11 0001b) at launch, would consist of a bus with a synthetic aperture radar and other science instruments. (NASA Release 78-180)
Although to most people “aviation” would mean airliners and military aircraft, with a sprinkling of light planes, most of the aircraft in service and about two-thirds of the miles flown were in branches of flying known collectively as “general aviation,” Lewis News reported, including private ownership for travel or sport; air taxi and commuter operations; agricultural flying; prospecting and exploration; law enforcement; firefighting; air ambulance; and pilot training. About 230 000 aircraft of varied types did jobs in the Free World, more than 90% of them in the U.S. General aviation had served all 13 200 U.S. airports, compared to the airlines’ 42%. In 1977 general aviation had provided transportation for 100 million Americans, using less than 0.7 of 1% of all fuel used for transportation in the U.S. and less than 6% of fuel used by all aviation, while carrying a third of all intercity air passengers. The general aviation industry had provided jobs for more than a quarter of a million Americans in the manufacture, sales, and service of its products; grossed about $1.5 billion in new aircraft sales; and exported about 30% of its total production, contributing more than $500 million to the U.S. balance of trade. {Lewis News, Mar 31/78, 3) During March: NASA announced arrival of the Space Shuttle orbiter, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster at MSFC for first assembly as a complete vehicle for ground-vibration tests. Using a facility originally designed for Saturn V moon-rocket testing, engineers would begin in early spring to evaluate the structural dynamics of the assembly and their effect on the Shuttle’s system. The mated vertical ground-vibration tests would consist of “floating” the Shuttle in the tall test tower and applying vibrations with exciters powered by amplifiers similar to those found on home stereo sets; sensors on the skin would record characteristics of the vibrations passing from one area to another. The resulting data would verify system-design and mathematical models of the control-system’s reaction to severe vibrations expected during launch and flight into orbit. The first test-article configuration would include an orbiter and external tank to simulate the high-altitude portion of a mission after separation of the boosters. The second test configuration would consist of solid-fuel rocket boosters filled with inert propellants, stacked in the stand along with the orbiter and tank to simulate liftoff conditions. The third test configuration would be the same as the second, except that boosters would be empty, simulating a mission just before booster separation. Tests would continue through most of the year stopping only to change test configurations. (NASA Release 78-47)
NASA announced it had decided not to reboost or deorbit the Skylab space station in orbit around the earth because success was unlikely. Uncertainties that had developed in Skylab systems, Skylab lifetime, Space Shuttle schedule, and teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) delivery had made further planning for a rescue mission impractical. Factors leading to the decision included deterioration of systems aboard Skylab (recurring control-moment gyro anomalies, marginal power conditions, and minimal attitude-control impulse gas); high sunspot activity that was accelerating decay of Skylab’s orbit; and reviews showing that a Skylab-rescue mission would be difficult to arrange before April 1980. Skylab, currently orbiting at about 426km (265mi) altitude, was being maintained in a low-drag attitude and would be continually monitored while NASA assessed the possibilities of damage on reentry, now predicted to occur between mid-1979 and mid-1980. Most of the vehicle would burn up during reentry, but some fragments probably would reach earth’s surface. Skylab’s flight path was 75% over the ocean; the probability of injury or damage from it was less than that from meteorites, according to estimates. (NASA Release 78-191) At a press conference following the announcement, Bill Haines of the Chicago Sun Times asked: “Way back in the olden days I remember that there was a lot of talk about space rescue, and one of the philosophies seemed to be that if we got into trouble or the Russians got into trouble, the other side would come to the rescue. Have you made any approaches at all to the Russians to see if they could do anything about this? If not, why not? And do you intend to?” John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, answered: “This is a little different from the space rescues that we had talked about. As you know, part of the ASTP program was to design docking equipment that could be prototypes of that. And we still have a long-range plan with the Russians, albeit rather fuzzy, to some day have this capability. “With respect to Skylab: After our ASTP, working with the Russians, of course, we had a fairly good working knowledge of the capabilities, at least that we knew of that were done in that program. And at least a year ago we got our own heads together and talked about whether or not they could do anything that we couldn’t do. We concluded that there are many problems that we won’t go into that it probably is not feasible, so we did not ask them. However, they are being informed of what we are doing here and if they make any proposals that we haven’t thought of that could be useful, we will certainly entertain them.” (NASA press conf Dec 19/78)
22pm EDT on the same date to produce an orbit with 35 469.1km perigee, 36 679.2km apogee, and 1.7° inclination. The drift had been too rapid, and an orbit-adjust maneuver June 20 had reduced it to 2 deg/day West. Goes 3 had been scheduled to arrive on station at 135°W July 16, 1978. All subsystems were on, except the visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR); the main power bus was normal. The S-band and UHF equipment had functioned properly, but NASA was checking specifics of gain, margin, and sensitivity. Although the space-environment monitor (SEM) subsystem had appeared satisfactory, it needed further testing for possible interference from other subsystems. NASA expected to check out Goes 3 and turn it over to NOAA for operation when it arrived at 135°W. Goes 3 would be a key element of the Global Weather Experiment, a worldwide yearlong accumulation of meteorological and oceanographic data that had begun in Dec. 1977. Largest international scientific experiment in history, with 140 nations participating, GWE was collecting information from sources that included nine satellites and scores of ships and aircraft, plus thousands of daily surface arid upper-air observations by several hundred buoys distributed in the southern hemisphere and by conventional observation methods elsewhere. The experiment, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) sponsored by the UN’s World Meteorological Organization and the Inti. Council of Scientific Unions, would last through 1979 and provide scientists with millions of pieces of information from all over the world. Goes 3 would not only provide the major western-hemisphere coverage in the experiment, but would also determine how much important meteorological information could be gathered from a data-sparse area of the world centering on the Indian Ocean. Goes 3 was the last NOAA geostationary satellite NASA would launch on an expendable vehicle; three additional geostationary spacecraft planned for the next 8yr, beginning with GOES-D, would be launched on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 78-72; MOR E-612-78-01 [prelaunch summary] Apr 26/78, [postlaunch] June 26/78; NOAA Release 78-66)
JSC announced it had selected General Electric Co., Space Division, Valley Forge, Pa., for negotiations leading to a contract for the Space Shuttle orbiter food system galley. The estimated $1.2 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, beginning December 1978 and ending January 1981, would be for a facility including food-preparation equipment (hot and cold water dispensers, oven, water heater) and serving equipment (meat trays). (JSC Release 78-43)
Dryden Flight Research Center commemorated the final flight lOyr ago of the X-15, piloted by Bill Dana, that reached in its 1 lmin free flight a top speed of 3716mph (5.38 times the speed of sound) and peak altitude of 255 000ft. This chapter in aeronautical history would be celebrated by the Edwards, Calif., AIAA section at a dinner meeting featuring Bill Dana. The article in DFRCX-Press concluded: “Recent press reports call the Space Shuttle engines the first reusable liquid rocket engines. How soon they forget.” {DFRC X-Press, Oct 20/78, 2)
... We are here today to recognize and honor six American pioneers of the farthest and highest of all frontiers, the frontier of space. We honor them for individual human qualities, dedication, skill, extraordinary courage. But we do more than that. What those men have done is the most visible part of a vast and continuing collective accomplishment of many people. Tens of thousands of Americans, many of you, including scientists, engineers, administrators, skilled workers, others, have contributed directly to the success of the American space enterprise. They in turn have had the support of an entire nation and the good wishes of an entire planet. The glory that belongs to the six recipients this afternoon of the Space Medal of Honor belongs equally to those who helped them, and in a real sense, to all humanity who prayed for them and who supported them. “It is fitting that these ceremonies take place today on the 20th anniversary of the founding of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. And it is, of course, fitting that they take place here where the ships that took men to the moon were launched and where we will take our next great step into space with the first flight of the Space Shuttle, which I sincerely hope will be before my next birthday. . . .
Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. had used an airfilm material-handling system at its Brigham City, Utah, plant to move and position Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket-motor components weighing up to 300 0001b, AvWk reported. The size of components for the Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket motors and the large number of Shuttle missions expected had led Thiokol to try new types of material-handling systems. Heaviest load moved had been a solid-fuel rocket-motor casting segment loaded with propellant weighing about 300 0001b on a transporter dolly weighing an additional 50 0001b, for a combined total of about 175 tons moved. (The motor would consist of four segments individually cast with solid rocket motor fuel in one of several pits at the Thiokol facility.) The airfilm system used compressed air to inflate urethane pads (bearings) attached to the bottom of specially-designed dollies; air forced into the bearings and seeping between them and the floor had created a space of two or three hundredths of an inch—enough to “float” the transporter and its load on a film of air. (AvWk, Jan 30/78, 56)
ESA’s Spacelab program board had turned down NASA’s proposal to barter Space Shuttle launch services for the second Spacelab NASA was committed to acquire, and the action was seen as final, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. NASA had hoped to exchange launch service in return for the Spacelab in order to reduce costs [see Sept. 12]. Although ESA itself favored the barter plan, the European governments had refused to commit themselves in advance to Space Shuttle flights. In lieu of the barter deal or any increased NASA funding, ESA might be asked to prefinance work on the second Spacelab until NASA could get the money. (D/SBD, Nov 8/78, 39)
After each Space Shuttle flight, parachutes used to slow the descent of the Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster (SRBs) would have to be washed, dried, and repaired before reuse; and KSC had modified for this purpose a facility formerly used as a news center and to refurbish Gemini parachutes, Spaceport News reported. Recovery vessels at sea would pull the parachutes from the water and wind them like fishing line on large deck reels for delivery to the facility, where they would be unwound, defouled, and hosed down. A chute arranged on hooks on an overhead monorail would proceed through the world’s largest automatic washer and dryer [see March 8] to remove any traces of corrosive sea water. Next the chute would be inspected for damage, with rips mended on special sewing machines. The chute then would be stretched on a worktable almost the length of the 220-ft building, and each individual panel would be systematically folded into place resulting in a tubular shape. A monorail would guide the bundle to a wedge-shaped packing canister. Depending on conditions, one parachute could move through the entire operation in less than 50hr. (Spaceport News, Nov 10/78, 3)
MSFC reported it had successfully conducted a first major test firing of the three Space Shuttle main engines during a 15sec run at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories in Bay St. Louis. MSFC had already successfully fired one of the modified engines for 520sec at 100% thrust, more power than needed for the first Shuttle mission. Test results would aid in establishing countdown procedures. More than 300 contractor and NASA employees had worked on the test series, described by, program officials as the most complex large propulsion-system evaluation undertaken in the U.S. space program. Test budget for firings and facilities was $52 million. Main propulsion-test articles were the Martin Marietta external tank containing propellant for firing tests, just as it would during Shuttle missions; the Rockwell Inti, orbiter simulator; three Rocketdyne main engines; and the Rockwell Inti, shuttle avionics test set, replacing the Shuttle-orbiter computers during tests. Key Shuttle launch and flight parameters to be verified by propulsion-test data were the cryogenic boil-off rate of external-tank propellants on the launch pad; rate of external-tank self-pressurization; engine-prestart requirements, such as pressure and temperature milestones; starting, throttling, and cutting off the engine, using external-tank propellants with the engines operating in close proximity; engine gimbaling; control-system response; loads placed by the engines on the orbiter; and launch acoustic data. Flight-dynamics engineers had been especially interested in verifying control-system models with the main propulsion-test data. Test 1, scheduled for 2.35sec, had been terminated at lsec because of an instrument problem. Test 2, scheduled for 15sec with the engines at 70% thrust, would assess propellant-flow paths from the tank through the orbiter and into the engines under thrust conditions. Test 3, planned for 15sec at 90% thrust level, would reverify overall propellant-system operation, and effect of the engine plumes on the test stand’s flame deflector. Test 4, planned for 40sec at 90% thrust, would define propellant flow and flame-deflector hot spots. Firings 5 through 7, lasting 500 to 600sec, would duplicate Shuttle flight profiles; firings 8 through 10 would run for long durations with flight-rated 77:1 nozzles; and firings 9 through 13 would have the 35:1 nozzles reaffixed for engine throttling, to demonstrate the effect on flight profiles. Although the main engine had taken the blame for Shuttle launch-date slip, the external tank and solid-fuel rocket booster tests also had failed to support a March launch. (Marshall Star, May 24/78, 1, May 17/78, 1; JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 1; AvWk, May 22/78, 55; May 29/78, 49)
NASA announced that a frame structure for mounting experiments inside the Space Shuttle orbiter’s payload bay had arrived by ship in Savannah, and would be transported by tug to the vehicle assembly building at KSC. Called an OFT (orbital flight test) pallet, the structure, fitted with NASA-developed subsystems, would provide electrical and other support to the experiments. This was the first of two pallet systems destined for use on two of the first six Space Shuttle flight tests. Designed and assembled by British Aerospace Corp. for ESA as part of the joint ESA/NASA Spacelab program, the pallet structure was nearly identical to that of experiment pallets to be used in Spacelab missions beginning in 1981. It was 3m (10ft) long and constructed in a U-shape to fit into the 4.5m (15ft)-diameter orbiter payload bay. Later in the Spacelab program, five pallets would be available for space missions. MSFC was responsible for delivery and system integration of the OFT pallets. (NASA Release 78-182)
KSC reported that NASA’s 4-engine Jetstar aircraft had completed the second of five flight tests of the microwave scanning beam landing system (MSBLS) installed at the orbiter landing facility. The first three flight tests were to verify the system’s ability to land the unpowered Space Shuttle orbiter safely on the 15 000ft runway; the final two would be to commission (declare operational) the runway-landing system. Because orbiters could approach KSC from either the northwest or southeast, the center would have to commission the system twice. Each of the first tests had taken about a week, as the Jetstar had made daily 2hr passes over the runway at different altitudes and azimuths. Precision laser tracking system instrumentation that could locate an aircraft at distances of 14mi and altitudes of 100 to 20 000ft had locked on to special instrumentation in the Jetstar, continuously tape recording the Jetstar’s position while the MSBLS tape recorded the same data. The tapes had been fed into a computer and compared; any positional errors in the MSBLS could then be corrected, aligning the landing system. (Spaceport News, July 7/78, 2)
The Washington Post reported that, as a result of belated discovery that Soviet radar in Europe would interfere with two NASA satellites scheduled for launch in 1980 to communicate with orbiting spacecraft, NASA would have to spend $100 million to redesign the satellites’ electronic systems. NASA had awarded Western Union a $786 million contract to build six 50001b tracking and data-relay satellites (giant orbiting transmitters and receivers, each carrying two umbrellalike antennas weighing 501b apiece and unfurling in orbit to a diameter of 16.5ft) that would have replaced 60% of NASA ground-station antennas at an estimated saving of more than $100 million a yr. The 3-mo delay necessary for redesign was important because it would affect communications with the Space Shuttle; failure by the Pentagon and the CIA to warn NASA of the size and scope of Soviet communications interference in high-orbit regions had delayed discovery of the problem. NASA testimony before two Senate committees revealed that Soviet radars from the Baltic tp the Black Sea were emitting beams that converged high over the Atlantic and Pacific in the exact places NASA wanted to put the TDRS. Built to replace obsolete and expensive ground antennas at Ascension Island; Quito, Ecuador; Santiago, Chile; Guam; and Hawaii, the TDRS would improve communications by allowing ground controllers to talk to other satellites and Space Shuttle astronauts during more than 90% of each earth orbit. The electronic interference was said to have been unintentional. NASA “did not fully understand the environment and the effects it would have on the system,” said C. Curtis Johnson, satellite project manager at Goddard Space Flight Center. “Otherwise, we would have been more careful in the specifications of the system.” NASA had considered reducing the number of satellites on order from six to four to save $100 million, estimated cost of the redesign. (WPost, July 2/78, Al)
MSFC reported that electronic simulators for Space Shuttle main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tanks had passed tests designed to check the Shuttle’s avionics during simulated missions. JSC would conduct Shuttle-flight simulations in a Shuttle avionics integration laboratory (SAIL) for which MSFC engineers had provided a mated elements system. All Shuttle avionics would work together in the SAIL for the first time in Shuttle-flight simulation that would include part of the countdown under normal, abnormal, and certain failure conditions. (Marshall Star, July 5/78, 2)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch in a briefing announced that NASA’s FY79 budget would propose an 8% increase, providing “buying power” at about the 1978 level. The space science request had gone up about 27%, largely because of the Space Telescope and the Galileo (Jupiter-orbiter) project. Applications and aeronautics were each up about 16%. The proposed FY79 budget was $4,371 billion; the FY78 budget was $4,064 billion. The FY79 budget requested money for only four Space Shuttle orbiters; Frosch explained that the four orbiters would use two launch sites (KSC and Vandenberg AFB) and that NASA and the Air Force would phase out the existing stable of expendable boosters. Omitted was OV-101, the Enterprise, which would be used for approach and landing tests or for spare parts, or could be reconfigured in an emergency to spaceflight status. The major new start NASA had included in the budget was the “Out of Ecliptic” (OOE) or Solar-Polar, a cooperative venture with ESA to fly two satellites to look at the structure of the sun’s surface and at sunspots and poles. Other new starts NASA had requested were the HALO (halogen-occultation) experiments to study upper-atmosphere pollution, and the earth radiation-budget satellite system to study incoming and outgoing radiation. Key application continuations would be Landsat C and D, the Nimbus-G environmental satellite, Tiros-N next-generation weather satellite, and Seasat-A. Space Transportation Systems would receive $1 827 700 000; Space Science $513 200 000; Space and Terrestrial Applications $283 400 000; Aeronautics and Space Technology $375 400 000; Tracking and Data Acquisition $305 400 000. Manpower would remain at the FY78 level, with 45 positions shifted from MSFC to JSC, KSC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA budget briefing, Jan 21/78; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1; W Star, Jan 23/78, A-8; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 13; Jan 30/78, 28)
Early analysis of Space Shuttle liftoff-configuration vibration-test results at Marshall Space Flight Center had revealed two primary deviations, the Marshall Star reported: excessive movement in a forward section of the solid-fuel rocket boosters that contained guidance gyros, and a problem with transfer of loads (or forces) at the attach points between the boosters and external tank. After installing brackets to strengthen the boosters at the gyros location, NASA would conduct individual tests on that booster section at a test facility used for smaller components. Additional studies of load distribution at the attach points would determine if additional tests were necessary. After the most recent test phase, engineers found that about 80% of the test modes had verified predictions of hardware behavior during flight. The final test phase, beginning early in 1979, would simulate the Space Shuttle configuration just before burnout and separation of the solid-fuel rocket boosters at an altitude of about 43.5km (27mi). (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 1)
Fourteen satellites, four of them NASA’s and two starting the Intelsat V series of international communications satellites, were on the preliminary schedule of NASA launches for 1979, Aerospace Daily reported. These missions would use expendable launch vehicles, and NASA hoped that its most significant mission of 1979 would be number 15: first flight of the Spaed Shuttle. The tentative 1979 schedule would begin the transition of payloads from expendable launchers to the Space Shuttle. The Delta launch vehicle, workhorse of the 1970s, would carry only 4 of 1979’s 14 missions. Only three of the payloads were commercial, and half the 1979 launches would be from Vandenberg AFB and Wallops Island rather than KSC. The three launches scheduled in the first quarter of 1979 would use all three launch sites and three different launchers. Second-quarter payloads, all sponsored by organizations outside NASA, would also use all three launch sites. NASA planned five launches in the third quarter, which it hoped to close with the Space Shuttle’s first flight. (A/D Nov 21/78, 95)	,
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan Lovelace, addressing members of LeRC’s launch directorate, had termed the launch-vehicle team “probably the best in the world. The record speaks for itself,” the Lewis News reported. Lovelace had visited LeRC to discuss the role of launch vehicles in NASA’s overall plans and to be briefed on other Lewis work.The expendable vehicles would make 13 launches through 1980, when the Space Transportation System (STS) would begin carrying payloads into space. Members of the STS team responsible for launching the Space Shuttle who would work with the LeRC launch-vehicle group “can learn team development, discipline, and mental rigor from the exemplary record of the Lewis team,” Lovelace said. (Lewis News, June 9/78, 1)
The W. Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee had cut NASA’s budget, endangering 3 of the agency’s most ambitious plans for the next 5yr: to search for life beyond earth, to keep the Skylab space station from falling back to earth, and to fly a rare joint mission with West Germany around the north and south poles of the sun. The subcommittee had cut $1.4 million from NASA’s request for $2 million to begin a program called SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), in effect killing the program. A NASA official said the funds would not be enough “to start design work on the antennas we were going to use to listen for extraterrestrial signals.” The subcommittee also denied NASA $20.5 million to use for Space Shuttle astronauts to fire the abandoned Skylab space station into a higher and safer orbit. NASA considered the most critical cut to be $5 million from the $13 million sought to start in 1983 the solar-polar orbiter mission that would have used two spacecraft, one built by the U.S. and the other by West Germany. The West Germans had warned that any U.S. delay meant that Germany would drop out of the mission. (IVPost, May 5/78, A13)
NASA had been considering FY81 and 82 missions to send a probe toward Halley’s comet and land it on Tempel 2 comet, and one that would return a sample of Martian soil to earth, AvWk reported. Return of a Mars sample—to be studied first aboard the Space Shuttle in earth orbit—had become the key mission sought by scientists planning Mars strategy for NASA, who viewed a sample mission as a direct follow-on to the Viking mission in progress. NASA would have to make its decisions this summer on specific missions for FY82. NASA might request the comet mission for FY81, in view of the determination by NASA planners and scientists to send a spacecraft near Halley’s comet, even though a plan to rendezvous with the comet had disappeared when NASA was unable to obtain a Halley mission in FY79. The Halley/Tempel 2 comet mission would consist of a 1985 Space Shuttle launch of a vehicle using solar-electric propulsion to encounter Halley’s comet in Nov. 1985 about 93 million mi from earth, eject a probe that would dive into the head or nucleus area of the comet, and return atmospheric data. The mother spacecraft would continue a high-speed flyby of the comet, either passing through the comet’s tail or flying a safer trajectory in front of it. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 14)
MSFC reported that the USAF had redesignated an interim upper stage (IUS) for Space Shuttle as the “inertial upper stage,” to reflect its inertial-guidance capabilities as compared to the NASA-sponsored spinning solid upper stage. The new name would also indicate that DOD payloads would use the stage well into the 1980s. (Marshall Star, Feb 1/78, 1; Spaceport News, Feb 17/78, 3)
MSFC announced it had test-fired Sept. 6 at the White Sands test facility a version of the rocket engine that would maneuver the Space Shuttle orbiter. The lOsec-duration burn was the first firing of the 6000-lb thrust engine in combination with propellant tanks, feedlines, and other components of the orbital maneuvering subsystem (OMS) pod. OMS engines using nitrogen tetroxide and monomethyl hydrazine as oxidizer and fuel had been designed for reuse in up to 100 space missions, with 1000 starts for a total firing lifetime of 15hr. The engines would provide thrust for final orbital insertion at the end of launch phase, orbit circularization, orbit transfer, changing and rendezvous maneuvers, and deorbit bums. (Marshall Star, Sept 27/78, 2)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would be guest speaker Oct. 5 at a NASA-LaRC colloquium and a public lecture to commemorate NASA’s 20th anniversary. Slayton, one of the original seven astronauts selected in 1959 for Project Mercury and the only one still active in the space program, was orbital flight test manager for JSC’s Space Shuttle Project Office. He had been chief astronaut and director of flight crew operations before going into space in July 1975 with the ApolloSoyuz Test Project. Title of Slayton’s colloquium lecture would be “The Space Shuttle”; his public lecture, “Manned Space Flight: Past Triumphs, Future Challenges.” (LaRC Release 78-47; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 2)
The third of four Space Shuttle solid-propellant booster motors (DM-3) to be tested during the development phase had been fired successfully the previous week at Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Division in Brigham City, Utah, the Marshall Star reported. First of a prototype solid-fuel rocket motor (SRM) to be tested in flight configuration, the DM-3 included several features not tested in earlier firings: The motor aft skirt, containing a thrust-vector (directional) control-actuation system for the nozzle was on the motor for the first time. Also part of the overall test was recording data on the pressure inside the exhaust plume (flame), showing how much force would impact the launch platform at liftoff, that JSC and KSC would use in launch-facility studies. An onboard hydraulic system powered the thrust-vector control, moving the nozzle to change vehicle direction, for the first time in an SRM development test. Final event was a test of the linear-shaped explosive charge that would sever the nozzle aft-exit cone from the motor about 25mi above earth during Space Shuttle flights. (Marshall Star, Oct 25/78, 2; JSC Roundup, Oct 27/78, 1)
President Carter at a press conference with editors and news directors was asked: “There was a big spread in the local (Cape Canaveral) newspapers yesterday that you were ordering cutbacks in the space program. And there are also rumors going around the Kennedy Space Center that as soon as the shuttle becomes operational, you will order even more cutbacks in an austerity program. So my question is this: What kind of space policy can we expect from your administration?” The President said: “I think a very aggressive space policy. Anyone who reads the documents that have been prepared very carefully, very thoroughly by the Defense Department, the CIA, NSC, all those who will use them, including Agriculture, Commerce, and finally approved by me, would say that it’s a very sound program based on scientific need and actually capitalizing now upon the great exploratory efforts that have been made in space. We look upon the Space Shuttle as a way to change dramatic, very costly initiatives into a sound, progressive, and innovative program to utilize the technology that we have available to us. “We’ll continue interplanetary space exploration. We’ll have a greatly expanded effort concerning astronomy assessments of the earth, weather, communications. We’ll expand our effort to bring into the space program now, both foreign countries and also private firms in our nation. And I think it is accurate to say that the Space Shuttle, which is approaching completion—we hope the first orbital flights will be less than a year from now—will open up a broad vista of new uses for our technology. “So, we’re not going to minimize or decrease our commitment to space at all. I think the spectacular efforts to send men to the moon and to make the first orbital flights, and so forth, have been just a precursor to now the more practical and consistent and effective use of our space technology. “So, it’s not a matter of playing down the importance of space; it’s a matter of using what we’ve already learned in the most effective way.” (Press Doc, Oct 20/78, 1976)
The Naval Research Laboratory reported that a team of its space scientists had evaluated two new types of far-ultraviolet electrographic cameras. Designed for possible use in the Space Shuttle program to investigate radiation spectra of distant stars and other celestial objects, both cameras would use alkaline halide photocathodes having more sensitivity in the vacuum ultraviolet below 2000A, and higher angular resolution, than cameras previously used. One camera, the internal-Schmidt-optics type, had an opaque photocathode like those NRL had used in previous sounding-rocket flights, in the lunar camera on the Apollo 16 mission, and on Skylab 4. The new camera, flown on two sounding-rocket missions, had on the first flight obtained far-ultraviolet images of the Andromeda galaxy and on the second had recorded the North America nebula in Cygnus and far-ultraviolet spectra of stars in Cygnus. The other camera developed by NRL, a more conventional end-window type, had a semitransparent photocathode intended for possible use at the focus of a large telescope or for making spectrographs on the Spacelab. This large-format electrographic camera, instead of using a phosphor screen, would record directly on film the electrons emitted by the photocathode, allowing better resolution and photometric accuracy. NASA had supported development of the electrographic cameras. (NRL Release July 20/78)
In an interview on NASA’s 20th anniversary, JSC director Christopher Kraft, Jr., said that speeding up the space program would require private capital. “Production in space will become an important part of our competitive position and have a great deal to do with the balance of trade.” Speculating on the future at JSC, Kraft said he believed it “highly probable that we’ll see a well developed space industry in the next ten years. I have an intuitive feeling that the thing is going to mushroom on us.” First major project for JSC would be to make the space transportation system operational: “If we’re going to make this thing a routine operation, it’s got to go in a more matter-of-fact manner, more like an airline operation, than we’ve seen in the past.”Tor the first 6 or 10 Space Shuttle flights, center employees could expect a level of activity similar to that during Apollo and Skylab “but after that point we’re going to have to phase into this new mode.” He emphasized he wasn’t implying airline pilots would fly the Space Shuttle: “It will still require highly trained astronauts because it is a very complex vehicle. With development of the transport system, we will see a new kind of astronaut—techniques will go into space very rapidly. The need for specific talent and skills will develop.” Kraft predicted that, in the next few years, the U.S. would “recognize a need for permanency of man in space. The best way to do that is with a space station. We will probably develop a permanent space station that would be carried up as modules in the Space Shuttle.” (JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 4)	.
On the basis of a 4mo interagency review requested in June 1978, President Carter announced a U.S. civilian space policy that would set the direction of U.S. space efforts over the next decade. The policy would reflect a balanced strategy of applications, science, and technology development that would: 1.	emphasize space applications that would increase understanding of earth resources, climate, weather, pollution, and agriculture, with the private sector taking increasing responsibility for remote sensing and other applications; 2.	emphasize space science and exploration in a manner that would retain the vitality of U.S. space technology, yet would provide short-term flexibility to impose fiscal constraints when conditions warranted; 3.	take advantage of Space Shuttle flexibility to reduce the cost of operating in space over the next two decades to meet national needs; 4.	increase benefits for resources expended through better integration and technology transfer among national space programs and through more joint projects when appropriate, thereby increasing the return on the $100 billion investment in space to the benefit of the American people; 5.	assure U.S. scientific and technological leadership in space for the security and welfare of the nation, and continue R&D necessary to provide the basis for later programmatic decisions; 6.	demonstrate advanced technological capabilities in open and imaginative ways that would benefit developing as well as developed countries; 7.	foster space cooperation with nations by conducting joint programs; 8.	confirm U.S. support of the continued development of a legal regime for space that would assure its safe and peaceful use for the benefit of mankind. Since space was becoming a place to work, an extension of the environment, the U.S. would pursue future activities in space when it appeared that national objectives could most efficiently be met through space activities. Finally, the U.S. found it neither feasible nor necessary to commit itself to a high-challenge space-engineering initiative comparable to Apollo. As resources and manpower requirements for Space Shuttle phased down, the U.S. would be able to give greater attention to new space applications and exploration, continue programs at present levels, or contract them. To meet the specified objectives, an adequate federal budget commitment would be made. The U.S. would maintain a position of leadership in space science and planetary exploration, said the President, continuing a vigorous program of planetary exploration and using the space telescope and free-flying satellites to usher in a new era of astronomy, space systems to develop a better understanding of the sun and its interaction with the terrestrial environment through space systems, and the Space Shuttle and Spacelab to conduct basic research. (White House Release Oct 11/78)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, and Professor S. Dhawan, secretary of the department of space and chairman of the Space Commission, Government of India, had signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) July 18 for launch in 1981 from the Space Shuttle of India’s first national satellite, INSAT-1. INSAT-1, a multipurpose spacecraft in geostationary orbit, would provide India with domestic public telecommunications and direct TV broadcasting and meteorology services. This was the first MOU NASA had signed with a foreign government setting forth terms and conditions under which NASA would furnish Space Transportation System launch services on a reimbursable basis. (NASA Release 78-109)
AvWk reported that the Senate Commerce subcommittee on science and space had become the second congressional group to add another $4 million for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter to NASA’s FY79 budget, challenging President Carter’s decision to defer purchase. This equalled the amount provided earlier by the House Science and Technology Committee. Overall, the Senate subcommittee had increased NASA’s $4.371-billion budget request by $13 million, but failed to agree with some earlier House changes that had given NASA a $15.5-million increase. Among Senate subcommittee changes were $3 million for advanced manned-space flight programs, $4 million less than the House; language added to stress the importance of continuing lunar exploration; $2 million of $4 million deleted by OMB, restored for Spacelab experiments; and $3 million added for large space-structures work, making a total of $111.3 million for this item. (AvWk Apr 24/78, 27)
NASA announced the five Pioneer Venus atmospheric-entry craft reaching Venus and the companion craft in orbit around Venus were the highlights of its space-exploration activities in 1978, the agency’s 20th anniversary yr. NASA had conducted 20 launches in 1978, mainly for other organizations and agencies; it was the third yr in NASA history with a 100% launch-success record. It had also seen completion, of major milestones in preparing for crew-carrying Space Shuttle missions scheduled to begin late in 1979. (NASA Release 78-190)
NASA announced that data returned by the American-British-European international ultraviolet explorer (IUE) satellite had suggested the existence of a massive black hole at the center of globular clusters in earth’s galaxy. A group of scientists headed by Dr. Herbert Gursky and Dr. Andrea Dupree, both of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge, Mass., had examined six clusters, three of them x-ray sources. NASA, in cooperation with ESA and the British Science Research Council, had launched IUE in Jan. 1978 into a modified near-equatorial synchronous orbit to study a wide range of celestial objects in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Dr. Gursky said the onboard UV instruments had delivered unexpected information when they penetrated the background denseness of the clusters, which were like miniature galaxies 15 000 light-yr away, to observe the cluster core. What they saw, according to Gursky, was probably radiation from a group of 10 to 20 bright-blue stars orbiting the core: “These stars may well be orbiting a massive black hole the size or mass of one thousand solar systems,” he said. However, existence of a black hole was not certain, as rotation of the stars in relation to the center of the million-star cluster had to be studied first. If the stars were indeed orbiting a massive black hole, Gursky believed they were right on the edge or, if not, might be providing their own gravitational equilibrium. What surprised the observation team, Gursky said, was the ability of the short-wavelength instrumentation to cut clearly through the million-star cluster. “For the first time we are seeing in a clean way the center or core of those globular clusters, and we were surprised. You can see the clusters in visible light, there are lots of red giant stars there, which mask what is going on in the center. Now we have a tool, the IUE’s shortwave ultraviolet, capable of going for the first time right to the core through the whole cluster,” said Gursky. Although the team would continue to observe the six globular clusters, Gursky doubted their findings could be definite until NASA put the space telescope in orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1983. That telescope, using much more powerful instrumentation including short-wavelength ultraviolet, could study the blue stars in more detail. (NASA Release 78-122)
NASA announced plans to conduct the first full design-limit test of the parachute-recovery system for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters. A B-52 aircraft flying at an altitude of 21 000ft would drop a 48 0001b dummy booster over the National Parachute Test Range at El Centro, Calif. Three main parachutes plus the pilot and drogue parachutes would deploy to slow the rate of descent. Primary objective of the test would be to simulate at a high dynamic pressure the loads that the main cluster of parachutes would encounter in actual use. MSFC would be responsible for the solid-fuel rocket boosters; Martin Marietta Corp. had been under contract to develop the recovery system; and DFRC would be responsible for B-52 operations. (Marshall Star, Apr 19/78, 3; DFRC Release 10-78)
NASA had formally designated as Project Galileo a 1982 mission to orbit a spacecraft around Jupiter for at least 20mo and send a probe into its atmosphere, NASA Administrator Robert Frosch announced. The designation had honored the 16th century Italian astronomer, first to observe Jupiter by telescope and discover its moons. Galileo would be the first planetary spacecraft carried by the Space Shuttle and the first planetary spacecraft named for a person, although NASA had christened the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 3 (0A03) “Copernicus” after it was launched. (NASA Release 78-11)
A delegation from NASA Hq meeting in Paris with ESA’s Spacelab program board would attempt to overcome W. Germany’s objections to a proposed barter agreement, under which NASA would provide four, free Space Shuttle launches instead of paying cash for Spacelab hardware it had agreed to buy, Aerospace Daily reported. The barter deal, proposed by ESA in 1977, had met with opposition from ESA-member governments. Main objection, stated most strongly by W. Germany, was that a European commitment to four Shuttle flights would be premature because European plans to use the Space Shuttle and Spacelab ought to be definite before a barter would make sense. NASA had agreed to the barter instead of paying cash for a full set of Spacelab hardware it had agreed to buy years before. ESA felt that, under the barter, the industrial consortium headed by VFW-Fokker Erno could continue to work with European money at a far more satisfactory pace than could be expected if they relied on NASA money. In exchange for the roughly $100 million the Europeans would pay, NASA would provide four free flights for Spacelab, two for ESA and two for Germany. Observers said that W. Germany’s reservations centered on uncertainty about ESA’s Spacelab program, and that its own commitment to two flights was premature. If (as was likely) W. Germany’s Spacelab missions would not use the Shuttle-Spacelab system’s full capability although it had agreed to the dedicated launches, Germany would have to fill up the Space Shuttle or absorb the resulting losses. Other concerns were the rising costs of Space Shuttle flights, as launch costs in deutschmarks increased while the value of the dollar decreased. (A/D, Sept 12/78, 43) Pegasus 1, launched Feb. 16, 1965, had gathered micrometeoroid data for use in designing spacecraft; data collection had ceased Jan. 13, 1968. The Pegasus 1 assembly weighed about 10 430kg (23 0001b) and was 21m (70ft) long. The spacecraft, weighing about 1900kg (32001b), had remained attached to the empty S-IV stage and the instrument unit of the Saturn I launch vehicle. Neither the satellite nor the attached S-IV contained radioactive nuclear power sources or materials. Pegasus 2 was still in orbit; Pegasus 3 had reentered Aug. 4, 1969, over the Pacific Ocean. Aerospace Daily reported that Pegasus 1 and associated hardware had reentered earth’s atmosphere Sept. 17 over Angola. A NASA spokesman said there were no sightings or reports of debris. (NASA Release 78-141; Marshall Star, Sept 13/78, 2, 20/78, 2; DFRC X-Press, Sept 22/78, 2; A/D, Sept 20/78, 91)
JSC announced it would issue an RFP for management-consulting firms to answer questions such as: Would controlling 40 to 60 Space Shuttle flights per yr limit JSC’s ability to perform its basic R&D job? How could JSC keep costs low to encourage maximum use of the space transportation system? How would increased Shuttle activity affect JSC relationships with other NASA centers and contractors? If Shuttle launches reached the expected rate of one or two per wk by 1985, JSC officials wanted to be sure these operations did not deplete already limited personnel and other resources JSC would need to remain a major R&D arm of the space agency. JSC planners had drafted an operations plan for the full-use era of the Shuttle, whose onboard capabilities had exceeded those of previous spacecraft. The plan would reduce the number of flight controllers now assigned to real-time ground operations, and would increase the effort put into flight planning. Because JSC flight control work would affect NASA-wide operations and JSC would have large responsibilities in future spaceflight R&D, center management wanted an outside examination of the plan and alternatives before making a commitment. (JSC Roundup, Aug 18/78, 1)
JSC announced it had signed a contract with Itek Optical Systems Division of Lexington, Mass., for the Space Shuttle orbiter camera payload system. The $4 890 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover the first flight system with an option for a second. Planned for spaceflight on pallets and test racks built by NASA or ESA in the orbiter’s 15 by 65ft cargo bay, the system would be a flexible photographic array for earth-imaging surveys, remote sensing, and supplementing nonimaging systems. The second option (to produce a large-format camera for the USGS) would, if exercised, increase the contract value by $1.5 million. (JSC Release 78-42)
NASA announced it had selected four 2-man crews to begin training for Space Shuttle orbital flights. Those chosen were John Young, commander, with Robert Crippen, pilot; Joe Engle, commander, with Richard Truly, pilot; Fred Haise, commander, with Jack Lousma, pilot; and Vance Brand, commander, with Charles Fullerton, pilot. Young and Crippen would crew the first orbital flight test (OFT-1) scheduled for launch in spring 1979 from KSC, with Engle and Truly as backup.	, NASA had planned 6 orbital flight tests increasing in complexity to check out the first U.S. reusable spacecraft. On the first 4 flights, the 75-ton orbiter would make an unpowered landing on a dry lakebed at DFRC; thereafter, it would return to a specially constructed runway at the KSC launch site. NASA had also considered an OFT mission to boost Skylab into a higher orbit; prime and backup crews to implement such a plan would be selected from those already named. (NASA Release 78-44; JSC Release 78-15; DFRC X-Press, Mar 24/78, 4; JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 1)
Engineers from Rocketdyne and NASA were trying to determine why a liquid-oxygen heat exchanger on a Space Shuttle main engine had failed during a test at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., Av Wk reported. This was the first failure of a heat exchanger (an engine component converting liquid oxygen to gaseous oxygen to pressurize the Space Shuttle’s external propellant tank). Earlier in 1978 the Natl. Research Council’s Assembly of Engineering had noted that, although the exchanger had not encountered any difficulties, the system “poses a potential threat to the total shuttle system” from a single-point-failure standpoint. The committee said that, whereas redesign to add systems redundancy was impractical at that point, the system warranted continued examination for potential design improvements. NASA agreed with that assessment. Inflight heat-exchanger failure might start a serious fire or explosion that could result in loss of the spacecraft. Failure during the test had resulted in some engine damage, but none to the test-stand. Testing with different engines was continuing. (AvWk, Dec 18/78, 8)
ESA’s Geos2 had apparently suffered a collision in space that did not affect its payload performance but had badly disturbed experiments studying the low-energy plasma, Nature magazine reported. Geos 2 had become fully operational Aug. 2, with all onboard instruments functioning well; prospects for a full 2-yr, mission had been excellent until 07.13 GMT Aug. 5, when UHF telemetry temporarily shut off. The fault had seriously affected the low-energy plasma experiments: the electrical-reference potential of the spacecraft appeared to have jumped 12v for half of each 6-sec spin cycle. This seemed to be the result of slight damage to a solar-array panel that apparently shorted the output of a string of cells to the structure whenever they became illuminated. The design of Geos 2 had attempted to eliminate differential charging; the conductive indium oxide coating of the solar cells was supposed to offer a shorting path in the case of mechanical damage. The Space Shuttle might some day serve as a vacuum cleaner to gather the many manmade objects floating in space. In the meantime, the geostationary corridor had rapidly become crowded, and spacecraft designers would have to consider the probabilities and consequences of space collisions. (Nature, Aug 17/78, 631)
MSFC reported that 17 scientists had signed contracts to develop materials-processing experiments, first to be conducted in the weightless environment of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and partially based on results of investigations during the Apollo, Skylab, Apollo-Soyuz, and SPAR (space processing applications rocket) programs. Among the products of interest to the scientists were improved medicines; electrolyte materials for smaller, higher capacity batteries; and larger, more perfect crystals for electronic applications. The $12 million program, covering a 5yr initial period, should produce significant scientific results for developing specific useful materials and products in space. NASA had aimed the programs at science and technology in both research and manufacturing activities leading to privately funded materials-processing in space. Five of the 17 scientists would have a chance to fly their experiments on an early orbital test of the Shuttle in a materials-experiments assembly (MEA) package that would not only produce valuable scientific data but would also define further experiments and hardware needed before the first extended flight on Spacelab or Space Shuttle. A Shuttle satellite-deployment mission would fly four of the MEA experiments again, along with five others; the fifth would fly again on the third Spacelab mission devoted almost exclusively to materials processing. Four more of the scientists would have experiments on this mission. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 1)	'
NASA reported that John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had testified before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on Space Shuttle status. Yardley said a detailed program review of cost, schedule, and performance had indicated substantial progress that year. He cited successful completion of approach and landing tests of Orbiter 101 (Enterprise), which had been shipped to MSFC for mated ground-vibration tests; mission-duration test firings of the main engines at the rated power level; and completion of the first phase of the 3-engine main-propulsion configuration testing. A review of the Shuttle schedule had shown that all program elements could be ready for a Sept. 28, 1978, first manned orbital flight (FMOF), if all planned tests were successful and if adjustments to the orbiter’s maneuvering-system pod and the solid-fuel rocket motors were complete. Unforeseen problems or unsuccessful tests could delay the schedule; however, NASA believed the probability of flying the FMOF during CY1979 was high. Significant Shuttle problems disclosed by the review had been in the main engine and in vehicle weight. Engine development, although slower than desired, had produced a design that, if tests went well, could be flight-certified by Sept. 1979. The weight problem had not affected early flight tests, but might hamper both the Galileo mission to Jupiter and certain USAF missions. Measures to reduce weight in the orbiter and external tank could satisfy all mission requirements until mid-1984, and performance augmentation options now under study could meet Shuttle mission requirements after that time. NASA would need additional funding to support the revised FMOF schedule, and to complete the Shuttle design and development test and evaluation program. Funding requirements had arisen not from any single program element but from several items (including the main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, external tank, and thermal-protection system), on which more work was needed than had been estimated. Shuttle development costs in FY79 and FY80 had exceeded previous plans, and current estimates of total Shuttle development costs were 8 to 9% higher than the earlier estimated $5.2 billion (1971 dollars). NASA had discussed Shuttle funding with OMB .as it affected the FY80 budget, and had reviewed with DOD the potential impact if additional Shuttle development funds were unavailable in FY79. Preliminary assessments had shown the first FMOF would be delayed an additional 6 to 9mo beyond the Sept, date, and delivery of production orbiters would be delayed up to lyr. (NASA Release 78-145; NASA testimony, US Sub-comm on Sp Sci & Appl, Sept 28/78; JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 1; Marshall Star, Sept 27/78, 1)
NASA announced that the Egyptian government had reserved four small self-contained payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. At the NASA Hq ceremony July 13, Dr. Mohamed Shakar, minister of the embassy of Egypt, and Dr. Farouk El-Baz, research director for the Smithsonian Institution’s Center for Earth and Planetary Studies, gave NASA officials a down payment to reserve Space Shuttle space. The payloads called “getaway specials,” each weighing no more than 90kg (2001b) and no larger than 0.5m3 (5ft3), would fly on a space-available basis. NASA had received payments for about 240 small payloads so far; purchasers had included private individuals, commercial firms, and foreign countries. The Egyptian purchase marked the first foreign educational use of a Shuttle payload, as Egyptian students would compete in proposing experiments for the Shuttle missions. Dr. El-Baz would direct evaluation of the proposals. (NASA Release 78-107)
The Marshall Star reported that MSFC had begun ground-vibration tests of the Space Shuttle in its liftoff configuration in the dynamic-test stand, first test of the Space Shuttle with all elements mated in flight configuration. The test phase would run through November. Test-preparation crews from Bendix worked around the clock to prepare the stand, the Shuttle, and the shaker systems for the second phase of ground-vibration testing. The Space Shuttle’s weight rested on the aft skirts of the two solid-fuel rocket boosters bolted to hydrodynamic support systems at the base of the test tower. When pressurized, the support systems would allow adequate vertical, lateral, and rotational movement of the entire Space Shuttle. Test engineers had predetermined a total of 83 shaker positions for the combination of Space Shuttle elements; using a spacecraft computers system to drive the shakers, the engineers could select different positions to determine vehicle response. The computerized system would automatically control up to 24 shaker channels from the 61 that were available, rated at 10001b, 1501b, and 501b force. (Marshall Star, Oct 25/78, 1)
French and West German space officials had told a House committee that increasing costs would limit use of the U.S. Space Shuttle and the European Spacelab, Av Wk reported. A NASA official had admitted that Spacelab could have been built less expensively under a single nation’s management, but denied that Space Shuttle operational costs had increased prohibitively. Wolfgang Finke, director of West Germany’s Dept, of Space and Transportation, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that not only had the price of conventional launches increased steadily, but also “the new space transportation system will not revolutionize the cost of space transportation. On the contrary, the estimates for the fare of a Shuttle roundtrip and the fringe costs going with it went up considerably, putting a real brake on our more ambitious plans to utilize the new system.” As for Spacelab, Finke said the results of a West German materials-processing experiment would need a series of experiments for confirmation, with a cost level “well above the range of traditional materials research costs.” Hubert Curien, president of the French space agency, said that “anticipated cost of Spacelab experiments now reaches such heights that their funding raises very serious problems for national budgets and constitutes a very severe limitation.” Finke noted in conclusion that administrative costs of international cooperation had increased costs of the overall project. A NASA official agreed that if Spacelab had been built in the U.S. under one management, total cost would have been less. (Av-Wk, May 22/78, 28)
NASA reported that a flight-configured Space Shuttle engine fired in tests at NASA’s Bay St. Louis, Miss., facility had exceeded 5000sec, the level to be met by a production engine to certify the main propulsion system for manned flight. Testing of the Space Shuttle main engine had increased dramatically, both in number of tests and time accumulated, since Aug. 12, 1978. Two engines had each accumulated approximately 7100sec of testing time, putting total engine-testing time over 25 OOOsec in 342 tests. Among these were five consecutive runs of 520sec, the length of time needed to put the Shuttle into orbit, on one engine at rated power level. Preliminary flight certification, which required a flight engine to have run 5000sec, was expected in the spring of 1979. Full-duration testing of the complete main propulsion system (a cluster of three engines) would resume in early 1979 when the first manned orbital flight configuration engines would become available. (NASA Release 78-144; JSC Release 78-40; Marshall Star, Sept 13/78,1)
Europe’s space industry was looking beyond Spacelab to future programs that would maintain technological advances and employment as well as joint development activities with the U.S. in manned spaceflight, AvWk reported. With delivery of the first Spacelab scheduled for next yr, European industry said U.S. delay in ordering a second flight unit might disrupt skilled manpower employment and management performance. Also, European industry officials had told NASA that its charges for Space Shuttle flights were too high, and that Europe should have special treatment in Space Shuttle/Spacelab use. W. Germany’s ERNO, Spacelab prime contractor, had proposed to NASA and ESA a second Spacelab as the basis for a barter agreement [see Sept. 12] under which costs of the second Spacelab would offset future Space Shuttle services for Europe. An ERNO spokesman had warned that NASA should not increase Spacelab 2 technical requirements to a point where the cost to Europe’s space industry was unreasonable. On the other hand, the barter agreement should not give the U.S. full autonomy in operating Spacelab or producing future Spacelabs. Commercialization of the Space Shuttle was essential, because “twenty million dollars (1975 price basis) for a standard Shuttle launch and possibly the same amount for a standard Spacelab flight service Eire hardly suited to arouse the interest” of European users, particularly industry, the spokesman said. (AvWk, Oct 23/78, 17)
RCA Americom Communications, Inc., announced it would launch its Satcom-3 domestic comsat in Dec. 1979, more than a yr earlier than planned, and would study procurement of a fourth comsat either based on current design or the first of a new generation of spacecraft, Aerospace Daily reported. Satcom-3 previously appeared on a Space Shuttle schedule for launch in mid-1981. Latest plans called for a Delta launch like Satcoms 1 and 2; the Shuttle reservation would be assigned to Satcom-4. RCA Americom said it was advancing the Satcom-3 launch because traffic on the first 2 satellites was nearing capacity particularly in cable television, now using 900 earth stations, with 1400 to 1500 expected by the end of 1979. Satcom-3 would have the same 24-transponder capacity as the first two satellites, but would carry spare transponders and additional stationkeeping fuel to exceed its planned 8-yr lifetime. The company had asked the FCC for permission to station Satcom-3 at synchronous altitude over the equator at 132°W to serve the 50 states, mainly for cable-TV relays. RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div., which had built the three Satcoms, estimated the cost of the third spacecraft and its launch at $40 million. (A/D, Nov 5/78, 150)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel had recommended elimination of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster’s thrust-vector control (TVC) system and modification or replacement of the Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power unit (APU), Aerospace Daily reported. The panel said its proposals should make the Shuttle a safer system during its operational phase. With “emphasis shifting to the problems of reusable operation from those of technical breakthrough,” it said in a summary report, “. . . it is not too soon for NASA to review the Space Shuttle design from this point of view.” The report concluded that the recommendations were “not reservation on the panel’s part as to the readiness for SS-1,” but rather said the Shuttle “will fly well, and probably on the scheduled date.” Modifications could be expensive, and panel members noted that such work might absorb the expected “Shuttle dividend,” funds from declining Shuttle development costs that might be devoted to other programs. NASA Administrator Robert Frosch responded that NASA might apply the panel’s proposals in designing its next space transportation system, instead of modifying the present system. (A/D, Dec 5/78, 148)
The USAF reported it had mapped and measured on the most detailed Shuttle models tested so far at AEDC the air pressures and loads to be encountered by the Space Shuttle during launch. The 6wk program had been the first to use mockups of the complete Shuttle orbiter, external fuel tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters in AEDC’s 16-ft transonic wind tunnel. NASA would compare results of these comprehensive tests with data obtained at AEDC and elsewhere on smaller, less detailed models. NASA would follow up on the AEDC transonic tests with supersonic tests of the same models at Ames Research Center. AEDC had recorded surface pressures on a 3% scale model with 1646 measuring points scattered over its surface, one of the most comprehensive pressure models ever used there. It had tested a 2% scale model in the aerodynamic-force part of the study using 9 measuring instruments, the most ever installed on an AEDC model; and had measured air pressure at 25 points around the base of the Shuttle model. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 78, 4)
NASA had officially changed the date of the first Space Shuttle orbital flight from Mar. to June of 1979 because of engine problems, the NY Times reported. NASA said the June date would be tentative until additional tests confirmed that the Shuttle’s three main engines were free of problems. There had been signs the engine situation was improving. Launch date had been important because of NASA’s plan to use the Shuttle to rescue Skylab from an uncontrolled fall to earth next year, possibly by early summer. (NYT, May 18/78, B-10)
INTELSAT announced it would use both the Space Shuttle and ESA’s Ariane launch vehicle to orbit later spacecraft in the Intelsat V series. INTELSAT’s board of governors had ordered two Shuttle launches from NASA and one Ariane launch from ESA. Worth a minimum of $82 million, the orders would cover the orbiting of the 5th, 6th, and 7th satellites in the Intelsat V series during 1981-82. The Shuttle would give INTELSAT its first experience with reusable launch vehicles; Ariane would be INTELSAT’s first use of a non-U.S. launch vehicle. INTELSAT said its decision was difficult because neither vehicle had been proven in operation. The organizations had scheduled its earlier Intelsat V satellites, like the then-current Intelsat IV and IV-A satellites, for launch on NASA’s Atlas Centaur. The agreement had provided for an Atlas Centaur backup for the series, should the first Shuttle not be available. (INTELSAT Release 78-34-1)
NASA announced plans to launch the Canadian comsat Telesat-D (to be called Anik-B in orbit) from ETR on a Delta no earlier than Dec. 15, 1978. Telesat/Canada would reimburse NASA $19.2 million for launch support under a March 11, 1978, contract. Telesat-D would be the fourth domestic comsat launched by NASA for Telesat/Canada, which owned and operated the satellites. Telesat-D would replace Anik AI, launched in Nov. 1972 and positioned at 109°W over the equator south of California. With a 7-yr design life, Telesat-D would provide point-to-point voice, TV, and data communications traffic to Canada’s 10 provinces. In addition to 12 commercial channels in the 6 and 4GHz frequency bands, Telesat-D would offer 4 channels in the 12 and 14GHz frequencies; the en	be leased to Canada’s liepartment of Communications for 2yr with an option for a 2yr extension. CDC would devote these channels to social experiments such as telemedicine, tele-education, teleconferencing, and Eskimo broadcasting to demonstrate how satellites can reach remote locations with small ground stations (a use begun by the communications technology satellite Cts, a joint U.S.-Canadian experiment). These channels would also carry out purely technical assignments to gather data on signal propagation and on power generation and usage. NASA planned to launch Anik-Cl and -C2 spacecraft (Telesat-E and -F) on the Space Shuttle in 1981, to replace Anik A2 and A3 (Telesat B and Q launched in April 1973 and May 1975, respectively. (NASA Release 78-184; MOR M-492-201-78-04 [prelaunch], Dec. 12/78)
MSFC reported that a patent had been issued for a reel mechanism and associated control system invented by MSFC employees Ralph Kissel and Charles Rupp for the Shuttle tethered satellite system (TSS). NASA had considered the TSS as a means of enhancing Space Shuttle performance of scientific investigations and operational activities in space. The system would use a flexible tether line to deploy and retrieve subsatellites at distances as great as 100km from the orbiter. NASA had judged the mechanism and control-system invention would contribute significantly to overall feasibility of the TSS concept. (Marshall Star, May 24/78, 4)
LaRC reported NASA had appointed astronaut Donald Slayton to manage the orbital-flight test (OFT) program for Space Shuttle at JSC. One of the original 7 Mercury astronauts and a member of the U.S. crew of the Apollo-Soyuz test project, Slayton would be responsible in his new position for all mission-unique activities associated with the 6 Shuttle orbital-flight tests scheduled to begin in the spring of 1979. He would represent program manager Robert Thompson across the total program to ensure timely and appropriate resolution of all OFT mission-unique issues. (LaRC Release 78-12)
NASA announced it had selected 15 Space Shuttle pilot-astronaut candidates and 20 mission-specialist candidates as its eighth group of astronauts, including 6 women, 3 blacks, and an American of Japanese descent. The first women and minority astronauts could be in orbit within 3yrs. Selection criteria for the more than 8000 applicants had been motivation, educational background, and work experience. All but one of the 15 pilot candidates and 7 of the 20 mission-specialist candidates had come from the U.S. military services. Of the 35 selectees, 10 were from the Air Force, 9 from the Navy, and 1 each from the Marine Corps and the Army. The mission specialists selected had come from medical, biological, earth sciences, physical and chemical sciences, and engineering disciplines. The number of selections had been keyed to the expected need for Shuttle crews to supplement the 17 pilot and 10 scientist astronauts now on flight status in Houston. The new astronauts would begin 2 years of training July 1 at Johnson Space Center in Houston. ' Selected to train as mission specialists were Anna Fisher, Shannon Lucid, Judith Resnick, Sally Ride, Margaret Seddon, Kathryn Sullivan, USAF Maj. Guion Bluford, USMC Capt. James Buchli, USAF Maj. John Fabian, Navy Lt. Dale Gardner, Terry Hart, Steven Hawley, Jeffrey Hoffman, Ronald McNair, USAF Capt. Richard Mullane, George Nelson, USAF Capt. Ellison Onizuka, Army Maj. Robert Stewart, Norman Thagard, James Van Hoften; as pilot astronauts, Navy Lt. Cdr. Daniel Brandenstein, Navy Lt. Cdr. Michael Coats, USAF Maj. Richard Covey, Navy lt. Cdr. John Creighton, Navy Lt. Robert Gibson, USAF Maj. Frederick Gregory, Stanley Griggs, Navy Cdr. Frederick Hauck, Navy Lt. Cdr. Jon McBride, USAF Capt. Steven Nagel, USAF Maj. Francis Scobee, USAF Capt. Brewster Shaw, Jr., USAF Capt. Loren Shriver, Navy Lt. Cdr. David Walker, and Navy Lt. Cdr. Donald Williams. (NASA press conference Jan 16/78; Marshall Star, Jan 17/78, 1; W Star, Jan 17/78, A-5; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 19)
NASA announced it had invited scientists to submit proposals for life sciences experiments to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle and Spacelab in the early 1980s. The experiments would study physical effects of spaceflight on humans and other living systems, and would test equipment and procedures. These experiments would be performed in the pressurized cabin of the Space Shuttle orbiter, in a pressurized Spacelab module, or (if requiring continuous exposure to the space environment) attached to an unpressurized Spacelab pallet. Proposed investigations would have to meet one or more of the following life sciences objectives: investigate and understand physiological, performance, and biochemical changes observed in humans who had flown in space; identify and investigate significant biological phenomena that might occur during or after exposure to the space environment; and/or test and demonstrate under operational conditions the equipment and procedures that would be needed by the NASA life sciences program. (NASA Release 78-64)
JSC announced that technicians had installed four radiator panels and a flash evaporator system (FES) in a chamber of Building 32 to prepare for Nov. tests of the Space Shuttle heat rejection system. Radiator panels that would reject heat and maintain a livable temperature for Space Shuttle crews would contain Freon. 21 flowing continuously through system loops, picking up heat throughout the ship and depositing cold; heat would be pumped to a central location and vented into space. From 14 000ft to orbit, the FES would cool the ship; in orbit, it would supplement panels that would open and, using ship’s maneuvers, reflect heat. The Nov. tests would close off the 120-ft-high chamber and pump liquid nitrogen through tubes in the black walls, dropping temperatures to -320°; infrared lamps would then increase temperatures to the level required in space. This would be first testing of all system components as a unit. (JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 1)
NASA reported it had amended a contract with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Inti. Corp. to procure 9 Space Shuttle main engines, in addition to the 7 already on order. The amendment had authorized Rocket-dyne to manufacture and test the 9 engines during a 180-day period in which prices would be negotiated. Estimated cost of the amendment had been $250 million. The 9 engines would support the Space Shuttle program through the first 4 orbiters approved for production; the present contract had covered engines for the first Space Shuttle flight scheduled for 1979 and had included 3 ground-test engines and 1 spare. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 3)
LaRC announced it would hold a conference on safety, occupational medicine, and environmental health May 15-18, with about 60 representatives from all NASA centers attending. Welcoming remarks by Fred Bowen, LaRC technical manager for management operations, would cover audiometric testing, types of hearing loss, rehabilitative techniques, noise protection equipment, and computerized treadmill data. LaRC Director Donald Hearth’s remarks on the second day would include discussion of workmen’s compensation, disability, continuation of pay status, and LaRC’s occupational medicine and environmental health and safety programs. The May 17 agenda would cover space suit testing, new approaches in workplace health standards, fire protection, Space Shuttle safety challenges, the kinetic method of lifting, and system safety in wind-turbine generators. On May 18 participants would discuss nuclear safety in space systems, Space Shuttle occupant safety, and new firefighting equipment. (LaRC Release 78-28)
Federal Aviation Administrator Langhorne Bond said the British Civil Aviation Authority and the British Plessey Corporation had been “using the press and other news media to deliberately mislead and confuse the world aviation community” about a U.S.-backed all-weather approach and landing system. The FAA administrator said the time reference scanning-beam/microwave landing system (TRSB/MLS) had been developed in a “goldfish bowl” from the outset with wide public participation; he labelled as “simply not true” British allegations that the U.S. had conducted a misleading test program or issued false data, and that the TRSB system was unsafe. Bond said the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), at its worldwide meeting in April, would probably select TRSB as the international system and that the campaign to discredit TRSB had been a last-minute effort by the British and Plessey to influence ICAO’s decision. (FAA Release 9-78; W Star, Jan 7/78, A-l) During January: NASA announced it had tentatively selected 18 scientists to participate in the design and early operational phases of the Space Telescope project. The 10-ton observatory to be launched by the Space Shuttle in 1983 would make astronomical observations deeper into space and in more detail than ever before. The scientists would head teams representing investigations definition (design and develop the focal plane instruments and carry out major scientific investigations); astrometry science (ensure that a fine guidance system could perform the required astrometric functions); faint-object camera science (U.S. members to assist ESA’s team); telescope science (interpret performance requirements in terms of telescope design specifications); data and operations (establish instrument specifications for control system, flight operation, and ground data handling); and interdisciplinary science (provide a broad scientific overview of ST development). A Space Telescope science working group to give scientific guidance to the project would consist of team leaders, 2 telescope scientists, interdisciplinary scientists, and appropriate project personnel. MSFC had management responsibility for the telescope; GSFC would manage operations and the development of scientific instruments. (NASA Activities, Jan 78, 9)
NASA announced it had selected Teledyne Brown Engineering, Huntsville, Ala., for negotiations leading to award of a contract for payload/missions integration for the sixth Space Shuttle orbital flight test and for the first 3 Spacelab missions to be managed by MSFC. An experiment-integration contractor, Teledyne Brown would ensure that the group of experiments for each mission was compatible with the Space Transportation System scheduled to carry it into orbit. The contract would provide for manpower, materials, and associated services required for integration and operation of Spacelab payloads. Flights scheduled during 1980 to 1981 would offer opportunities for scientific investigations on Spacelab missions in the planning stage with scientists from throughout the world participating. These missions would give scientists the first chance to go into space as payload specialists and conduct their investigations in earth orbit. (Marshall Star, Feb 22/78, 1)
In its “Profile of a Mission,” Lewis News reported that a new era of opportunity in space had become available. The Space Transportation System (the Space Shuttle) would open the door to activities ranging from experiments in basic research on physical and chemical process, to using the weightlessness and vacuum of space as an environment for manufacturing products. LeRC’s Space Experiments Integration Office (SEIO) would help principal investigators proposing experiments that needed a space environment, by preventing duplication of effort and standardizing paperwork required for project approval. SEIO had management responsibility for one facility and four experiments, three of which were to fly on the long-duration exposure facility (LDEF) managed at LaRC: —The advanced photovoltaic experiment (APEX) on the LDEF consisted of three related approaches to investigating the solar spectrum and the effect of exposure to space on advanced photovoltaics and materials. For the first time, space-calibrated solar cells would be available as laboratory standards for assessing performance of new solar cells. —The space power experiment (SPEX) on the LDEF would evaluate the use of commercially available components for a space-power system. With three LDEF trays carrying commercially available terrestrial solar cells and a fourth carrying commercial power electronics and batteries, successful operation of these components in space could significantly reduce costs of future space-power systems. —In the ion-beam texturing and surface-coating experiment on the LDEF, which would expose such surface samples to launch stress and near-earth space, ground tests before and after exposure would record the optical properties of the surface of each sample and compare durability of ion-beam-textured surfaces with that of state-of-the-art surfaces. If the ion-beam-textured surfaces exhibited higher durability, use of thermal-control coatings for spacecraft would increase. —The cryogenic fluid-management experiment (CFME), a payload attached to a Spacelab pallet, would obtain long-duration low-gravity engineering data on systems for storage/acquisition/supply of liquified gas (subcritical) to verify the possibility of successfully operating such a system in space. The zero-gravity combustion facility (OGCF), a versatile reusable assembly that would permit a Spacelab experimenter to study combustion free of earth’s buoyancy forces, would carry out tests ranging from rapid burning to long-term smoldering of a variety of liquid, solid, and gaseous fuels. {Lewis News, June 9/78, 3)
NASA announced that 11 of its 16 launches scheduled for 1979 would be reimbursables (launched by NASA for other agencies or corporations). Paying customers included DOD, NOAA, the United Kingdom, Western Union Corp., ComSatCorp, and RCA. As in 1978, most of the 1979 launches would emphasize use of space for the direct benefit of people: communications, environmental, and meteorological information. Activities in 1979 would include the first launch and orbital flight of the Space Shuttle; Jupiter and Saturn encounters by two Voyager spacecraft; and the Pioneer 11 flyby of the rings of Saturn. NASA would launch the Space Shuttle from KSC into its first orbital flight Sept. 28 with astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen as crew. They would land 53hr later at DFRC. The 1979 schedule would begin with two launches Jan. 25: DOD’s spacecraft charging at high altitudes. (SCATHA) from Cape Canaveral, and a stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE-A) from Wallops Flight Center. In April NASA would launch NOAA-A for NOAA and Navy-20 for DOD from Vandenberg AFB. It would launch in May FltSatCom-B from Cape Canaveral, and UK-6 for the United Kingdom from WFC; Westar-C in July and Intelsat V-A in Aug., both from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp; in Sept., its third high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-C from Cape Canaveral, and its Magsat-A from Vandenberg; in Oct., the solar maximum mission (SMM-A) from Vandenberg. NASA would launch Intelsat V-B from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp in Nov.; in Dec., NOAA-B for NOAA from Vandenberg, and RCA-C for RCA from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-196)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
NASA officials had unveiled the prototype of a parachute-cleaning machine strongly resembling a carwash operation, Today reported. If approved, the facility would become part of KSC’s system to refurbish Space Shuttle parachutes. Each of the Shuttle’s two solid-fuel rocket boosters jettisoned into the Atlantic Ocean shortly after launch would carry 4 nylon parachutes; both the boosters and the parachutes were designed for recovery and return to KSC for another launch. The carwash-type facility would rid the parachutes of salt water before washing and drying them in large machines. The current system had rinsed parachutes in the same water they were washed in; the new system would save some of the 20 OOOgal of water now used by the washing machine. In the carwash-type system, parachutes would move along an overhead rail, rinsed 3 times by water sent through high-pressure nozzles. The 3 main parachutes were 230ft long and 115ft in diameter, weighing 16001b dry and 20001b wet; the fourth parachute measured 145ft in length and 54ft in diameter, and would weigh 12001b dry and 14001b wet. On completion, the new system should require 2hr to wash and 2hr to dry each parachute. (Today, Mar 8/78, 8A)
Av Wk reported MSFC’s intent to demonstrate within 5yr the assembly of a large space structure in low-earth orbit, to exploit Space Shuttle capability. MSFC had proposed assembling a 10 x 30m (33 x 98ft) structure in space to demonstrate fabrication and assembly techniques, followed closely by a Space Shuttle mission to demonstrate deployment of a large antenna 50 to 200m (164 to 656ft) in diameter. The USAF Space and Missile System Organization (SAMSO) had also expressed interest in flying a Shuttle-based antenna-deployment test before 1985. Although most U.S. aerospace companies had been working on structures in space, Grumman Aerospace Corp. had been in the forefront in large space-structures work; MSFC had awarded Grumman four of six contracts for large space structures development, and JSC had awarded it at least one significant contract. MSFC’s approach had been to define tools and procedures needed, and to evaluate whether such operations would be possible and to what degree. Most building-block study for large space structures had assumed the use of open-truss aluminum beams joined by diagonal and cross braces, with beam sections lm (3.2ft) wide and length varying according to mission. Grumman had just begun to demonstrate a beam-building machine [see Apr. 12]. Both NASA and Grumman had been scheduled to evaluate the beams for deviations from specifications such as straightness or basic strength, and for individual subsystems such as the automatic welders used to affix the cross sections. In Sept. Grumman would transfer the beam-builder to MSFC for tests of beam manufacturing in a vacuum, to simulate space conditions. (A vWk, June 12/78, 49)
KSC announced award to the International Hydrodynamics Co., Vancouver, British Columbia, of a contract for systems to recover expended Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket-booster (SRB) casings. The $1 million contract would cover fabrication, testing, and delivery of the recovery systems with associated equipment and hardware. Recovery of SRB casings would mean sizeable savings to the Shuttle program; estimating 19 reuses of a casing, the savings realized by reuse (including cost of retrieval and refurbishment) would be $47 million. (KSC Release 37-78)
NASA announced it had awarded TRW Defense and Space Systems Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., a contract for the materials processing in space (Spacelab) program at an estimated cost of approximately $9.7 million. TRW would be prime contractor for various aspects of the Materials Processing in Space (MPS)-program, the contract to cover the initial phase of the MPS Spacelab-payloads project expected to begin in September 1978 and continue through 1981. TRW would develop (and support the operation of) specialized and general purpose payload systems that would accommodate a variety of different materials processing experiments during recurring earth orbit missions of the Space Shuttle. NASA had selected the first series of experiments from among proposals by scientists from the U.S. and numerous foreign countries. Objectives of the MPS program were to study new or improved processes and to identify candidate products of initial commercial interest: electronic materials, metals, glasses, and certain chemicals produced by processes such as crystal growth, solidification, and containerless processing. MSFC would manage operational aspects of the program. (NASA Release 78-103; ARC Astrogram, July 27/78, 3)
Aerospace Daily reported that House-Senate appropriations conferees would allow NASA to reprogram FY79 funds from Space Shuttle pro-, duction into development as it had done with $100 million in 1978, if the agency first asked Congress for a budget supplement to restore the production money. Reporting on a Sept. 14 compromise $4.35 billion NASA money bill, the conferees promised that NASA would receive “prompt consideration” of a supplemental request. The reprogramming suggestion seemed to address the major concern: whether or not NASA could increase the rate of development spending ahead of supplement approval. Under a reprogramming, production would be slowed pending restoration of funds, but development could proceed at a rate consistent with the expected extra money. This arrangement had followed up on an earlier House provision dropped by the conferees, allowing NASA to set up a reserve fund for Shuttle development by taking $30 million from three science programs. The conferees had approved NASA’s $20.5 million request for development of a teleoperator retrieval system, with the proviso that NASA get approval from both appropriations committees before obligating more than $10 million of the money, and that the balance of $10.5 million be available “only for Space Shuttle funding requirements in the absence of committee approval.” Both committees had been skeptical of the TRS proposal because its use in a Skylab mission might be impossible in view of Shuttle delays and the deterioration of Skylab’s orbit. Conferees also had agreed to add $500 000 to the money bill to start a Stereosat program; the House had added $4 million, the Senate nothing. The conference had compromised on an add-on of $2 million for a solar-power satellite system, ratifying the House cut of $5 million from expendable launch vehicles. It had also eliminated funds for the SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence) program. (A/D, Sept 15/78, 65)
NASA announced it had selected astronauts Dr. Owen Gar-riott and Dr. Robert Parker to be mission specialists on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the early 1980s. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in crew-activity planning, consumables usage, and Space Transportation Systems/payload interaction. The 7-day flight, a verification test of Spacelab systems and Spacelab/orbiter interfaces, would carry about 40 experiments. Garriott had flown on the second manned Skylab mission of 56da duration; Parker had been a mission scientist and spacecraft communicator during Apollo and Skylab. Ten European nations, under agreements with the European Space Agency, had developed and financed Spacelab to be carried in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter as a fully furnished laboratory adapted to the weightless environment of space and pressurized for working without space suits. Spacelab 1 would also carry two payload specialists (one European and one U.S. citizen) to operate the scientific instruments. (NASA Release 78-121; JSC Release 78-34; JSC Roundup, Aug 4/78, 1; Marshall Star. Aug 16/78, 3; DSFCX-Press, Aug 11/78, 3; Langley Researcher, Aug 11/78, 1)
AvWk reported that the Soviet Union had labeled the U.S. Space Shuttle a killer-satellite development, and U.S. officials planning talks with the USSR had been debating how to refer to the Space Shuttle in these discussions. NASA had been concerned about the effect on the Space Shuttle program of antisatellite negotiations, although U.S. negotiators had stated they had no intention of trading away Space Shuttie capability for USSR concessions. Informal negotiations on limitation of antisatellite-weapons tests had been set for May; U.S. officials said that NASA must have expected the Space Shuttle to be part of antisatellite discussions. As the Soviets had not cited the Space Shuttle by name, but rather as a “manned system of dual use,” U.S. officials had not decided whether the concessions sought by the USSR would be on overall Shuttle capability, on individual Shuttle capabilities, or on individual potentially antisatellite Shuttle missions. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 17)
The USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) announced award of a contract to Boeing Aerospace Company, Seattle, Wash., for full-scale development and initial production of an inertial upper-stage (IUS) vehicle system, consisting of a 3-axis-stabilized vehicle of multiple solid-propellant stages with an avionics section including a reaction-control system. Although the USAF had primary responsibility for development of the IUS, NASA would participate in development because it also would use the IUS. The basic concept, a 2-stage vehicle for use with the Space Shuttle and on the Titan for some USAF missions, had one 20 0001b solid-propellant motor and one 60001b solid-propellant motor that would deliver a 50001b spacecraft to geosynchronous orbit. NASA also planned two other vehicle configurations, one to carry large spacecraft on planetary missions and another for deep-space missions such as Galileo, a probe of the planet Jupiter. The Space Shuttle would deliver all NASA IUS vehicles to low earth orbit for use in pushing spacecraft to higher orbits or to earth-escape trajectories. The first NASA IUS flight would be a mission planned for summer 1980 to launch a tracking and data-relay satellite (TDRS); first use of a 3-stage IUS would be the Galileo mission planned for launch Jan. 1982. (Marshall Star, Apr 19/78, 1)
Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. had delivered the last of eight empty solid-fuel rocket motor-case segments to MSFC for use in the final burnout phase of Space Shuttle ground-vibration tests scheduled for early 1979, the Marshall Star reported. Current vibration testing was in the “liftoff’ phase using motor cases filled with inert propellant; this phase would be completed and the Space Shuttle elements removed from the dynamic-test stand by the end of 1978. All the elements would be returned to the stand, including the empty motor-case segments, for final vibration-test phase simulating the actual Space Shuttle situation just before solid-fuel rocket-booster separation after expending the solid propellant. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 1)
NASA announced the inception of Orbit 81, an RCA educational program to involve inner-city high school students in designing and developing a scientific experiment for launch on the Space Shuttle in 1981. The program had resulted from discussions among representatives of the Camden, N.J., public school system, NASA, and RCA. Other high schools were conducting similar programs, but NASA officials called the Camden project unique because it was the only “total involvement program covering all the disciplines, arts, and skills” taught in the curriculum. Students taking courses other than science and mathematics could be active participants in the project. Selection of an Orbit 81 experiment would take place when students had gained enough scientific insight to participate in the decision. The program would include enrichment courses in space science, summer sessions, and tours of NASA and RCA facilities. RCA had donated surplus laboratory equipment to the schools; NASA would provide literature, special programs, lectures, and demonstrations. Students of Camden and Woodrow Wilson High Schools had attended a space colloquium presented by NASA and RCA. RCA had made an initial payment to NASA as part of the $10 000 reservation fee to ensure that the Orbit 81 payload, which could weigh up to 90kg and occupy no more than 0.14m3, would have a place aboard the Space Shuttle when launch time arrived. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 11)
Boeing had awarded a $2 million contract to United Technologies’ Chemical Systems Division to build seven servoactuator systems (and two actuators for preflight testing) that would raise the inertial upper stage (IUS) to deployment position in the Space Shuttle payload bay, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Each system would consist of two servoactuators (one for backup), composed of an actuator and electronic controller positioned on either side of a tilt table in the payload bay to which the IUS would be secured. On command, the system would physically tip the tilt table to a predetermined position (e.g., 58°) for IUS deployment. The actuator motor would drive an extendable shaft 41 to 57in long to rotate the tilt table. Pyrotechnic devices on the tilt table would release the IUS, and springs would launch it into space. First flight of the IUS on board the Space Shuttle was scheduled for 1980. (D/SBD, Dec 20/78, 239)
The House subcommittee on space science and applications had added funding of $4 million to the NASA FY79 budget for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter and a new stereosat earth resources spacecraft, AvWk reported. The subcommittee had also added $7 million to NASA’s Office of Space Transportation funds for advanced planning, plus $3 million each for. large space-structures work and solar power satellite studies. (NASA’s initial budget request had not included solar power satellite funding, because of Dept, of Energy priority in this area.) The subcommittee had added $40.5 million to the NASA request and cut $25 million, resulting in a net $15.5 million increase. Funds for a stereosat came with a subcommittee call for development of the $40- to $45-million spacecraft based on significant funding from the user community; primary users would be geologists exploring for petroleum and minerals. Other subcommittee additions were $10 million for distribution of Landsat data and training programs to states for crop-prediction research, encouragement of microwave development, and work on an operational Landsat system; $4 million to stimulate, bioengineering work; $1.5 million to support industrial application of NASA technology; and $4 million for modifying NASA’s tracking system to facilitate full and timely handling of Spacelab data early in Spacelab’s flight program. (AvWk, Mar 6/78, 13)
As the climax of a 4-mo attempt to stabilize and trim the orbital position of Skylab, a NASA team of engineers and controllers from JSC, MSFC, IBM, and three tracking stations (Bermuda; Madrid; and Goldstone, Calif.) had successfully put the space station in an orbital position they hoped would prolong its lifetime in space, JSC announced. Maneuvers in June had put the space station in an attitude intended to reduce atmospheric drag at its orbital height of 389km (242 statute mi). Assuming that the gyros continued to function, NASA hoped the new attitude would extend the orbital lifetime of Skylab by 6 to 12mo to late 1979 or early 1980, giving NASA time to arrange an early Space Shuttle test flight to reboost Skylab into higher orbit, or deorbit it into a remote ocean area. Maneuvers had begun in Mar. when engineers and flight controllers at the Bermuda tracking station checked out Skylab systems and brought its batteries to a fully charged state. On June 8, flight controllers had turned on the dormant control-moment gyros in the Skylab attitude-control system. (The other part of the system, the thruster attitude-control system, would expel nitrogen gas through nozzles to move Skylab into various attitudes in its orbit.) A computer with various sensors to indicate position had controlled both systems. Although one gyro that failed during the last Skylab mission in 1974 could not be used, the other two gyros were activated and worked as expected. On June 9, controllers had commanded Skylab into a solar inertial attitude in which the spacecraft’s solar cells always faced the sun. On June 11, they had maneuvered it into the desired “end-on velocity-vector” attitude, docking port forward and long axis parallel to the ground along the flight path. Skylab had remained in that position while engineers continued to monitor it, periodically transmitting minor corrections to the onboard computer controlling Skylab’s position. (JSC Release 78-25; Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; June 14/78,1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78,1; June 23/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, June 2/78, 2; June 30/78, 2; W Post, June 12/78, A-19))
NASA had not yet decided when to command the Skylab space station into a cartwheel maneuver that could extend its orbital life by 9 to 14mo, Science magazine reported. The maneuver could increase chances of a Space Shuttle mission either boosting Skylab or propelling it into controlled reentry. Major factor in the decision would be assessment of how long the station’s control-moment gyros could sustain the maneuver before failing; without the cartwheel, NASA believed reentry would occur between May 1979 and July 1980. According to Science, however, Skylab’s chances of remaining in the sky until NASA could get to it with a Space Shuttle were no better than 1 in 2. {Science, Apr 7/78, 28; AvWk, Apr 24/78, 15)
Langley Research Center announced it had presented to Thomas Blackstock its first major award for an energy-saving proposal. LaRC Director Donald Hearth had presented Blackstock with a check for $1245, largest monetary award ever given at the center for a suggestion. Blackstock’s idea was to upgrade the high-pressure air-supply system in the continuous-flow hypersonic tunnel so that it would run in an intermittent short-duration-flow blowdown test rather than in the longer duration continuous-flow mode. The tunnel, which represented LaRC’s only large-scale Mach 10 aerothermodynamic-test capability, had been important to the Space Shuttle testing and would aid in developing low-cost advanced space-transportation vehicles. Blackstock’s suggestion could save $30 000 the first yr without compromising the tunnel’s research capability; LaRC’s wind tunnels had consumed one-third of the electrical energy purchased by the center. (LaRC Release 78-24; LaRC Researcher, May 5/78, 1)
JSC announced that one of the world’s most unusual freight airplanes, the Super Guppy, would deliver a high-fidelity mockup of the Space Shuttle orbiter crew compartment from the contractor in Calif, to neighboring Ellington AFB in Tex. for transfer to NASA, marking first use of the Super Guppy for delivering Space Shuttle equipment. NASA would install the mockup (a detailed model of the cockpit and living quarters on the Space Shuttle orbiter) in a JSC training area for use in crew familiarization. The nonworking mockup was built by Rockwell Inti., prime contractor for the orbiter. The Super Guppy took aboard the mockup at Los Alamitos Naval Air Station near Los Angeles and flew it to Ellington, refueling at Davis-Monthan AFB, Tuscon, and Dyess AFB, Abilene. A modified Boeing YC-97J, the Super Guppy had the world’s largest internal dimensions in an aircraft; it could accommodate the fuselage of a 747, if sectioned. Its present configuration, test-flown by late NASA pilot Joe Walker in late 1965, v/as first used by NASA early in 1966. The Super Guppy, equipped with 4 Pratt & Whitney T34 turboprops, had flown more than 2 million mi carrying NASA cargo and had seen extensive use in the Apollo and Skylab missions. It had last landed at Ellington AFB in June 1976. (JSC Release 78-58)
MSFC reported that a failure in Skylab’s power system July 9 had caused loss of vehicle attitude; MSFC engineers had reconfigured the system and fully charged the spacecraft’s batteries, before performing reorientation maneuvers to return it to its minimum-drag attitude. Skylab was now about 240mi above earth, rolling at about 2 revolutions per hr. Engineers had planned maneuvers to stop the roll and place the vehicle first in a solar-inertial attitude, then in an end-on velocity vector that would encounter minimum atmospheric drag. However, Dr. Chris Kraft, JSC director, said in a copyrighted interview with the Dallas Morning News reported in the Washington Post: “I don’t believe Skylab is going to live long enough for us to get to it with the Space Shuttle . . . We’re going to have to live with the fact that Skylab is going to die a natural death.” (Marshall Star, July 19/78,1, July 12/78,1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 1; ARC Astrogram, July 13/78; 1; W Post, July 21/78, A14)
Rockwell Inti. Corp. announced that the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory had awarded its Los Angeles Division a $6.04 million contract to build test-aircraft structures using a revolutionary manufacturing process developed by the company and used on the Rockwell-built Space Shuttle. The AF Built-up Low-cost Advanced Titanium Structure (BLATS) program would use 2 Rockwell-developed processes (diffusion bonding and superplastic forming) in designing, fabricating, and testing a 10001b section of fuselage for use on a future advanced fighter. The 46mo contract called for construction of a complex about 8ft x 10ft x 3ft, representing the center fuselage section where the wings attach, and a portion of the aft fuselage where the engines would be mounted, and including the necessary fuel tanks. Rockwell engineers believed superplastic forming with concurrent diffusion bonding of titanium aircraft structure was the biggest breakthrough of the decade in advanced metals fabrication, because it might result (depending on the type of structure) in cost savings of from 50 to 70% and weight savings of from 30 to 50%, compared to conventional methods of building titanium parts. Besides the next generation of fighter aircraft, other applications of the process could be jet engines, spacecraft, and supersonic transports. (Rockwell Release LAD-8)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that, pending arrival of the age of the Space Shuttle, the USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAM-SO) was modifying a Titan III 34D booster to ensure prime and backup launch capabilities during Space Shuttle transition. The 34D was a modified Titan HID that the USAF had put into operation in 1971; SAMSO had recommended it in 1975 to the Defense Science Board studying how DOD could manage an orderly transition from expendable to reusable launch vehicles. Instead of a variety of boosters, the 34D would use a common Titan III core for east- and west-coast launches, with the option of dedicating a 34D launch vehicle to either coast as late’ as 6mo before launch. The 34D also was compatible with the new inertial upper-stage (IUS) vehicle, another SAMSO project in full-scale development by Boeing Aerospace Co. During the Space Shuttle backup era beginning in 1980, the 34D/IUS combination would be contingency booster for top-priority defense payloads. Plans called for development of seven 34D boosters to be used first for launching two defense satellite communications system (DSCS) spacecraft in July 1980 from Cape Canaveral. Four of the seven vehicles would serve east coast launches using the IUS, and three would serve polar launches from Vandenberg AFB. Differences between the 34D and Titan HID included solid-fuel rocket motors lengthened 5 ft each to align with new common-core attach points and payload fairing modified to extend from 40 to 55ft. The new fairing would make the 34D payload environment nearly identical to that of the Shuttle orbiter cargo bay, a step toward upper-stage commonality. The 34D program was in final design stage under contracts with Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and United Technologies Corp. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 78, 9)
NASA and ESA announced selection of experiments for the proposed 2-spacecraft solar-polar mission planned for launch in 1983 and designed for first-time observation of the sun from the unique perspective of its polar regions. The solar-polar mission would explore one of the remaining frontiers of the solar system: the third dimension of space, out of the plane of the orbits of the planets. All previous interplanetary space probes had flown in the orbits of the planets, essentially intersecting the sun’s equatorial regions. Congress had not yet approved the project, but early selection of scientific participants and investigations would allow a prompt start on approval. NASA and ESA would each provide one spacecraft, and the combined scientific payload would be divided between U.S. and European investigators. The Space Shuttle would launch both spacecraft simultaneously using an inertial upper-stage booster, directing them on a trajectory in the ecliptic plane (the plane containing all the planets) toward Jupiter. Swinging around Jupiter, the craft would use the gravity of that planet to move out of the ecliptic plane and back toward the sun in trajectories, one northbound and one southbound, essentially mirror images of each other. After passing over the north and south solar poles, the spacecrafts would swing through perihelion (the distance closest to the sun) in the ecliptic plane, pass respectively over the other solar poles, then fly back to the vicinity of Jupiter’s orbit. The period from launch until shortly after the second pair of polar passages would be approximately 5yr. The mission should provide important new knowledge about the solar wind, cosmic rays, and the 3-dimensional structure and evolution of the sun’s corona (the outermost solar atmosphere), and increase understanding of solar phenomena that shape and control earth’s space environment. In anticipation of a FY79 Congressional authorization of the mission, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, manager of the mission for NASA, had undertaken studies of the U.S. spacecraft, payload, and mission design concepts. More than ISO American and European scientists would participate in solar-polar investigations. (NASA Release 78-39; ESA Release Mar 13/78; JPL Universe, Mar 17/78, 1)
JSC officials were puzzled after a weekend surprise, the Houston Post reported: 240 000 or so people came out to see the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise. With interest in the space program supposedly flagging, the question was why so many—some of whom walked for miles to get to the Space Shuttle orbiter—showed up to see an airplane-like craft just sitting atop a large airplane. The newspaper quoted a highway patrol trooper with 9yr of traffic-patrol duty: “Never in my life have I seen people come like that.” Largest previous crowd had been the 135 000 who turned up at Ellington Air Force Base for a 2-day Blue Angels show. Charles Biggs, JSC exhibits manager, said JSC had made no effort other than the usual press releases to attract a crowd, “no bands, no celebrities, no giveaways, just the orbiter sitting there.” A tour guide commented: “What I thipk is that this is different than Apollo and going to the moon. I think the Shuttle is coming closer to the people. It is something they can relate to. They wanted to know when they can go on it.” (Houston Post, Mar 14/78,3A)
NASA had completed an ignition test Apr. 21 on 3 Space Shuttle main engines at the National Space and Technology Laboratory at Bay St. Louis, Miss., the JPL and KSC newsletters reported. The firing planned for 2.5sec had actually lasted only lsec, but NASA officials said the test had met most of the objectives. A low-temperature reading in the fuel-pressure pumps caused premature cutoff. NASA and Rockwell Inti, engineers would decide whether to repeat the test before moving to the next phase of the program. {JSC Roundup, Apr 28/78,1; Marshall Star, Apr 26/78, 2) During April: NASA reported it had increased emphasis on general-aviation research, addressing problems and concerns of the industry, which had used results from recent programs in designing new aircraft. Objectives of NASA’s general-aviation research had been to improve safety and efficiency, reduce environmental impact of general-aviation aircraft, and ensure a base of new technology adequate to support continued growth in the light-airplane utility. Aerodynamic research had emphasized airfoil development, resulting in significant improvements in performance in all speed ranges. Avionics research had aimed at reducing the complexity and cost of aircraft interaction with traffic-control systems improving navigation, guidance, stabilization, and systems management. In generating information needed to design low-cost advanced avionics systems applicable to general aviation in the 1980s and beyond, NASA had integrated results of its studies into specifications for final systems design, fabrication, and installation on a twin-engine general-aviation aircraft for flight evaluation in 1979 and 1980. NASA had also defined technical problems that had limited accuracy and efficiency in aerial application of agricultural materials. The NASA program also had emphasized safety measures, including an automatic pilot-advisory system (APSA), structural crashworthiness, stall/spin research, and investigation of alternative fuels such as automotive gasoline for aircraft. Reducing the environmental impact of noise and exhaust emissions generated by light aircraft had also been an objective of NASA’s aeronautical program, which would eventually assist industry and regulatory agencies in meeting future noise and pollution-reduction goals. (NASA Release 78-41)
NASA announced that President Jimmy Carter had presented 1977 presidential management-improvement awards to Curtis Helms and Thomas Winstead of MSFC’s structures and propulsion laboratory. The two were among 7 awardees, selected from 50 nominees, honored at a May 23 ceremony in the White House rose garden. Their redesign of the Space Shuttle external fuel tank, eliminating one of the two vent-relief valves, had reduced vehicle weight and program costs while still meeting venting requirements and reliability standards, resulting in total savings of $5.6 million. (NASA Actv., July 78, 27)
