NASA announced that it had signed a contract with Rockwell International Corporation’s space systems group to build two Space Shuttle orbiters (OV-103 and OV-104), convert a ground-test orbiter (OV-99), and modify the first orbiter (OV-102); this would give NASA four orbiters for Shuttle operations. JSC would administer the $1.9-billion contract at Rockwell’s California facilities and at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. (NASA Release 79-15; JSC Release 79-07)
KSC reported another step toward Space Shuttle launch: mating of the first two segments of the solid-fuel rocket motors to aft skirt assemblies. The first major element of the system, the orbiter, was in the KSC processing facility being prepared for launch: the three main engines had been installed, and work was in progress on other items, especially installation of the thermal protection tiles. The second major element, the huge external tank, had been delivered to KSC for checkout before being mated to the rest of the system. The third major element, the two solid-fuel rocket motors that would fire in parallel with the orbiter engines at liftoff, had been built in sections to be assembled at KSC and were designed for reuse after cleaning, refurbishing, and reloading. Before the first test flight in 1980, the remaining tiles would be installed; orbiter systems checked out; remaining motor segments delivered and stacked; major elements mated on the mobile launch platform; assembly rolled out to the launch pad; and three main engines actually test-fired, in a final systems checkout. (KSC Release 174-79)
Gen. Lew Allen, Jr., U.S. Air Force chief of staff, told the annual meeting of the Military Operations Research Society that the priority of the Space Shuttle program had “shifted to matters of national defense,” the Santa Barbara News Press reported [see October 30]. Whatever else the Shuttle does and whatever other purposes it will have, “the priority, the emphasis, and the driving momentum now has to be those satellite systems which are important to national security,” said Allen, a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Emphasizing the “change from what had been true a year or so ago,” Allen said the change was “apparent and accepted now, and it’s a change which will, if there are additional technical difficulties..., become more and more significant.” The Shuttle, he said, was “quite critical for concerns of national defense and for.. .verification of treaties.. .Confidence in the Shuttle and its reliability must be sufficiently high for us to place what is a substantial amount of the security of the nation on the performance of that system.” (Santa Barbara News Press, Dec 6/79, 14)
NASA said that it would stop acquiring Goes 3 data after February 1980; on July 1 it had shut down the altimeter, primary experiment device. DOD would use the C-band transponders to calibrate tracking and would monitor and control Goes 3 after March 1, 1980. (NASA MOR E-855-75-01 [postlaunch] Dec 27/79) During December: The AFSC Newsreview reported completion of the first phase of construction at Vandenberg Air Force Base’s Space Shuttle facility. Launch eomplex 6, built in the 1960s for the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program, had never been used (the MOL program was canceled in 1969) and was available to WSMC as a Shuttle launch site, Phase 1, carried out by Morrison-Knudsen, Inc., under a $3.9 million Army Corps of Engineers contract, had moved 680,000 cubic yards of earth and 10,000 cubic yards of reinforced concrete and had dismantled 2,400 tons of steel. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 79, 6)
MSFC announced that on June 13 it would begin flight-qualification testing of a Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster at the Thiokol range near Promontory Point, Utah, to demonstrate the production, assembly, and firing cycle for a full series of Shuttle flights. Assembled from four segments, the 35-meter-long motor would first be static-fired to demonstrate “ablative safety factors” of the motor nozzle, which would be gimbaled to simulate control during a launch. Designed to move 8° in any direction, the nozzle would be part of the Shuttle guidance system. Insulation and ablative materials would protect the motor from heat during firing. (MSFC Release 79-54) The first flight-qualification firing of a Shuttle motor was “quite satisfactory,” said George Hardy, manager of the booster project at MSFC. After witnessing the firing in the Utah desert, Hardy said that the amount of thrust developed and the performance of the steering nozzles was “well within specifications.” The motor and igniter had been modified as a result of test firings of four development motors during the past two years. Static tests of the flight-configured solid-fuel rocket booster that each Shuttle mission would use in pairs would complete qualification testing. (MSFC Release 79-60)
NASA announced that JPL had selected TRW’s Space Systems Division, Redondo Beach, Calif., to negotiate a contract estimated at $80 million for designing, building, and testing one of two spacecraft to explore the Sun’s polar regions in the 1980s. A second spacecraft would be developed by ESA. The solar-polar mission sponsored jointly by NASA and ESA would study the Sun, cosmic rays, and magnetic fields in uncharted areas of the solar system. The four-year mission would begin with launch of both spacecraft by the Space Shuttle in 1983; a gravity-assist flyby of Jupiter in 1986 would put the craft over the solar poles in 1986 and again in 1987. This would be the first mission using spacecraft out of the plane in which Earth and other planets orbit the Sun. JPL would manage the project for NASA’s Office of Space Science. The TRW contract covered the spacecraft system and ground-support equipment, integration of the science payload, tests and launch preparation, and spacecraft-system support during the mission. (NASA Release 79-100)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle flights through early 1984 were almost completely booked up for payloads, with firm commitments for the first 37 operational flights beginning in 1981. The 47 payloads scheduled for those flights belonged to 14 government, commercial, and foreign users and ranged from launches of ESA’s Spacelab to navigation, communications, and weather satellites. NASA payloads would account for 32% of the number; DOD, about 15%; and all other users, about 53%. Payloads normally received assignments on a first-come first-served basis, but missions affecting national security would get priority, as would missions with time-critical launch windows or prime scientific or technical objectives. Flights for which NASA would be fully reimbursed would take precedence over routine scientific or technical launches. Services available to Shuttle users would include a basic launch with support and options (available at extra cost) such as special hardware, tests, and analysis; use of KSC services and facilities; or special operations such as extravehicular activity or longer duration. In addition to the 47 large payloads designed for the cargo bay, more than 200 organizations and persons had reserved (at a cost of $3 thousand to S10 thousand) space for up to 300 small self-contained payloads called getaway specials (GAS), research-and-development packages weighing 200 pounds or less. (NASA Release 79-142)
NASA reported successful completion December 17 at NSTL in Mississippi of a full-duration 9-minute 10-second run of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article, a time longer than that needed to launch an actual Shuttle into orbit. This was the first time the whole system was operated for full duration. No problems occurred, and MSFC test managers said that all goals were achieved. The test article consisted of a cluster of three main engines mounted in a simulated orbiter aft section, drawing propellants from a flight-type external tank. The three engines were throttled back from 100% rated power level to 90%, 80%, and 70%; engine gimbaling and pulsing were successful. To check out two-engine performance, one engine was cut off early as planned, and the remaining two were operated at 70% rated power level for the last 5 seconds of testing. (NASA Release 79-178; MSFC Release 79-133)
NASA announced that MSFC had appointed a board to investigate the automatic cutoff of a test firing July 2 at NSTL of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article (three main engines mounted in an orbiter aft section and attached to an external tank). A liquid-hydrogen leak from a main fuel valve caused the cutoff after 18.5 seconds; no explosion occurred, and the gaseous nitrogen and water fire-control systems put out an external fire resulting from hydrogen accumulation around the test article’s aft area. Inspection revealed damage to the aft heat shield and charring of external-tank insulation, but the engines appeared generally in good condition. (NASA Release 79-92) 570 million miles a flood of scientific data and “stunning photographs of the planet and some of its moons,” as the New York Times described them. Scientists at the JPL, control center for the mission, said that the flight was continuing to provide them with “new surprises.” They had modified observing sequences on Voyager 2 to benefit from discoveries by Voyager 1 on its encounter in March. Changes included more darkside images of the planet to measure lightning and aurora; images of Jupiter’s ring, taken away from the equatorial plane; and about nine hours of continuous imaging of Io for volcanic activity. Voyager 2’s inward track past three of the four “Galilean” satellites had let it see regions not viewed by Voyager 1; its path was “more conservative,” as it passed 10 Jupiter radii above the visible clouds compared to Voyager i’s 4.9 radii, for “complementary observations.” Voyager 2 studies began April 25 and would continue for a seven month look compared to Voyager Ts three month look. Voyager 2 had been launched August 20, 1977; Voyager 1, launched September 5, 1977, on a faster and shorter course, had overtaken its sister ship before the end of the year. Scientists found that Jupiter and its moons did not resemble planets or satellites nearer the Sun, nor one another. Surprises in the findings were due, they said, to real differences between the outer and inner solar system and lack of previous knowledge, a result of the distance separating Earth from Jupiter. Before Voyager 1, “we thought we had some idea of what planets were like,” said Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey after seeing Europa images from Voyager 2. Instead of a sphere heavily pocked such as Earth’s moon and Mars from meteor impacts, Voyager 2 images showed Europa “as smooth as a billiard ball,” with hardly any craters on a surface covered by a mantle of slushy snow and ice up to 60 miles deep, with far-reaching shallow marks like cracks in an eggshell. The spacecraft passed Callisto and Ganymede on its way toward Europa and, after its encounter with Jupiter, had begun a 10-hour watch for Io, where it photographed six volcanoes erupting. On its approach to Jupiter, Voyager 2 had encountered radiation so intense that JPL had turned off a sensitive ultraviolet (UV) detector six hours earlier than planned; however, project director Ray Heacock declared “no problems and no failures in any of our instruments.” (JPL Release 901; NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, June 26/79; NY Times, July 10/79, C-l; W Post, July 10/79, A-10; W Star July 11/79, A-4; July 13/79, A-10) The PRC news service told of the difficulties encountered by Skylab and the U.S. government’s offers of assistance and compensation in case of damage or injury, noting that some airlines had suspended flights during the critical period. Tass said that western Australia authorities had “warned the population that some parts of Skylab might be radioactive and urged. .. caution in approaching them.” At a NASA press conference a few days earlier, a reporter asked how NASA could tell if someone brought in a piece of debris claiming falsely that it was part of Skylab. Richard G. Smith, deputy associate administrator, space transportation systems, who had been “actively in charge of Skylab activities for NASA,” replied that “it is very easy to identify an object that’s been in space. The high-energy particles that penetrate it in orbit give an extremely low-level but characteristic radiation background—no radiation for anybody to be worried about.. .But it’s very easy to determine that.” United Press International (UPI) reported July 13 that the Kalgoorlie town hall had squeezed into its lobby the biggest fragment recovered so far, a 6.5-foot by 3.25-foot cylindrical piece of metal bearing a stamped number 102: “very good for the tourist industry,” said Mayor Ray Finlayson. (NASA press conf July 6/79; coord ctr bltns July 9, 10, 11/79; NASA Dly Actv Rept July 12/79; W Star, July 12/79, A-l; UPI, July 14/79, A-7; FBIS, Xinhua in Chinese, July 12/79; Tass in English, July 13/79; AvWk, July 16/79, 22)
The Washington Post said NASA’s inspector general and the DOD were investigating charges that Rockwell International’s Space System Group beginning in 1977 had hidden cost overruns by charging expenses to the wrong projects. Work on the USAF’s Navstar satellite was charged to NASA’s Space Shuttle contract, employees alleged, and current costs of Shuttle development were charged to future operations, in violation of government budget rules. Present and former Rockwell employees had provided company documents to back up their statements. Ray Sena, an employee who had complained to higher management and to NASA officials, was formally suspended by Rockwell. Company officials admitted an investigation was in progress but refused comment. Although NASA learned of the situation in 1977, it only recently admitted that the Shuttle was at least $500 million over budget. (W Post, Nov 5/79, A-2)
MFSC reported that the first Space Shuttle engine tested for flight acceptance had “passed with flying colors” a 520-second endurance test May 12 that simulated launch conditions. Scheduled for use on Columbia, this engine would undergo electrical and mechanical checkout before formal acceptance. The tests began April 25 with 1.5-second ignition-test firing, followed by a 100-second calibration-test firing May 2. After formal acceptance, the engine would go by truck to KSC for installation. The other two of the cluster of three Rockwell-built engines to be used on Columbia were at Space Technology Laboratories for the same series of tests. (MSFC Release 79-45; NASA Release 79-68)
MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon carrying a Space Shuttle external tank and other components had begun an 11-day trip to KSC by way of the Tennessee River and the Gulf of Mexico. KSC would use the items to check out assembly and movement of the components in the vehicle assembly building and to train personnel in stacking the Shuttle on its mobile launch platform. MSFC said the waterways to the Gulf, swollen by recent rains, had receded enough to permit a normal trip to KSC. (MSFC Release
NASA announced that it had named the first four Space Shuttle orbiters that would operate in space to honor U.S. explorer ships. The first orbiter (102) scheduled for launch later in 1979 was named for the Columbia, which located the Columbia River in 1792; Captain Robert Gray named the river for his sloop. Challenger (orbiter 099) was named for the ship that gathered data December 1872-May 1876, filling 50 volumes on Earth’s oceans. Discovery (orbiter 103) was the ship looking in 1610-1611 for a northwest passage from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean by exploring Hudson’s Bay. Atlantis (orbiter 104) was the first U.S.-operated vessel designed for ocean research, a two-masted ketch that logged half a million miles between 1930 and 1966. Enterprise, the first orbiter built, was named for a vessel exploring the Arctic from 1851 to 1854, as well as for the flagship in television’s Star Trek; as the test orbiter, it was not intended for use in space. (NASA Release 79-10; Washington Post, Jan 26/79, C-2; WSJ, Jan 26/79, 1).
The New York Times said that Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, had told a House subcommittee that problems with the Space Shuttle would delay flight of the Galileo mission for two years. NASA now planned to launch the mission in 1984 in two parts: one Shuttle flight would take a Galileo orbiter into Earth orbit for launch toward Jupiter, and another Shuttle flight would take another spacecraft for launch into the atmosphere of Jupiter carrying instruments to record its composition. Earlier mission plans were for a 1982 Shuttle launch carrying a single Galileo package including orbiter and Jupiter probe; the change would add more than $184 million to the cost of the project, previously estimated at about $450 million. NASA had had problems not only with the Shuttle insulating tiles but also with the rocket engines. An improved engine was to be standard after the first test flights. Angelo Guastaferro, NASA’s head of planetary programs, said that the 4,600-pound Galileo spacecraft would be too heavy for the Shuttle to carry into Earth orbit without the improved engines. (NY Times, Oct 18/79, A-15)
JSC reported that it had amended its contract with Rockwell International Corporation to cover 56 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter. The first amendment, covering 32 changes, would cost $14,338,000; the second, covering 24 changes plus testing, repairs, and spares, would cost $2,869,833. The control value was now about $3.43 billion. (JSC Release
Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle orbiter built, began its last trek across the United States from KSC to DFRC, where “its flight log books will be closed,” said the Marshall Star. DFRC said the craft, which served as prototype in all Shuttle tests to date, would be trucked to Rockwell’s Palmdale facility, where parts would be removed for additional testing and possibly used in constructing future orbiters. Enterprise had made eight captive and five free-flight approach-and-landing tests at DFRC in 1977; it then was ferried to MSFC for ground vibration tests, then to KSC in April this year to check out facilities for handling Columbia, first Shuttle scheduled for launch. JSC Roundup later reported that 750,000 people had crowded airports during the return to California and that Enterprise was a two-day front-page story in area papers at each of the six stopovers and a lead story on television and radio. Donald “Deke” Slayton, now program manager for Shuttle flight-test operations, piloted the T-38 chase plane flying with Enterprise and was spokesman for the Shuttle program during press briefings. (DFRC Release 29-79; Marshall Star Aug 8/79, 1; JSC Roundup, Aug 24/79, 1)
Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, sent committee members a report prepared by staff of a review of cost, performance, and schedule aspects of the Space Shuttle program, based on NASA’s request for a $220-million addition to the FY80 budget request. The staff director wrote that recommendations in the report would, if implemented, improve budget requirement estimating, program cost, and schedule control, as well as NASA communications with the committee. (Text, oversight rept Aug 79)
MSFC reported that it had delivered most of the hardware that would be needed by the first Shuttle mission: main engines, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters. All three main engines had arrived at KSC; two had been installed, and the third was scheduled for next week. The first external propellant tank had been barged to KSC and installed in the VAB to await arrival of Columbia from the processing facility nearby. Flight hardware for two solid-fuel rocket boosters, except for the loaded motor segments, had been delivered to KSC, and the loaded parts were to arrive about September 20. (MSFC Release 79-82)
MSFC reported completion of flight-certification test firings of the Space Shuttle main engines June 27, with a simulated abort mission requiring the engine to fire 823 seconds. To detect potential weaknesses in systems or hardware, engineers would remove selected components and inspect them for wear and tear; after inspection and analysis of test data, the same test series would be repeated on the same engine to simulate typical mission profiles. J.R. Thompson, MSFC’s main-engine project manager, said that engine performance and operation during the test series was very satisfactory. Rockwell conducted the tests at NSTL. (MSFC Release 79-69)
MSFC reported the successful conclusion October 26 of three separate static-firing tests of the Space Shuttle main engine. The three test engines had completed a scheduled total of 1245 seconds of firing time in less than 12 hours; two engines were tested at NSTL in Mississippi; the other, in California. One of the pair tested in Mississippi fired for 520 seconds, the running time needed for Shuttle launch; the other fired for 665 seconds, the time required for a mission abort. Both these tests were part of a preliminary flight certification series. NASA had postponed a 510-second static test scheduled for October 24 [see October 25] because of a faulty sensor that indicated a hydrogen leak. (MSFC Release 79-119)
NASA reported that a scheduled 510-second firing of the main Shuttle propulsion system test article’s three-engine cluster at the National Space Technology Laboratories had failed November 4 when a sensor detected excessive pressure in the oxygen pump of the No. 3 engine and shut the test down after 9 seconds. The No. 1 engine was damaged during the cutoff sequence, when a hydrogen line ruptured near the base of the engine nozzle. Extent of the damage was unknown; the engine would be sent to Rockwell’s California plant for inspection and repair. MSFC and the contractor were investigating the failure and the possibility of replacing the damaged article in the test stand. Impact on Shuttle schedules had not been assessed. Meanwhile, the orbiter Columbia had successfully passed a series of “ hot fire” tests at KSC of the auxiliary power units to steer main-engine nozzles during launch and to drive control surfaces during atmospheric flight. The tests simulated ascent and descent phases of a Shuttle mission. Next milestone for Columbia would be an integrated test of all systems. (NASA Release 79-146; MSFC Release 79-122)
NASA announced that it would accept on an annual basis applications to become Space Shuttle astronauts; the 1979 time for civilian applications would begin October 1 and end December 1. Successful applicants would report to JSC for a year’s astronaut training, after which NASA would choose pilot and mission-specialist candidates to be assigned by the Astronaut Office to jobs that would continue to train them in their scientific or technical field. NASA now had 27 selectees, including 11 scientists, available as Shuttle crew; 35 more candidates were in training to qualify for selection. The number of candidates to be selected in 1980 would depend on mission requirements. (NASA Release 79-101; JSC Release 79-50)
The $220 million requested by the President as an amendment to NASA’s Space Shuttle program was “essential to allow the... program to proceed in a reasonable manner,” Dr. William J. Perry, undersecretary of defense for research and engineering, told the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space. Noting that NASA’s launch predictions were based on the supplemental funding, Perry said DOD was concerned about the adequacy of the Shuttle fleet to meet traffic demands sure to build rapidly “once the Shuttle is operational.” DOD planned to transfer “several programs important to our national security” to Shuttle launch by 1983, and delays in orbiter delivery would mean further use of expendable launch vehicles, with “adverse operational and economic impact.” A House appropriations subcommittee PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED had dropped $70 million for construction of Shuttle facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base from FY80 budget requests, and the full committee was not likely to ignore the subcommittee’s recommendation. (Text, June 4/79; Today, June 6/79, 1A)
MSFC reported that a delegation from the People’s Republic of China (PRC) visiting the United States since November would arrive at MSFC January 5 to investigate peaceful uses of space technology. Following up a visit to the PRC last July by Presidential Science Advisor Dr. Frank Press, the Chinese delegation, accompanied by NASA representatives, had visited several NASA centers and U.S. aerospace industry establishments. Among items of interest to the visitors at MSFC would be the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, currently undergoing tests. The PRC representatives were to be in the United States until mid-January and had concluded an informal agreement on developing a civilian communications system for the PRC and on buying equipment to receive Earth resources data from Landsat remote-sensing satellites. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch headed the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Jen Xin-min, director of the PRC’s Academy of Space Technology, headed the PRC delegation. (MSFC Release 79-2)
NASA reported that arrangements for press coverage of the overland trek of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia from Rockwell’s plant at Palmdale, Calif., to Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and the flight from there to KSC, would begin March 7 for DFRC and March 5-9 at KSC. The trip by truck would precede the mating of Columbia to its Boeing 747 carrier, the brief flight test March 9 of ferry preparations and tile status, and the departure soon after for KSC. The Shuttle would be off-loaded and moved into the orbiter processing facility March 10-11. (NASA Release NE79-2)
NASA announced that a special staff of consultants appointed in May 1979 to assess Shuttle management had submitted its report to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. The report contained eight major conclusions (and comments). 1) When the Shuttle program began, NASA managers took an economical approach to space transportation. Subsequent budgets challenged managers to bring in a difficult technical program with limited funds. —(NASA originally envisioned a S5.15 billion program, predicting first manned orbital flight in 1978.) 2)	Shuttle management had achieved “a commendable level of accomplishment. . .considering fiscal constraints placed upon the program since its inception.” (Though this report necessarily focused on deficiencies, it noted that Shuttle-program personnel had individually and collectively achieved a great deal in a large and very complex program,) 3)	Shuttle management, in an effort to proceed toward completion even under funding limitations, had set up work schedules demanding more performance than could be delivered. (This approach had resulted in deferment of some of the planned work each year, as funds required exceeded those available. When critical new work became necessary within a fiscal year, as technical problems came up, even more scheduled work had to be deferred. This resulted in continual planning adjustments that precluded establishment of a stable baseline and led to program inefficiency. (Example: subcontractor work increased or decreased repeatedly as funding changed in critical areas such as tile manufacturing. Program changes and associated up-and-down expenditure rates had led to termination of experienced contractor and subcontractor personnel, who became unavailable later because of aerospace industry demand. The subsequent employment of inexperienced personnel reduced overall efficiency. The report called this a major cause for concern, especially in the production phase of the program, also, costs due to delays in solving technical problems had increased.) 4)	Long-range planning and status reporting were lacking: emphasis was on the current fiscal year with only secondary attention to work remaining to be done. Near-term planning took so much attention that long-term impact of deferred work was not integrated into the budgets. (Effective long-range planning requires clear understanding of what has been accomplished, plus accurate prediction of remaining work. Shuttle management faced budgets showing unrealistic costs of its goals, with no effective status-reporting system. Most program planning consisted of constant near-term replanning to count up expenditures in a timely manner, although measuring the work achieved through these expenditures and estimating work still needed were weak. Management tools lacking in some major Shuttle contracts, such as cost reporting integrated with work measurement, were useful but did not provide an automatic solution. (The only available means of assessing even the partial funding requirements of the Shuttle was an agencywide budget plan called POP [program operating plan] inadequate for program control: it appeared only twice a year and contained little pertinent data between July and March. NASA needed a reliable way—lending itself to independent evaluation—to know program baseline and status, with realistic cost and schedule projections. Management must overcome the cumulative impact of previous constraints and pressures, while making allowance for the need to rely on contractor input.) 5)	The Shuttle organization functioned well from a technical standpoint but not in the areas of schedule and budget. Organization needed strengthening, and two-way communications needed improvement. (The original concept of Shuttle organization was a Level 1 program director at NASA Headquarters, a Level 2 [integration] program manager at JSC, and Level 3 separate program offices at the various centers: JSC for the orbiter; MSFC for the main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster; and KSC for checkout and launch. Prime contractor support to project offices would be Level 4. Time had altered the concept: the Headquarters Level 1 associate administrator had become the de facto program director, who required the directors of JSC, MSFC, and KSC to take more part in activities reporting to them; responsibility for funding shifted from Level 2 to Level 1. This seemed a feasible arrangement, but the report said “none of the management levels in Rockwell and NASA had a good grasp” of undone work and other items needing completion before shipping Columbia to KSC. Investigators said Level 1 “broad and detailed involvement” with technicalities meant less time for cost and schedule. NASA needed cost awareness “independent of contractor input” and sensitivity to “lower-level cost trends.”) 6)	Schedule changes were no longer a valid way to cope with reduced program or funds; fixed delivery schedules and milestones in the initial operating program not yet achieved required a new management approach. (Work schedules and budgets must allow for modifications required after the first few Shuttle flights. Users must recognize that initial operations would include development; NASA should make Shuttle users aware of realistic performance and schedule commitments, with priority to successful completion of development.) 7)	Transition to the operational phase remained to be worked out; management should ensure that current organization alignments for Shuttle operations are appropriate. The NASA/DOD interface needed clarification. (NASA Headquarters managed program operations, with operations offices at JSC, MSFC, and KSC; cooperation between the operations and program offices was evident, but transition from development to operations would need work. Since needs and plans of the DOD user community would affect NASA planning and budget, management to forestall problems should maintain “high-level near-term understanding” of DOD plans.) 8)	The potential was high for unexpected technical problems, schedule slips, and cost growth. All program planning should include appropriate reserves. (Although the report noted that some parts of a total management-control and information system were in place and functioning well, significant potential for problems would remain until deficiencies cited in the report were corrected.) (Shuttle Program Management Assessment rept, Sept 12/79 [issued to press Oct 18/79], HistOfc fls; NASA note to editors NE79-20; JSC Roundup, Sept 21/79, 1)
At a press conference on NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1980 (FY80), Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said the 1980 budget year would not “go down in history as my favorite.” The request NASA submitted to Congress was just over $4.7 billion, an increase of about $160 million over the FY79 budget, counting in the latter a $185 million supplemental NASA had asked for. The FY80 request would amount to slightly less than the rate of inflation, Dr. Frosch said; not counting the $185 million supplemental in the FY79 budget, the 1980 request would be “about equal to inflation.” Whereas funding sought for space science and applications was up about 20% and the total amount included support for all ongoing programs, it contained no money for “new flight project starts of any major kind” in space sciences or applications. The budget did contain “some increases in aeronautics, where it is more difficult to identity a major new start in any case.” “Current best estimate” for the first Space Shuttle flight was November 9, postponed from September 28, and NASA’s schedule had been adjusted accordingly. Money requested for space science had increased $100 million, about 20% over FY79; this covered major projects and research and development now under way, such as Space Telescope, Galileo (the Jupiter-orbiter probe), the high-energy astronomical observatory, Spacelab, the solar polar mission, infrared astronomy satellite, and solar maximum mission. Applications funding included money for joint multiagency research in crop monitoring and commodity projection by NASA, together with the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior and the Agency for International Development (AID). Funds for aeronautics would increase 14% to cover current research and technology and to continue the aircraft energy efficiency program, with research on reduction of noise and pollution. In manpower, NASA would lose 674 permanent Civil Service positions over FY79 and FY80, part of this the agency’s share of a government-wide 2 % cut in personnel. Frosch summarized the budget as one that “in key program areas continues momentum. . .while it’s tight, we think we can make a good transition to the Shuttle era and we can keep going on the science, the applications, and the aeronautics.. (Text; W Star, Jan 22/79, A-10)
The Washington Star reported that faulty aluminum might have been built into the Space Shuttle and newly constructed military and civilian aircraft. A German aircraft firm, Fokker, had discovered the problem in May; Reynolds Aluminum Company, the manufacturer, told a high-level team of officials from NASA, DOD, and FAA that the plates might have “soft spots” because they were not cooled properly during fabrication. Walter Williams, NASA chief engineer, said that, until records of the disposition of the faulty aluminum were located, “we have to worry about everything.” The agency suspected that the large external tank (which would carry the Shuttle during blastoff) might contain some of the metal, as might the Shuttle itself, as well as its solid-fuel rocket engines. External-tank strength was crucial because it bore the weight of the liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen fuel under high pressure, as well as the solid-fuel rockets during liftoff. Spokesmen for Reynolds and the Pentagon were “vague about the amount of aluminum involved,” the Star said, but an internal NASA memo said it was about 15 million pounds of aluminum plates. {W Star Aug 7/79, 1)
JSC reported on trials of a Buck Rogers-style maneuvering unit designed for moving about and working outside the Space Shuttle. Officially named Manned Maneuvering Unit (MMU), the device worn on the back of a spacesuited astronaut would allow movement in the weightlessness of space using nitrogen gas jets to control direction. Martin Marietta, the manufacturer, had submitted a prototype the previous week for three months of testing on different-sized astronauts (including female candidates) for fit and mechanical performance in use. Astronaut Dr. Bruce McCandless had successfully checked out the unit’s compatibility with the self-contained portable life-support system, wearing a spacesuit and backing into the maneuvering unit as it would be located in the orbiter cargo bay, “like backing into a phone booth with a large knapsack on your back,” KSC would get the first flight unit early in 1980. (JSC Release 79-55)
MSFC said a long-duration test firing of the Shuttle main propulsion system scheduled June 12 was successful, even though a glitch in the automatic-cutoff instrumentation had terminated the test about 50 seconds into the 520 second program. Frank Stewart, test manager for MSFC’s Shuttle projects office, said that the test was successful “in the sense that the system performed as predicted and yielded a great deal of valuable data” needed before the first Shuttle flight. Stewart said the firing sequence was excellent. For the first time in test firing of three flight engines, the rated power level was attained, and the test produced pogo pulsing (a deliberate oscillation from very low to very high frequencies generated by a piston in the liquid-oxygen manifold, to show if vibrations in flight would constitute resonance dangerous to structures). This first long-duration firing of the clustered flight-type engines and propulsion system had already been delayed by malfunction of a development engine during single-engine tests. Inspection after the failure revealed a crack in the coolant pipe, requiring removal of the engine nozzle. Engineers modified a spare nozzle for installation in the test article. Stewart said the event should not delay the total test schedule, which included extra time for unforeseen difficulties. System verification should be complete “in ample time for the first Shuttle flight,” he said. (MSFC Release 79-58)
NASA announced that JSC was studying two ways to repair Space Shuttle tiles in orbit, both requiring crew members to go outside the Shuttle. JSC director Christopher Kraft called it “prudent” to be ready for in-orbit repairs, in case the tiles did not come up to specifications in actual fight: the thousands of heat-resistant blocks covering the underparts and sides of the orbiter might be damaged at launch and need patching before reentry. The first idea, using an extendable boom carrying television cameras and a platform, would relay images of a damaged area into the cockpit and sustain a spacesuited astronaut making external repairs. The other concept would use a jet backpack to maneuver an astronaut around the orbiter to inspect it and make repairs wherever necessary. JSC had three studies under way by General Electric, Martin Marietta, and McDonnell Douglas on repair materials and tools suitable for outer space. (NASA Release 79-120; JSC Release 79-58)
NASA reported it would speed up development of the MMU to be built by Martin Marietta for astronaut use in inspecting and repairing Space Shuttle insulating tiles while in orbit. The MMU, an improved version of a gas-jet backpack tested inside the orbiting Skylab in 1973-1974, should be fully developed by next August for the second Shuttle flight in October 1980. NASA would not consider further an alternate method of tile inspection (an extendable platform on a boom with a television camera). (NASA Release 79-125)
NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, which arrived at KSC April 10-after a piggyback flight from MSFC, would be rolled out to Launch Complex 39 on May 1 as part of an exercise to clear the way for launch of its sister ship, Columbia, which had arrived at KSC March 24 for checkout and final installation of thermal tiles. This would be the first time a complete Space Shuttle configuration had been put together in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) and moved to the launch pad; use of the Enterprise would confirm compatibility of assembly and launch facilities and ground support equipment with elements of the Shuttle and would rehearse KSC staff in Shuttle handling operations. On April 17, a 15-story external tank was mated with two inert solid-fuel rocket boosters on a mobile launcher platform in high bay 3; more than 75,000 visitors to the center viewed the assembly moving down the 2-mile towway to the VAB, into which Enterprise was moved April 18. The delta-wing orbiter would be mated with the external tank in a 19-hour operation before its 3.5-mile ride to Pad A, former site of Apollo lunar launches modified for Shuttle operations, where it would remain until the first week of June. (NASA Release 79-50)
In a move “necessary and proper to achieve the objective of national technical superiority through joint action with U.S. domestic concerns,” NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced that the agency would offer industry “equity partnership ventures” in use of the Space Shuttle, NASA technical advice, data, equipment, and facilities for commercial purposes. NASA had set up guidelines to ease U.S. industry entry into an area that, because of high technology and high economic risk, had traditionally been left to the federal government. Such a government-industry relationship would combine industry’s risk capital and experience with NASA’s resources to ensure U.S. leadership in space processing of materials. Areas of potential commercial interest included semiconductors, infrared and nuclear detectors, metallurgy, microwave devices, and medicine. (NASA Release 79-119)
JSC announced that all Space Shuttle orbiters would have an optical landing aid presently used by pilots of more than 20 U.S. and foreign commercial and military aircraft. Rockwell International, prime contractor for the Shuttle, would provide for the commander and pilot of all orbiters a “head up” system to project instantaneous displays of spacecraft speed, rate of descent, altitude, and other critical flight factors on a transparent viewing glass located above the cockpit window to be pulled down like the sun visor of an automobile. The system would be placed on Columbia in time for the first operational flight, expected early in 1981 after completion of the flight-test program, and in JSC simulators and trainers. (JSC Release 79-64)
Wire services reported that an explosion that damaged a Space Shuttle engine during test firing at Bay St. Louis, Miss., on December 27 might delay the first Shuttle launch, now scheduled for the end of September. Further tests would await determining the cause of the accident—apparently failure of a valve in a high-pressure pump feeding oxygen to a combustion chamber. The engine had completed 255 seconds of a 52-second test firing when the pump exploded, damaging the engine, and NASA would also need 3 to 4 weeks to repair damage to the test stand. Last September, when NASA announced delay of the first launch, originally scheduled for March, Associate Administrator John F. Yardley warned of further delays “if unforeseen problems arise or the tests are not entirely successful.” {NY Times, Jan 2/79 [UPI], A-13; W Post, Jan 4/79 [AP], A-2)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
The Washington Star reported that NASA had reestablished radio contact with Voyager 1 speeding toward Saturn after the spacecraft apparently became disoriented December 13 during a commanded course correction and aimed its antenna in the wrong direction. JPL controllers had managed to make it “reorient itself and aim its antenna directly at earth.” (W Star, Dec 17/79, A-4) The press reported that a 14-hour dry-run test of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia got under way at Cape Canaveral December 16 after a day’s delay for routine checks. The orbiter integrated test would check out Columbia’s systems using equipment and engineering teams in control centers at the Cape and JSC. (NY Times, Dec 17/79, D-15; W Star, Dec 17/79, A-2; W Post, Dec 17/79, A-28) Dr. Paul MacCready, builder of the lightweight Gossamer Albatross that made the world’s first manpowered flight across die English Channel in June this year, saw his creation go on display in Philadelphia’s Franklin Institute, the Washington Star reported. MacCready was now planning a solar-powered Albatross, the paper said. {W Star, Dec 17/79, A-2)
MSFC reported that 1.5-second ignition-test firings May 4 of a cluster of three Space Shuttle main engines at National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) had been successful, clearing the way for the second phase of verification tests. The three flight-type engines, previously acceptance tested individually at the facility, had undergone the cluster test in an assembly including the engines, a simulated orbiter midbody, and a flight-type aft fuselage to which the engines were fitted. Frank Stewart, MSFC test manager, said that sequencing was good and that he foresaw no problems with the first long-duration firing scheduled for May 15. The tests would evaluate system performance in a static-firing environment as a step in verifying the system for the first manned orbital Shuttle flight. Cluster firings would take place about once per month through July; the third phase of long-duration firings would begin in September and conclude in November, after the equipment had been modified. (MSFC Release 79-47)
MSFC announced that NASA would buy from Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International, 12 more main engines for the Space Shuttle under a $365.7 million amendment of the original 1972 contract that would bring its value to $1,263,215,058. The original contract was for purchase of 27 engines; the amendment would bring the total ordered to 19. The amendment also called for overhaul and test of 10 engines to 109% of rated power level, plus a second overhaul and flight test of the 3 engines being used for propulsion testing. Rocketdyne had delivered the engines for the first Shuttle flight, three ground-test engines, and a spare flight engine under the original 1972 contract. The three flight engines delivered to KSC had been installed on Columbia for next year’s first spaceflight. (MSFC Release 79-117)
NASA reported that 35 candidates for Space Shuttle astronaut had completed classroom instruction and moved into engineering assignments at JSC. The courses had begun in July 1978, and the successful candidates would become astronauts in July 1980. NASA had brought in personnel from other NASA centers and from universities to conduct courses on subjects such as space physics, ascent and reentry aerodynamics, spaceflight physiology, and tracking techniques; veteran astronauts had lectured on the budget process, people, and requirements in the space program and on being a CAPCOM (capsule communicator). Videotapes of the classes would be available to all employees at JSC. The first crews selected for Shuttle flights had begun lessons in the mission simulator, and the astronaut candidates would be observers. Lessons would include tests of every sort of emergency the crews might encounter during a mission, supervised by instructors who had spent six months learning how to harass the astronauts in their simulator exercises. The lesson plan, scheduled to take nine months “not counting. . .problems,” would prepare the crews for nearly any emergency, NASA said. (NASA Release 79-34; JSC Release 79-20)
ESA reported that the West German firm, Dornier System, leader of the STAR industrial consortium, would be prime contractor for a European spacecraft to participate in the international solar-polar mission (ISPM), a cooperative ESA-NASA project. The contract would cover design, development, manufacture, and testing, at a cost of more than 47MAU (million accounting units, worth U.S. $1.2 in 1979). The ISPM would make measurements outside the ecliptic plane and observations of the Sun using two spacecraft, one each from ESA and NASA, to be launched in February 1983 on the U.S. Space Shuttle. (ESA Release 25)
