Today reported that Rockwell International, prime Space Shuttle contractor, had made “key management changes and major organizational realignments.. .similar to ones made within the space agency recently.” The paper said NASA now hoped to launch the Shuttle in September, two years behind schedule. {Today, Jan 4/80, 12A)
NASA announced selection of two firms, McDonnell Douglas and TRW, to receive parallel $1 million one-year contracts for design-definition studies of 25-kilowatt power systems for the STS. The power systems, using solar energy to support large payloads left in orbit, would be placed in a fixed orbit by the Space Shuttle to provide electric power, heat rejection, attitude control, communications, and data handling for a variety of payloads freeing the Shuttle from extended time in orbit and reducing payload cost per day in orbit. MSFC would manage the study contracts and any follow-on development flight system. (NASA Release 80-63)
NASA reported selection of Hughes Aircraft’s space and communications group for negotiation of a $40 million contract to be managed by ARC for a carrier spacecraft to transport the Galileo probe to Jupiter. Launched from the Space Shuttle in March 1984, the probe would reach the planet by July 1987, separate from the carrier, and enter the atmosphere to measure it for about one hour down to a level where pressure would be 10 times that of Earth’s. The carrier would be powered by two radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs); solar energy at Jupiter’s distance would be too weak to furnish power to the carrier, which would maintain contact with Earth during the entire mission, returning data both in real time and for playback on tape recorders. The carrier would receive data from the probe during its entry and descent into Jupiter’s atmosphere, transmitting it to Earth stations. Data on Jupiter’s atmosphere, believed to consist of the original material that formed the stars, would give scientists better understanding of Jupiter’s and Earth’s weather mechanisms. (NASA Release 80-171; ARC Release 80-79)
NASA had no plans to carry tourists into outer space, the Washington Star said, even though its offices around the United Slates had floods of requests for rides since the Space Shuttle project was unveiled in 1977. At least 15,000 people had tried to book seats, and 1,200 new requests arrived each week. “Non-astronauts may be aboard some missions to conduct experiments,” said Chester M. Lee, NASA’s director of space transportation systems, “but we’re not ready to book tourists. There is absolutely no provision or thought for non-working passengers.” (W Star, July 8/80, A-2)
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) reported that a team of its scientists was working on a solar-ultraviolet (UV) spectral irradiance monitor (SUSIM) for use on the Space Shuttle to study long-term variations in solar flux for more accurate monitoring of UV radiation from the solar chromosphere and corona. Solar radiation in the wavelengths under study control many photochemical processes in Earth’s atmosphere at altitudes below 100 kilometers; variations in the radiation may alter the composition of the lower atmosphere, affecting the lifetime of pollutants and ion density in the D region. The Navy also considered the D region of the atmosphere important because of its direct effect on communications systems. The principal investigator, Dr. Guenter E. Brueckner, said that measurements by conventional methods in the 120- to 400-nanometer wavelength range were not accurate enough for scientists to define values for solar-flux variations over time. The monitor would travel as a solar sensor on an early orbiter flight; the spacecraft pilot would use its real-time data to point directly at the Sun in order to monitor the entire solar disk and measure variation of its intensity with solar activity. Brueckneir’s team consisted of three scientists—Michael E. VanHoosier, Dr. Dianne K. Prinz, and Dr. John-David F.	Bartoe—developing and testing the SUSIM for Shuttle flight. Both Prinz and Bartoe had passed mental and physical tests for astronaut-scientists and had been chosen to make a Shuttle flight; one of them might obtain firsthand data on solar activity by actually using monitor on a Shuttle flight. (NRL Release 20-5-80C)
NASA announced that MSFC had awarded a $230 million cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace for full-scale production of Space Shuttle external tanks, the only part of the: Shuttle not recovered for reuse. Martin Marietta had an earlier contract for design, development, and delivery of nine tanks—three test articles and six flight articles—for Shuttle test flights. The new contract, for delivery of 7 flight tanks to support Shuttle operating missions, included long lead-time procurement of components and subassemblies for 5 additional tanks and raw material for 24 other additional tanks. Manufacturing of the external tanks would take place at NASA’s Michoud assembly facility. (NASA Release 80-100; MSFC Release 80-90) —MSFC announced that it planned to reduce the weight of the Shuttle external tank by 6,000 pounds, a change that could increase the Shuttle’s payload-carrying capability by about the same amount. The center amended its tank design and development contract with Martin Marietta, adding more than $42.9 million to cover the weight-reduction effort and modify tools used in future production. The change would affect tanks built under a new contract for full-scale tank production to support operational Shuttle launches. The first lightweight external tank would be delivered in the summer of 1982. (MSFC Release 80-93; NASA Release 80-102)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA scientists and engineers were “concerned that political maneuvering, as opposed to thoughtful planning, was playing too strong a part” in FY81 budget cuts affecting NASA science and applications programs. Delay in bringing NASA’s program before a House appropriations subcommittee scheduled to meet March 25 could force the agency off the hearing schedule for weeks, further endangering approval of the $300 million Space Shuttle supplemental for FY80. NASA and congressional observers feared administration efforts to delay announcement of federal program cuts until after primary elections set for the coming week. {AvWk, Mar 24/80, 21)
OMB told Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, that President Carter concurred with NASA’s request for a 1986 mission to make a detailed examination of the surface of Venus. Previously, both U.S. and Soviet probes had penetrated the planet’s cloud cover to send data over a few minutes to several hours; Pioneer Venus returned data on the atmosphere, but none had given an idea of the surface. The President would request the necessary funds in his FY82 budget. The Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) spacecraft, managed by JPL, weighing about 5,000 kilograms (11,000 pounds) at launch, and costing $500 to $600 million, would carry a synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) and other scientific instruments. Lanched from the Space Shuttle in May or August of 1986, it would arrive at Venus in December 1986 and circle it for seven months in a 300-kilometer (180-mile) near-polar orbit, taking radar pictures and measuring atmosphere as well as surface. VOIR images should disclose the presence of continents, ocean basins, mountain chains, rift valleys, fault belts, or volcanoes, as well as nature and timing of plate-tectonic activity (continental drift) or the size and frequency of occurrence of impact craters. (NASA Release 80-166)
JSC reported that parts of the remote-manipulator system (the robot crane that would handle inflight transfer of Space Shuttle cargo) were being tested in its Shuttle avionics integration laboratory. The system would be used on the Shuttle beginning with the second flight to place or retrieve satellites in space, to assemble structures or components, or if necessary to rescue crews by transferring them to another vehicle. The manipulator was a 50-foot arm with movable joints at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist; associated motors, gears,and sensors; and an end-effector serving as an ingenious hand. The test parts were a display and control panel, rotational and translational hand controllers, and an interface unit for manipulator control belonging to the electrical subsystem. The arm and its movement would be simulated by computers in the lab. In the tests, engineers and technicians from NASA and the contractor Space Aerospace, astronauts, and representatives of the Canadian Research Council would try to duplicate events to be encountered while operating the space crane in orbit. Astronauts Drs. Sally Ride, Judy Resnick, Norm Thagard, and Story Musgrave would controls arm movement by using the hand controllers in a mockup of the orbiter’s aft station. System operators would watch a computer-generated television scene duplicating the view the crew would have out of the cockpit aft window. The difficulty would come in operating the arm with the dynamics induced by arm movement: in the weightlessness of space, once a mass (the arm and its load) were moved, it would keep going until stopped by an equal and opposite force. When a command moved the arm, the control system had to be ready to command a counteracting move. Also, the orbiter would move in response to the arm, and vice versa. Interaction between arm and orbiter controls must be explored before flight; the simulations in this investigation were among the most sophisticated ever attempted at JSC. (JSC Release 80-034)
JSC described a simulated Shuttle mission ending in a return-to-launch-site abort, as one of a series run in the Shuttle avionics integration laboratory (SAIL) in preparation for launch later this year. The SAIL resembled a full-size orbiter stripped of its skin, with wires and connectors bared, configured with the same flight-qualifiable hardware and electrical systems being used on the real orbiter at KSC. SAIL employees would run test sequences on a 24-hour basis to check' out the complex Shuttle avionics system; a typical test would begin with a nominal phase (all systems operating normally), then engineers would inject failures to see if the flight system could cope. The Shuttle dynamic simulator would feed equations for aerodynamics, environment, and motion of the orbiter, solid-fuel rocket booster, and external tank into the test system. More than 300 mock missions would fly in the JSC lab before the projected November launch. (JSC Release 80-016)
NASA announced that it and the ESA had selected 37 scientific experiments for the first flight of Spacelab, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 1982. The experiments were in five categories: atmospheric physics and Earth observation; space plasma physics; material sciences and technology; astronomy and solar physics; and life science. NASA would sponsor 13 of the 37; ESA (a consortium of 11 nations), the others. Deferred for assignment to later flights were three NASA experiments and a major ESA facility; the factor preventing selection of all the experiments was mass. Each agency would be allowed to fly 1,392 kilograms (3,062 pounds) of equipment on the mission. Unlike Skylab, Spacelab would not be left unattended in space; it would remain in the Shuttle and be returned to Earth for use in another mission. (NASA Release 80-62; MSFC Release 80-66; ESA Info 9)
MSFC announced that NASA had signed a $183,960,000 contract with ESA for a second Spacelab to be delivered in 1984. Like the first, the new Spacelab would be built by ERNO of West Germany, prime ESA contractor, with at least 26 subcontractors in ESA nations as well as the United States to make components and subassemblies. MSFC was responsible for technical support; JSC would handle operations; Kennedy Space Center (KSC) would be responsible for integrating Spacelab with the Space Shuttle and for launch. (MSFC Release 80-11)
The Space Shuttle Columbia, OV-102, rolled out of KSC’s orbiter-processing facility at 6:01 p.m. and moved to the VAB for mating to its external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters. Next rollout, from VAB to launch pad, would occur late in December. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt Nov 26/80; NASA anno Nov 24/80)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Rocketdyne officials had decided that widespread modification of Space Shuttle flight-engine welds made with welding rods from a suspect lot would not be necessary. Last month the company reported that it might have to straighten a large number of welds, but it had now decided to limit the modifications to an area of hydrogen line located near the base of the engine nozzles. The modified engines would be reinstalled on Orbiter 102 by mid-March, the magazine said. (AvWk, Jan 14/80, 21)
NASA announced award of its largest contract so far to a small business firm. KSC entered a fixed-price contract of $6,689,666 to W&J Construction Company of Cocoa, Fla., for work on Pad B of Launch Complex 39 where the Space Shuttle would be launched in 1982 when it became operational. W&J would put in long-run pipes and cables to pump and monitor fuels, coolant, nitrogen and gaseous helium, compressed air, and hydraulic fluids, from storage areas to the fixed and the rotating service structures. Connections to the Space Shuttle would be from the two service towers. The contract would be completed in 20 months. (NASA Release 80-152) •
NASA announced that, contrary to recently published reports, it was not taking reservations for travel on Space Shuttle missions. Recent articles on NASA plans to carry small experimental payloads on the Shuttle had mentioned a deposit of $500 to reserve payload space; the reference to a reservation had been taken to imply passenger space. NASA said that it would not offer seats on Shuttle flights to paying passengers. (NASA Release 80-2)
MSFC said that the Michoud facility near New Orleans had begun assembling the lightweight external-propellant tank for the Space Shuttle. Built by Martin Marietta Aerospace, the modified tank would weigh 6,000 pounds less than its predecessor, increasing Shuttle payload capacity by about that amount. Recent structural tests showed that reducing thickness of skin panels would not affect tank integrity; changing materials of some components would also take advantage of recent research. The external tank (actually two tanks connected by a collar-like intertank) would contain liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants for the three Shuttle main engines and would be the only major element not recovered for reuse. First of the lightweight tanks should be ready for delivery in the summer of 1982 for the fifth Shuttle launch. (MSFC Release 80-155)
NASA reported “highly successful” completion of a third static test on a Space Shuttle main engine at NSTL April 19, last of a series simulating power levels necessary to abort at full power in a Shuttle launch. Previous tests were on March 31 and April 14. The engine used (2004) was fired for 10 minutes, 10 seconds with 6 minutes at the 109% power level; this engine had a total firing time of 12,911 seconds (3.58 hours), equivalent to about 25 Shuttle flights. It would now undergo preliminary flight certification tests, 13 static firings at 102% of rated power level. (NASA Release 80-55; MSFC Release 80-58)
NASA reported that a final test firing of the Shuttle solid-fuel booster motor February 13 in the Utah desert was successful, and the motor would be ready for flight as soon as test-data results were available. Tests of this motor had begun in July 1977 with static firing of the first of four prototypes; three more development tests followed, the last Februaiy 17, 1979. A series of test firings of flight-type motors began June 13, 1979, to qualify them for manned flight; the test just concluded was the third and final firing of that series. Robert E. Lindstrom, manager of the Shuttle projects office of MSFC, said completion of the tests meant that the solid-fuel booster motors would perform successfully in flight. After propellant burnout, the boosters would separate and plunge into the ocean for retrieval and reuse. Two of the solid-fuel boosters were already on the launcher at KSC awaiting integration with other components (external tank and the orbiter itself) in preparation for the first Shuttle flight later this year. The assembled motor, major component of the booster, was more than 35 meters (115 feet) long and 3.5	meters (12 feet) in diameter, largest rocket motor of its type developed for space flight and the first built for manned spacecraft; it would generate 3 million pounds of thrust. (MSFC Release 80-18; NASA Release 80-25)
INTELSAT announced that Guinea became the 105th member in a ceremony at the U.S. State Department when Ambassador Mamady Lamine Conde signed the operating agreement. Guinea planned to operate a ground station using the Intelsat spacecraft located over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-15-1) July 15.'The Wall Street Journal said that ESA would go ahead with a $125 million probe of Halley’s comet because original plans for a $370-$470 million joint mission with NASA had become impossible due to U.S. budget cuts. The original plan called for launch of a Space Shuttle that would have sent a satellite to Halley’s as well as to Tempel 2, a comet much farther out in space. NASA had to scrub the two-comet mission because it couldn’t get the money for a new kind of space engine to make the flight; the Wall Street Journal said that it was still studying a stopgap plan to use an old-fashioned rocket to shoot a spacecraft past Halley’s when it approached Earth. ESA now planned to put up a 750-pound satellite, Giotto [see July 10], from Kourou in July 1985 to rendezvous with Halley’s in March 1986. (IKS'/, July 15/80, 30) July i7.The Washington Star reported that discovery of a “serious potential safety defect” in the nation’s most widely used jet engine had led the FAA to order mandatory inspections for two-thirds of the short- and medium-range commercial jetliners in the United States. The engine was standard on three major planes: the medium-range Boeing 727, with three engines, and two short-range planes with two engines each, the Boeing 737 and the McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Each FAA-ordered inspection on a Pratt & Whitney JT8D engine would take 170 hours to disassemble it to the point where it could be checked. Some of the engines were nearly new; others had been serving for several years: a JT8D would normally be retired after 20,000 cycles in service. When a Hawaiian Airline DC-9 blew up on takeoff at Honolulu June 15, FAA inspection revealed that a portion of the engine was subject to metal fatigue and failure because of the factory machining of the metal. No serious injuries occurred in the Hawaii incident. However, random FAA checking showed that other planes equipped with JT8D engines had cracks in the same engine spot as the Hawaii plane. The potential flaw in the engines was the eighth compressor hub, a 591-pound wheel with an array of blades located in the middle of the 3,000- to 4,000 pound engine. Each engine had 13 compressor hubs, each with a successively smaller set of fans to collect air and force it through smaller areas into the fuel-combustion chamber. Machining of a flange on the eighth compressor hub was ground against the grain of the metal, putting unusual strain on that part. FAA spokesman Dennis Feldman could not estimate the cost of the inspection programs, thought to be in tens of millions of dollars; nor could he give any definitive answer as to whether the manufacturer or the airline would have to cover the cost. (W Star, July 17/80, A-l)
NASA announced that it would maintain an expendable launch-vehicle capability at the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) in Florida as a backup to the Space Shuttle during transition to Space Transportation System (STS) operation. It would use the standard Delta launch vehicle, capable of putting spacecraft weighing up to 1,100 kilograms (2,400 pounds) into orbit. NASA would charge commercial Delta users $22 million per launch at the outset. (NASA Release 80-22)
Newspapers reported NASA’s selection of 19 astronaut candidates for Space Shuttle training, the second group of pilots and scientists specifically picked for that purpose. Those chosen in the 1978 group of 35, including the first women and blacks among civilian astronauts, received astronaut wings at JSC in August 1979. In the new group was Dr. William F. Fisher, husband of Dr. Anna Fisher, who was selected two years ago; the Seabrook, Tex., physicians were the first married couple chosen by the United States. The 8 new pilot candidates (one black) and 11 mission specialists (two women and one Hispanic) would, if successful, join the 62 astronauts now on duty with NASA. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly 30 or 40 missions a year with up to seven astronauts on a mission. Pilot selections were Lt. Col. John E. Blaha, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Charles F.	Bolden, Jr., U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Col. Roy D. Bridges, Jr., U.S. Air Force; Maj. Guy S. Gardner, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Ronald J. Grabe, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Brian D. O’Connor, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. Richard N. Richards, U.S. Navy; and Lt. Cdr. Michael J. Smith, U.S. Navy. Mission-specialist selections besides Dr. William Fisher were Dr. James P. Baglan, anesthesiologist; Dr. Franklin R. Chang, physicist; Dr. Mary L. Cleave, research engineer; Bonnie J. Dunbar, JSC flight controller; Capt. David C. Hilmers, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. David C. Leestma, U.S. Navy; John M. Lounge, JSC flight controller; Capt. Jerry L. Ross, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Sherwood C. Spring, U.S. Army; and Maj. Robert C. Springer, U.S. Marine Corps. (NY Times, May 30/80, A-ll; W Post, May 30/80, A-8; NASA Release 80-78; JSC Release 80-038)
NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
Eighteen years after he blasted away from a launch pad at Complex 14, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, to become the first American to orbit the Earth, Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio) returned to dedicate a marble memorial of his flight and those of Mercury astronauts Scott Carpenter, Walter Schirra, and Gordon Cooper, donated in 1978 by the American Monument Association but held back for dedication until gantries at the site were removed and sold for scrap. The Washington Star said the site was now desolate, “surrounded by palmettos and visited only by an occasional alligator or rattlesnake.” About 600 persons at the ceremony heard Glenn describe the new U.S. goal of routine and economical access to space with the Space Shuttle. {W Star, Feb 21/80, A-2; Today, Feb. 12/80, 1QA; NASA Actv, May 80, 19)
NASA reported a major milestone for a Shuttle main engine February 8, with completion of a second series of flight certification tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) near Bay St. Louis, Miss. In the two series of tests (mostly run for 520 seconds at 100% of rated power level), the engine accumulated more than 10,000 seconds of firing time, equivalent to that required for 19 Shuttle flights; in one test, the engine ran at 102% of rated power, and in another it ran for 823 seconds to simulate an aborted mission. The first series of tests last year began March 27 and ended June 27. (MSFC Release 80-19; NASA Release 80-26)
JSC announced NASA selection of two California aerospace firms to negotiate contracts for production of solar cells as a supplemental power source for the Space Shuttle orbiter. Applied Solar Energy Corporation and Spectrolab would each receive a $300,000 contract to develop a large-area low-cost solar cell for NASA’s proposed power-extension package, to be produced at the rate of 144,000 space-qualified solar cells per year, reducing the cost to $30 per watt. (Solar cells now cost from $80 to $120 per watt.) The power-extension item would be a 2,000-pound package folded into the orbiter cargo bay; in orbit, the item would be moved out by a remote mechanical arm, the 177-foot wings unfolding to supply the Shuttle with 26 kilowatts of electric power. (JSC Release 80-032)
NASA reported that MSFC had chosen Ball Aerospace Division to negotiate a $9.5 million contract for design, development, and manufacture of a chemical release module for use in the first large-scale controlled investigations of dynamic phenomena outside Earth’s atmosphere. Information on such processes in Earth’s magnetosphere, ionosphere, and upper atmosphere was hard to obtain because the areas were so enormous and the dynamic activity was invisible. Scheduled for mid-1983 launch on the Space Shuttle, the self-contained free-flying module would release in space chemical elements that would absorb sunlight and reflect distinctive colors; other chemicals would glow when reacting with oxygen particles in the upper atmosphere. Motion of atoms and ions colored in this way could be tracked. During the module’s six-month lifetime, it would make 20 to 30 chemical releases for visual, camera, and radar observation. (NASA Release 80-99; MSFC Release 80-89)
MSFC reported the first sustained operation of the Space Shuttle main engine at full power level, 109% of rated power for 6 minutes, in static firing tests March 31 at NSTL. The engine ran for 10 minutes, 10 seconds, reaching the objectives attempted in an aborted run the previous week. (MSFC Release 80-47; NASA Release 80-42)
NASA announced selection of Ford Aerospace to negotiate a contract for overall system-design engineering on preliminary operations requirements and test-support system for the Space Telescope. Work under the $9.2 million contract should be done by December 1983, to support the space-telescope mission. Ford Aerospace would run the system for six months before turning it over to NASA. The system located at GSFC would control telescope attitude, point it, and monitor the on-board systems 24 hours a day, 7 days per week. Besides engineering design, hardware and software, and support for facility construction, the contract covered design of the project operations-control center plus required software and hardware. Ford Aerospace would provide testing, integration, installation, maintenance, documentation, training, and operating services for the system, including launch on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 80-80)
MSFC noted the arrival of the age of automation in its Materials and Processes Laboratory, where industrial robots were improving manufacturing techniques in Space Shuttle hardware production. Robotics, integrated into totally computer-controlled systems, would help meet high launch-rate fabrication and between-flight refurbishment requirements of reusable Shuttle items. One of the two MSFC robots was helping spray foam insulation for thermal protection on booster structures such as forward and aft skirts or nosecones. The second, currently used for advanced welding, would serve in a thermal protection process for the external tank. A third robot to arrive in December would run a high-pressure water blaster to strip insulation from reusable Shuttle hardware. (MSFC Release 80-138)
JSC reported that its television engineers were working on modifications of a U.S. Air Force camera for live television broadcast by crew members on spacewalks outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA would buy three systems for flight, training, and qualifications at a cost (including integration, testing, and mission planning) of about $750,000. The camera (which would include a battery pack, FM transmitter, antenna, and a receiver inside the orbiter, with other support hardware), located on an astronaut’s visor assembly, as miners’ lights are mounted on their foreheads, would see what the astronaut saw and send black-and-white pictures to a television monitor watched by crew members on the spacecraft. A wide-angle lens would give a 19.7-mm focal length with a 32° horizontal field-of-view; lens range would be present to focus from about 15 inches to the distance needed. The inside crew members could see hardware or spacewalk activity in real time, helping make joint decisions on repair. (JSC Release 80-052)
MSFC reported successful completion March 13 of the first full-power test (10% of rated power level) of the Space Shuttle main engine. The test consisted of a 125-second run on a single engine, 10 seconds at 109%; a total of 26 seconds ran above normal rated power. This major step toward certification of the engine for full-power abort capability envisioned possible malfunction of a single engine, requiring thrust in excess of rated power from the other two engines to ensure achievement of orbit or return for safe landing. Rockwell International, prime Shuttle contractor, conducted the tests at NSTL in Mississippi. (MSFC Release 80-36; NASA Release 80-36)
Changes made during the past year to the three main engines designated for the first flight of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia had led NASA to set up further tests, the agency announced. Modifications included high-piessure turbopumps, valves, and nozzles. Acceptance-tested between April and July 1979, the engines would be shipped from KSC to NSTL in Mississippi for reacceptance firing and return to KSC. The two- to three-month testing would not affect the timing of the first flight, now scheduled for a date between November 1980 and March 1981. About 6 weeks before the planned launch, the engines would be fired again for 20 seconds on the launch pad. (NASA Release 80-60; JSC Release 80-030)
NASA announced a student involvement project, a joint activity with the NSTA. Up to 200 semifinalists in a competition to develop experiments for flight on the Shuttle and their teachers would attend preliminary conferences in 10 regions to discuss the proposals with other students as well as NASA and industry scientists; many of the regional conferences would be at NASA centers. NASA awarded the science teachers’ group a contract to conduct the competition and select the winners. From the 200, 10 would be selected whose concepts would best use the capabilities of the Shuttle. The 10 national winners would attend a special conference at KSC late in 1981; all entrants would receive a certificate of participation. Shuttle flights should begin in March 1981; the winning experiments might go on flights in 1981 or 1982. (NASA Release 80-132)
MSFC reported successful firing of three Space Shuttle main engines mounted in a test article for 535 seconds in the eighth test of the main propulsion system. A similar firing for 555 seconds occurred 3 weeks ago. In the latest test, engineers for the first time gimbaled the engines while including a “pogo” effect (a phenomenon of cyclic pressures in the propellant system that had occurred in earlier launch vehicles) to demonstrate the engine accumulator’s ability to prevent pogo during flight. Another successful first was the simulation of failure in thrust-vector control to see whether redundant systems would perform properly. The test had been planned for early morning so that engineers could observe ice and frost conditions on the external tank when it was filled with supercold propellants during nighttime hours, in the absence of heat from the Sun. Rockwell International’s space systems group conducted the main propulsion-system testing for MSFC at NSTL. (MSFC Release 80-41)
In the last of a series on “Life Aboard the Space Shuttle,” KSC’s Spaceport News described the unisex space suits provided for the pilot and the ranking mission specialist on each flight. No longer tailor-made for an astronaut, the Shuttle space suit would come in small, medium, and large sizes to be worn by men or women. It consisted of an upper and a lower section snapping together with sealing rings, with a life-support system in the upper half. In an emergency, each of the other crew members would use a “personal rescue enclosure,” a 34-inch-diameter ball fitted with life-support and communications gear for one person. Nonsuited crew would climb into the enclosures, and the suited astronauts would transfer them from a disabled vessel to a rescue ship by carrying them, by attaching them to the remote-manipulator arm used for deploying payloads, or by using a pulley line between the two spacecraft. (Spaceport News, Aug 29/80, 4) During August: NASA distributed its Program Plan, Fiscal Years 1981 through 1985, containing “initial guidance for NASA’s activities over the short-term and, to some extent, the long-term future.” The introduction noted the current drive to curb inflation and resulting cuts in the federal budget—‘including NASA’s”—but called for a perception of the work the agency was technologically ready to undertake “and should undertake in the interest of the Nation.” Citing problems raised by “absence of major new initiatives,” the introduction called for “sound, logical, technological progression toward achievement” of U.S. goals in aeronautics and space. Major goals to be met by the plan’s 46 “major initiatives” were: —to fill the transportation and orbital operations needs of science and applications space missions and most transportation needs of national security space missions; —to apply space technology in remote sensing, communications, materials processing, and technology transfer that “hold promise for immediate or potential benefits to humanity”; —to continue developing aeronautical technology; —to improve “by a factor of 10 to 100” NASA’s ability to acquire, transmit, and process data; —to advance knowledge of how energy is transported from the Sun and through the interplanetary medium and how that energy effects Earth; —to ensure good health and performance of humans in space and to study the effects of gravity on living systems; —to understand the origin and distribution of life in the universe and the relationship between life and its habitat. Major initiatives in the field of aeronautics numbered 6; in space science, 8; in space and terrestrial applications, 20; and in space transportation systems, 12, for a total of 46. Half the initiatives listed in a similar program plan (for FY80-FY84) had been postponed: Of the 23 missions, 11 were previously scheduled for 1981; 7 for 1982; 4 for 1983; and 1 for 1984. Of the 11 previously scheduled for 1981, 9 were now postponed to 1982; and 1 each, to 1983 and 1984. Of the 7 missions previously scheduled for 1982, 5 were postponed to 1983; 1, to 1984; and 1, to a time “to be determined.” Of the 4 missions previously scheduled for 1983, 1 was scheduled for 1984; and 3, for 1985. The sole mission previously scheduled for 1984 had been postponed to 1985. International programs in which NASA would tie concerned during the next fiscal years would include cooperative activities (Space Shuttle and Spacelab; space applications such as remote sensing, geodynamics, materials processing, and communications; space science such as astrophysics, planetary research, solar-terrestrial relationships, and solar energy; exchanges of experiments with the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union); reimbursable launches; and foreign competition in remote sensing, communications, spacecraft launching, and aircraft development. The volume included probable schedules for NASA missions and tables of funding and development needed to carry out the program. Space transportation funding, for instance, showed increases in FY81 and FY82, then leveled off. Funding for applications showed rapid increase; that for aeronautics, space technology, and space science would also increase but at a slower rate. The 235-page program plan contained detailed lists of activities in each program area, with graphs and tables showing schedules and funding for that area. The book concluded with an index and a list of the abbreviations and acronyms used in NASAs programs. (Text, NASA Hq Mgmt Sppt Ofc, distributed Aug 80)
JSC reported signing of a letter contract with Martin Marietta Aerospace for development and production of an in-orbit tile-repair kit to be used on llie Space Shuttle. The letter preceded an official award of contract and aulliorized llie firm to go ahead willi design and development of llie kit. Estimated value of llie contract was $2.1 million. (JSC Release 80-004)
The Washington Star quoted Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s statement before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation that NASA’s Space Shuttle program was “critical” to defense planning. The committee was considering the FY81 budget requests of NASA and DOD. (WStar, Feb 8/80, A-5)
ESA reported that European and U.S. astronauts scheduled to fly with the first Spacelab on the ninth Shuttle flight would attend a training session May 27-30 on using an infrared-grill spectrometer to check the composition of the stratosphere to monitor the effect of human activity on its evolution. Besides a commander and copilot of the Shuttle, the Spacelab crew would include two payload specialists (one each from ESA. and the United States) and two mission specialists in charge of the interface between the Shuttle and Spacelab. Two of the five payload specialists attending the training session would be selected six months before flight: physicist Ulf Merbold of West Germany; astronomer Claude Nicollier of Switzerland; physicist Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands; physicist Michael Lampton, University of California at Berkeley; and biomedical engineer Byron Lichtenberg, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NASA mission specialists attending the training session would be atmospheric physicist Owen Garriott and astronomer Robert Parker. (ESA Info 13)
MSFC reported that July 21 had marked the end of an era: Gustav A. Kroll, last of the original 118-man “von Braun team” to leave the center, retired just six weeks short of having 35 years of U.S. government service. He had headed the structures division of MSFC’s Structures and Propulsion Laboratory. Kroll arrived in the United States in 1945 in Operation Paperclip and worked at Ft. Bliss, Tex., with the von Braun team, which transferred to Huntsville in 1950. Kroll became a U.S. citizen in 1954. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1976 for “guiding the overall structural design of the solid rocket boosters,” two of which would be used in the first two minutes of flight on each Space Shuttle launch, recovered, and refurbished for reuse. He had worked in structures throughout his career: “all of them—every one of Marshall’s projects—Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn, Shuttle—all of them,” he said. Looking back, “there are no favorites, but the highlight would have to be the Saturn V flight and landing on the moon.” (MSFC Release 80-101)
NASA held a press briefing on the solar maximum mission slated for launch February 14. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said that exploration of Earth’s nearest star was significant both scientifically and technologically. Dr. Harold Glaser of NASA’s solar terrestrial division noted that the Sun, dominant energy source for the Earth, was a variable star in that its energy output varied in periods running from 10 minutes to ll years (the so-called solar cycle) as well as over periods of centuries. The solar variations causes variations on Earth; for instance, the solar flares known to have a periodicity of 11 years. In short time periods, a flare is the most energetic manifestation of solar changes, with significant effects: Earth suffers communications problems along with atmospheric heating and other phenomena, and the trillion kilotons spewed into the solar system would affect almost all the planets. The focus of the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) would be to understand more about solar flares in order to predict their occurrence. The magnetic field of the Sun had also been found to vary with a 22-year periodicity, strongly correlated with drought in the U.S. western plains. During the 17th century, solar activity apparently ceased for about 80 years, a period called the Maunder Minimum which featured a “mini-ice Age” documented in northern Europe. This seems to have happened more frequentBLANK NOT FILMED ly than previously realized. Space research during the last 20 years had produced these data, Glaser said, including evidence that the Sun might be changing sides, with a corresponding increase of luminosity or incident radiation. Also, the Sun appeared to oscillate rather like a fluid, probably because of interior activity whose nature was as yet unknown. Joseph Purcell of GSFC, standing in for project manager Peter Burr who was ill, described the spacecraft and its planned retrieval by the Space Shuttle, and the modular design that would allow it to be serviced in orbit if necessary. The SMM would be the first NASA satellite designed for retrieval and first to include the tracking and data-relay satellite capability; at 5,000 pounds, it would also be the heaviest payload launched by a Delta. Purcell explained the 24-hour computer watch on the SMM, calling it an operation with “very intense man-machine relationships.” Kenneth J. Frost, also of GSFC as SMM project scientist, described the payload as essentially one experiment to determine the nature of solar flares, using seven instruments and a “very detailed scientific game plan.” Investigators needed a 24-hour watch to evaluate the plan’s progress and to react to targets of opportunity on the Sun. For instance:, a flare on the Sun’s west limb would be observed on Earth and by a series of spacecraft in orbit around the Earth, so that the quality and completeness of the observations would “far outstrip anything we’ve ever had before.” The SMM spacecraft would have a productive lifetime of about two years, Frost said, and the scientific group at GSFC would consist of investigators prepared to spend that much time away from their home institutions. In response to a question, he pointed out that the broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum to be investigated by SMM could not penetrate Earth’s atmosphere. (Text, Feb 8/80; NASA Release
MSFC reported that it had shipped two segments of a Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor, used during 1979 in mated vertical ground vibration tests, to Thiokol’s Wasatch division in Utah to be refurbished and loaded with propellant for use as a flight motor after being combined with other segments shipped earlier in January. (MSFC Release 80P-12)
Aviation Week & Space Technology said that cuts in NASA’s FY81 budget would delay the international solar polar mission to 1985, although $135 million in contracts had already been awarded in the United States and Europe. Delay would force “major restructuring of the contracts’—$80 million to TRW for the U.S. spacecraft and $55.8 million to Dornier as prime contractor for the European spacecraft—and would give ESA additional problems with its budget, although NASA expressed hope last week that ESA would remain a part of the project. A split mission with the U.S. and European spacecraft on separate launches would increase costs substantially. Aviation Week & Space Technology said that NASA was “unable to discuss this situation before Congress last week” because of an administration embargo on new budget projections. Although NASA could testify on the Space Shuttle need for a $300 million FY80 supplemental appropriation, the embargo had forced the House appropriations subcommittee to cancel two days of NASA hearings on FY81 space science and applications. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch said that, unless the supplement was passed, contractors would lay off up to 20,000 skilled workers, and the overall cost of the Shuttle program could increase by $600 to $900 million. The combined impact on NASA and DOD could go as high as $1.1 billion, according to subcommittee members. {AvWk, Mar 31/80, 27)
JSC reported that it would conduct a 30-hour mock mission of Space Shuttle Columbia beginning at 8 a.m. Wednesday, January 23, running through orbital operations to landing. Flight directors and their teams of controllers would monitor system performance, carry out navigation and targeting, and watch support-crew adherence to mission timelines. Simulation specialists would spring problems on the controllers and on the orbiter crews going through routine duties in the Shuttle simulator and another orbiter mockup. About 500 persons would participate in the “flight,” including prime crew John Young and Robert Crippen and backup crew Joe Engle and Dick Truly. Flight directors would be Neil Hutchinson for the launch team, Chuck Lewis for the orbit team, and Don Puddy for the landing team. This simulation would check out operational procedures over an extended period; previous simulations had not lasted as long. More 30-hour practice flights would occur every six weeks to two months in preparation for the real thing. (JSC Release
Ground testing of Space Shuttle engines suffered another setback, the New York Times reported, when three engines shut down prematurely during a static test firing in Mississippi. The engines, identical to three now on the Columbia at Cape Canaveral, were supposed to fire for 9 minutes, 41 seconds, the time it would take to put a Shuttle into orbit. NASA said that instruments indicated overheating in part of a turbopump. This 11th firing of the three engines in the test series would have been the 5th for the full time needed to launch a Shuttle. Columbia was scheduled for its maiden launch in March 1981. (NY Times, Nov 4/80, C-3)
NASA reported successful testing April 14 of a Space Shuttle main engine at 109% of rated power for six minutes, in the second such test in two weeks conducted by Rockwell International at NSTL. The 10-minute, 10-second test met all objectives; NASA said that it planned at least one more firing in this series on this engine, which had accumulated 183 minutes of firing time in two series of preliminary flight-certification tests. (NASA Release 80-49; MSFC Release 80-55)
NASA reported award to United Space Boosters, Inc., subsidiary of United Technologies Corporation, of a contract for a two-ship recovery force to retrieve used Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters from the Atlantic Ocean. This supplemented a contract under which the firm assembled and processed solid-fuel rocket boosters for flight. The ships would locate and retrieve expended booster casings, parachutes, and other equipment from the Atlantic and deliver them to a disassembly facility at Cape: Canaveral Air Force Station. The disassembly facility was on the eastern shore of the Banana River, a shallow area where an endangered species, the sea cow or manatee, made its home. The ships would use a 425-HP waterjet stern thruster instead of propellers that could maim or kill the manatees [see May 29]. The ships, UTC Liberty and UTC Freedom, were being built and would be delivered in October 1980 and January 1981; both would be used on each Shuttle mission, each retrieving one booster and its components. At liftoff, the boosters would bum simultaneously with the three-engine cluster on the Shuttle. After about two minutes they would be jettisoned and land in the Atlantic about 257 kilometers (160 miles) downrange from KSC, their descent being slowed by three parachutes on each casing. Each vessel would carry four parachute-rollers to handle the three main and single drogue parachutes on each booster and cranes to hoist aboard the collateral flight equipment. The ships would carry equipment to plug the nozzles, pump water out of the casings, and ready them for towing to the disassembly facility, where they would be cleaned and taken apart for shipment to Utah and reloading with solid-fuel propellant. Each casing could be used for up to 20 missions, reducing the cost of flight operations. The ships would also have sophisticated electronic communications and navigation gear such as radars, sonars, loran, direction finders, fathometers, and gyrocompasses. (NASA Release 80-89)
