LaRC reported on a meeting of representatives from industry and six NASA centers to review the agency’s large space antenna program. Shuttle flights in the mid-1980s would include models of several antenna concepts: the large antennas designed for communications and other Earth-oriented applications, as well as for purely scientific studies of the solar system and the universe, would be transported into space folded into the Shuttle’s cargo bay and deployed in Earth orbit. Previous work concentrated on the structural and material requirements of each concept; the meeting would identify work still needed on system technology, ground testing, and technical resources to complete development. (LaRC Release 81-9) February JO: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) was undertaking the first mass shift of satellites at 22,300 miles altitude in space, moving three meteorological satellites to new areas to improve their product and to prevent possible collision of one of them in its present crowded location, the Department of Commerce (DOC) reported. NOAA would move Goes 4 (the geostationary operational environmental satellite launched in September 1980) from 98°W to 135 °W as backup for failing Goes 3\ NOAA would not move Goes 3 while it continued to function, but would put Goes 4 as near as possible without its interfering with communications. On January 29, NOAA moved a third meteorological satellite, Goes 2, from 105 °W to 109 °W to reduce the danger of collision with other craft or space debris; this satellite served primarily to relay weatherfax charts to ground stations. NOAA had to operate two geostationary satellites at all times: “Goes Fast” for the eastern United States and Canada and for most of the Atlantic, and “Goes West” for the western United States and Canada, for Alaska, and for the Pacific westward to Hawaii. On January 29, NOAA also boosted its 7-year old Sms 1 into a 22,600 mile high orbit, where it would remain indefinitely. After NASA’s launch of a seventh geostationary satellite, planned for March, NOAA would move Sms 2 from its station at 75 °W to a nearby location on standby. (NOAA Release
NASA launched the world’s largest telecommunications satellite, Intelsat V-2, from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur at 6:42 p.m. EDT into a highly elliptical transfer orbit with 35,960-kilometer apogee, 172-kilometer perigee, 633.9-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. Originally scheduled for May 21, the launch was delayed by computer problems in the rocket’s main safety-control system. The huge communications satellite, weighing more than 2 tons, was second in a new series of nine international communications satellites the first having been launched December 9, 1980, as an on-orbit spare for the Atlantic network, which would eventually consist of four satellites. The first five Intelsat Vs would be launched by Atlas Centaur; the next three, by Europe’s Ariane booster. Average estimated cost of an Atlas Centaur launch was $42 million; that of an Ariane launch was $27 million. Overall cost of the Intelsat V program was $680 million, or some $76 million for each mission; estimated average cost of each satellite was $34 million. Intelsat V-2, after coming on station at 355 °E for a month of testing, would be operational by July at 335.5 °E, handling communications between the Americas and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. It could transmit 12,000 telephone calls simultaneously in addition to two television color channels, having twice the capacity of Intelsat IV-As previously launched by NASA for INTELSAT. The 106-nation organization jointly owned and operated 12 satellites over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans in order to handle two-thirds of the world’s overseas communications, from telegrams and telephone calls to television and data. In 1984, INTELSAT would begin a series of three improved Intelsat V-As capable of 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels; 1986 would inaugurate Intelsat Vis, each handling more than 40,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels and designed for launch by either the Ariane or the Space Shuttle. (NASA MOR-491-203-81-02 [prelaunch] May 20/81, [postlaunch] June 17/81; NASA Release 81-60; INTELSAT Release 81-10-1; W Post, May 24/81, A-3, D/SD, May 27/81, 140; A/D, May 28/81, 151; Spacewarn SPX-332, June 30/81)
The Japanese government accepted a U.S. proposal to use the U.S. Air Forces’ Kadena Airbase on Okinawa Island as an emergency landing area for the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia, the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) reported. Tokyo Kyodo said NASA was arranging sites for emergency landings at six airports, three domestic and three abroad. The agreement with Japan covered only four test flights; other flights would need further negotiations. Officials of Japan’s foreign and defense ministries would discuss safety measures because nearby Naha airport was in constant use for both civil and military flights. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Mar 5/81)
NASA officials began a “tanking exercise” of the Shuttle on its KSC launch pad to see if newly installed water-pressure systems would prevent recurrence of shockwaves produced by booster exhaust during the April 12 liftoff. The New York Times quoted officials as saying that shockwave reduction was “mandatory” before Columbia could head for space again. Columbia, already erected on the pad for its second mission, contained a payload of five experiments and a 50-foot mechanical arm put aboard in June when the cargo bay was “closed out,” the New York Times said. NASA might remove a package of scientific experiments rather than risk damaging it during liftoff. (NY Times, Sept 15/81, C-2) —MSFC said September 8 that the Shuttle’s external tank was “successfully filled with liquid propellants” in a cryo-loading test at KSC designed to check out ground and vehicle systems. The success was “a major milestone” toward the second Shuttle flight, now scheduled for October 9. (MSFC Release
Biggest and best customer of the Space Shuttle, developed and operated by a civilian agency, would be the Department of Defense (DOD), said the Washington Star in one of a series of articles on the Shuttle program. At least 21 of 75 spaceflights planned before 1986 would be military missions, and neither NASA nor DOD would say what the flights were for. DOD had contributed millions of dollars to the Shuttle program in hardware and personnel, including a multibillion-dollar facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base for launches into polar orbit. Although the Shuttle would serve both civilian and military purposes, the two sides showed differing degrees of confidence: current boosters had reached orbit only 90% of the time, 10% dumping expensive satellites into the sea. “We have yet to achieve routine access to space,” said Lt. Gen. Richard C. Henry, commander of the U.S. Air Force’s Space Division. Shuttle reliability should be “as close to 100% as you can get.” Most NASA missions slated for the 1980s and beyond could not be flown without the huge cargo bay of the Shuttle. The military, however, would keep its Adas and Titan expendable boosters just in case. Space, said Henry, was the high ground, “crucial for collecting and disseminating information, for reducing the confusion of battle, even for improving combat efficiency. . . . Everything we put up is supportive of our national security, but nothing is combative.” DOD, he added, had “made commitments far in excess of any civil users.” (W Star, Mar 24/81, A-8)
NASA said that the most likely date for ferrying the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia back to KSC would be April 25 for the flight to Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma and April 26 for the flight from Tinker to KSC. Delays in deservicing were “mainly due to first-time-thru problems,” the agency said, referring to the lack of interface between Columbia and the mate/demate device “because of the unavailability of OV-2” which had not been checked out with the new ground-servicing equipment “for form, fit and function.” NASA noted that the three-day stretch in the schedule had covered leaks in quick-disconnect systems, new position of the work stand, the “unexpected OV-102 configuration (engine-bell placement that no longer fitted into the mate/demate device), and changes in operational maintenance instructions. A NASA press release pointed out that deservicing the orbiter involved “removal or containment of hazardous propellants such as toxic hypergolics and cryogenics,” inspecting its systems (including the thermal protection system), and raising the orbiter, with its 17-piece tailcone in place, to a stand where it could be fastened to its 747 carrier. Reviewing events, Aviation Week Space Technology said that ground personnel wearing protective suits had trouble connecting hoses to orbiter interfaces for off-loading propellants and purging systems because of limited space; operations were complicated by wind, rain, and lightning, with a series of four power losses in service facility, each requiring a two-hour minimum to power up again by following a checklist. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 21/81; NASA Release 81-50; DFRC Release 81-18; AvWk, Apr 27/81, 30-31)
Space shuttle Columbia was still awaiting its trip to KSC’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) because of a delay in the orbiter integrated test that had been scheduled for July 23. The test had to wait until technicians finished wiring the remote manipulator’s system for emergency jettison of its $100 million Canada-built “bionic arm.” That system would have to be retested before the major integrated test could begin, probably not before August 9. The delay would not affect launch date of STS-2, NASA said. (MSFC Release 81-90, 81-91; NASA Release 81-109; W Star, July 27/81, A-2)
NASA officials said that the Space Shuttle Columbia was “in excellent condition” after its flight and should be able to make at least 100 round trips into orbit. Technicians were hooking up ground power links and monitoring systems, photographing the tiles, and preparing to purge the fuel tanks and to install a shroud over the tail section for the flight back to Florida. Postflight servicing was running about 12 hours behind schedule. (WStar, Apr 16/81, A-l)
The Soviet Union’s space program must develop a low-cost transport vehicle like the U.S. Space shuttle, according to Konstantin P. Feoktistov, one of the three cosmonauts who orbited the Earth six times in Vostok 1 in 1964. Feoktistov, now a professor of technical sciences doing research for the Soviet space program, did not specifically mention the successful flight of Columbia in April but called for solution of technological problems in space travel such as cheap lightweight batteries. The New York Times quoted from Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, the first official acknowledgment by the Soviet Union that it would like to have a shuttle-like vehicle for manned space flights. Tass said June 19 that Cosmos 1267 had docked with the empty Salyut 6 with the mission of testing systems “of the design of future spacecraft and for training in the methods of assembly of orbital complexes of a big size and weight.” The Washington Post said that the linkup was “the precursor of a very large space complex that U.S. sources expect to have military uses.” (NYTimes, June 11 81, A-18; W Post, June 20/81, A-9; FBIS, Tass in English, June 91/81)
Press reports on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s launch noted the loss of some insulating tiles from engine-pod coverings visible, television viewers from an aft-facing cockpit window when astronaut Robert Crippen opened the payload-bay doors to dissipate heat into space as a way of cooling the orbiter. The areas lacking tiles, nine on the right-hand engine pod and four to six on the left-hand pod, had undergone the greatest stress during blastoff and ascent. Astronaut John Young relayed the view to Earth so flight directors could estimate the damage. The two astronauts evinced so little concern about the missing tiles that, during a six-minute telecast late on Monday, neither mentioned the subject. As flight directors wanted to know whether the underside of the fuselage was intact, Deputy Operations Director Eugene F. Kranz announced that supersecret U.S. Air Force cameras in Hawaii and Florida would photograph the orbiter in an attempt to discover further areas of damage. His statement hinted at the highly classified capability of DOD cameras: photographing areas lacking tiles of a moving craft 170 miles up would be like reading license plates in a Moscow parking lot from orbit, the Washington Post commented. The fuselage’s underside housed Shuttle electronics and hydraulics systems that would navigate the craft on its return; move the elevons, keeping it on course during the last 1,000 miles; and lower the landing gear. Should loss of tiles expose the surface to reentry heat that could burn through the fuselage and the underlying systems, the orbiter without its landing gear lowered would have to crash-land at more than 200 mph. If photography showed underside tiles missing, Kranz said the crew would handle the reentry “to avoid a possible catastrophe,” not specifying the alternatives. Officials said that the areas known to be missing tiles were not critical to reentry; all visible edges of tail and wings appeared intact, suggesting that tiles v/crc lost during the stress of launch only on the engine pods. (W Post, Apr 13/81, A-l, A-20, WSJ, Apr 13/81 3; NYTimes, Apr 13/81, 1; W Star, Apr 13/81, A-l)
Press reports described the rollout of space shuttle Columbia on its eight-tread mobile launching platform from KSC’s VAB to launch pad 39A, a 3.5-mile trip that took about seven hours. New launch date was October 9, only 39 days from rollout; however, Columbia had sat on its pad for 104 days before its first flight, and launch director George F. Page said that all the usual tests should be completed in time. The new schedule allowed for weather delays or new technical problems. The launch pad was modified after last April’s ignition caused shockwaves that buckled struts on the spaceship and endangered other parts; Columbia had “several hundred” of its 31,000 heat-resistant tiles replaced. It would carry a new fuel tank—the only expendable part of the Shuttle assembly—and two new solid-fuel booster rockets to be retrieved from the ocean shortly after liftoff. KSC officials had closed two viewing sites for the next launch because of exhaust fallout. Dr. Albert Koller, chief of environmental management for KSC, said that the fallout problem was a surprise: acid drops in an exhaust cloud produced by STS-l’s boosters had spotted vegetation up to four miles north of the site, but apparently did not harm animals in the area. Hydrochloric acid drops from the cloud might cause reddening and burning of unprotected skin. NASA hoped eventually to send a shuttle back into space within two or three weeks of its previous mission, but Page said “we’re a long way from that ultimate goal.” (NY Times, Sept 1/81, C-3; W Post, Sept 1/81, A-4)
Dr. Alan Lovelace, NASA’s acting administrator, held a briefing on the agency’s FY82 amended budget, which he said “eliminates or defers all FY81 and FY82 new program initiatives in space science, aeronautics, and applications.” At a press conference January 15, he had discussed the budget for NASA proposed by the previous administration, just over $6.7 billion for FY82. The revised budget would reduce NASA funds by $604 million to a new total of $6,122 billion. The revisions preserved Space Shuttle test-flight schedules and research and development; allowed continued production of a four-orbiter fleet on the present schedule, which “meets the critical needs for both civil and military missions”; and kept the option for a fifth orbiter. However, the funding would delete the solar-polar spacecraft; cut space and aeronautical technology development; delete construction-of-facilities projects; and eliminate 840 civil-service positions. It would defer the VOIR and the gamma-ray observatory launch from 1986 to 1988; cancel NOSS, a three-agency project; end the technology transfer program; and cancel funding for energy-technology activities, a geological applications program, and a search-and-rescue mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
NASA announced that it would launch the next Shuttle flight (STS-2) on September 30, if turnaround procedures went smoothly. JSC spokesman Robert Dotts said that the thermal-protection system “exceeded our expectations” and that the amount of repair needed would not affect turnaround time. Only 10 or 12 of the foamed-glass tiles protecting Columbia’s fuselage during reentry would need replacement. Inch-deep gouges all over the surface of the Shuttle mostly occurred during takeoff. NASA cautioned that the orbiter would be undergoing turnaround for the first time, and unforeseen problems could affect the flight schedule. (NASA Release 81-65; MSFC Release 81-61; W Post, May 16/81, A-2)
NASA postponed the second Shuttle launch to November 4 because of tile damage caused by an oxidizer spill September 22. Tile replacement was “proceeding well,” and measures had been taken to prevent further spillage. Science magazine described the “minor problems” causing previous postponements: tests that took longer than expected and various handling mishaps. The Shuttle’s complexity would “resist attempts to operate with aircraft-like efficiency,” the article said. NASA had already decided to trim its Shuttle flights by 30% over the next three years, from 44 missions to 28: it had less money to spend on flying its own satellites and science experiments, as it had to pay for Shuttle modifications and construction of more orbiters. The delicate instruments planned for the second flight had almost been delayed to a later mission by the discovery that pressures from the solid-fuel boosters against the KSC module launch pad could damage the experiments: the shock had been 2.4 pounds per square inch, not the expected 0.6, enough to buckle a strut supporting a fuel tank near the cabin. If the tank had been jarred enough to leak or malfunction, the first-flight crew would not have been able to orient the Shuttle properly for landing. NASA engineers devised a system of nylon water troughs to disperse the shock and redesigned the launch platform to allow jet watersprays to dissipate the pressure. (NASA Release 81-160; W Post, Oct 9/81, A-15; Science, Oct 9/81, 160)
**** - AS i .-INTENftONAUf fiLAIft Aeronautics programs canceled or deferred included efforts in vertical/ sidewise takeoff and landing (V/STOL) systems, supersonic cruise research, the variable-cycle engine, and the proposed numerical aerodynamic simulator. A initiative in large, composite primary aircraft structures was eliminated. Other programs affected were materials processing in space, AgRISTARS, instrumentation for an upper-atmosphere research satellite, and the Spacelab flight schedule. Lovelace said that adjustments in FY81 figures would reflect impact of decisions on the FY82 budget: an increase of $60 million in 1981 Space Shuttle changes and upgrading would “provide added schedule confidence” in Shuttle development and testing and in production of orbiter vehicles. The amended budget reflected NASA’s decision announced in January to discontinue the three-stage version of an inertial upper stage and to modify the Centaur upper stage instead. The modified stage would allow NASA to fly the Galileo mission to Jupiter on a single launch in 1985 and could be used for a restructured solar-polar mission in 1986 and VOIR in 1988. (NASA Text, Mar 10/81) March 12:	The Soviet Union announced the launch of Soyuz T-4 at 10 p.m. Moscow time to link with the orbiting space complex Salyut 6-Progress 12. Salyut 6, in space since September 29, 1977, had docked January 26 with cargo craft Progress 12, which refueled it automatically on ground command and used its engine to raise the orbit. Soyuz T-4 carried as commander Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, veteran of Soyuz 25 that failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and of Soyuz 29, which docked there for 140 days in June 1978. Also on the T-4 flight was Viktor Savinykh as flight engineer. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 12/81) —Tass said March 13 that the Soyuz T-4 had docked with the Salyut 6-Progress 12 complex March 12 at 11:33 p.m. Moscow time and the cosmonauts had transferred into the space station, being the 15th crew to occupy it in the 3Vi years. They would check on-board systems and equipment, do maintenance, and replace instrumentation as necessary. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 13/81)
The external tank (ET) for the third shuttle flight (ETA) left the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans on a NASA barge for KSC. Unlike those used in the first two flights, this tank would be light brown, the natural color of the insulation sprayed on the tank’s exterior. The white paint on the first two tanks weighed about 600 pounds. Since the tank went almost all the way to orbit, elimination of the paint would add nearly 600 pounds payload besides saving several thousand of dollars in handling and would not affect the tank’s fire-retardant or water-repellent qualities. (MSFC Release 81-122)
NASA signed an agreement with the West German firm Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom (MBB) covering the first flight of shuttle-pallet satellite SPAS-01 scheduled for orbit on STS-5, the first operational Shuttle flight, in September 1982. This would be the first payload deployed and retrieved by the Shuttle’s Canadian-built remote-manipulator system (RMS). The 1,814-kilogram (4,000-pound) payload would operate inside the payload bay and would also be a free flyer when deployed, using an on-board stabilization and control system. NASA would use it to test RMS capabilities during the five-day mission, with a 70-mm camera on the payload to record deployment, free flight, retrieval, and reberthing. MBB would conduct materials-processing experiments while the payload was in the shuttle bay. The agreement was signed for NASA by Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, and for MBB by Dr. Johannes Schubert and Dr. Peter C. Bittner, general manager and commercial director of MBB’s space division. The pact would cover KSC and JSC launch services as well as NASA’s use of the payload for RMS testing. (NASA Release 81-80)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
During the early-morning move of space shuttle Columbia from it KSC hangar to the VAB, a forklift “accidentally banged into” the spacecraft, damaging two tiles on the left elevon, according to KSC spokesman Rocky Raab. Engineers and technicians were expected to replace the tiles by nightfall so that raising Columbia and bolting it to its mobile launcher could proceed. The three-times-delayed rollout began at 3:54 a.m EDT and took 26 minutes to cover the quarter-mile distance. (NY Times, Aug 11/81, C-3)
NASA said that astronaut Alan L. Bean, fourth man to set foot on the Moon, would resign effective June 26 to devote full time to his career as a painter. Bean, selected in the third group of astronauts in the fall of 1963, flew on the second moon-landing mission, Apollo 12, in November 1969, exploring the Ocean of Storms with Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., as Richard F. Gordon circled in the command module. He captained the second Skylab mission in July-September 1973 and was backup spacecraft commander for the 1975 U.S.-USSR Apolio-Soyuz mission. He noted that in his 18 years as astronaut he had seen sights no artist had ever viewed firsthand, and he hoped to record his experiences through his art. Bean’s time in space—1,671 hours 45 minutes—made him first among active U.S. astronauts and fourth of all in total spaceflight time. He was currently head of astronaut-candidate operations and training. His resignation would leave in the corps only one of the 12 U.S. astronauts who had walked on the Moon: John Young, chief of the astronaut office and commander of shuttle Columbia’s first flight last April. (NASA Release 81-87)
The Washington Post said that NASA was faced with cutting so much money from its budgets for the next three years that it was considering abandoning the Voyager, now on its way from Saturn to a flyby of Uranus in 1986 and Neptune in 1989. Turning off Voyager’s radios would save S222 million (the amount needed to keep NASA scientists and engineers on the job and to operate the Deep Space Network antennas in California, Australia, and Spain) over the next eight years. OMB had ordered NASA to cut $367 million from its FY82 budget and $1 billion each from FY83 and FY84. As NASA could not take money from the Space Shuttle, it would have to save money in other ways. It had already bowed out of an international mission to Halley’s comet and now must choose from among three other programs: the Galileo mission to Jupiter in 1987, the large Space Telescope to be orbited in 1985, or the Voyager trips to Uranus and Neptune. Killing both Voyager and Galileo would save about $520 million. The only other way for NASA to save a large amount of money would be an indefinite delay in building a fourth shuttle, the Discovery, estimated to cost $1.2 billion and due for delivery in 1985. (WPost, Oct 7/81, A-4)
NASA’s acting administrator, Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, signed a memorandum of understanding with Hans-Hilger Haunschild of the Federal Republic of Germany’s (FRG) ministry for research and technology on FRG use of the STS (Shuttle), with NASA furnishing launch and support services on a reimbursable basis. NASA said that the Federal Republic had “long been a supporter” of STS and had contributed 40% to ESA’s development of Spacelab, soon to be a Shuttle payload with laboratory facilities like those on Earth but adapted for zero gravity. The Federal Republic of Germany had already paid NASA for two reimbursable Spacelab missions: D-1, materials processing and life-sciences experiments, and D-4, astrophysics experiments; it also planned to launch an X-ray satellite (Rosat) from the Shuttle in 1986. In addition, private and scientific organizations in West Germany had reserved 25 small self-contained payloads for eventual shuttle flight on a space-available basis. (NASA Release 81-58)
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting adminsitrator, left the agency July 11 to become corporate vice president for science and engineering at General Dynamics Corporation, St. Louis, Mo., in charge of research, engineering, advanced product and program development, and development and implementation of corporate engineering and research policy. NASA’s new chief, James M.	Beggs, who began his new job July 9, had been executive vice president for aerospace at General Dynamics. Lovelace had been acting administrator of NASA since the departure of Dr. Robert A. Frosch in January 1981; he had actually retired as deputy administrator in December 1980 but at Frosch’s request had agreed to remain through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of a new administrator. Lovelace had entered federal service in 1954 with the U.S. Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, and became director there in 1967. He went to Andrews Air Force Base in 1972 as director of science and technology for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command and in 1973 became acting deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development. He came to NASA in 1974 as associate administrator, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) and was appointed deputy administrator of NASA in June 1976 by President Ford. Lovelace recently received the Presidential Citizens Medal for his work on developing the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, July 2/81; NASA Release 81-88; NYTimes, July 6/81, D-6)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
NASA said that the third shuttle flight, now scheduled after January 1982, would carry the first biology experiment specifically designed for the Shuttle: the effect of gravity on formation in plants of lignin, the woody substance giving plants structural stability. Monitoring growth in the microgravity environment of space should show how wood is formed. The plants should grow upward in response to the presence of artificial sunlight, but root development was unpredictable. (NASA Release 81-166; ARC Release
NASA launched Space Shuttle Columbia, designated STS-1, from pad A of KSC’s launch complex 39 at 3 seconds after 7 a.m. EST. All launch facilities, systems, and support equipment performed as designed; NASA said that damage to the launch pad was less than predicted. The solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRBs) jettisoned after burnout fell within the predicted impact “footprint” in the Atlantic about 14 nautical miles northeast of KSC, splashing down 7 minutes and 100 seconds after liftoff. All the SRB parts were recovered for reuse except two of the six parachutes. The external tank separated at 8 minutes and 58 seconds into the flight and began to break up at about a 280,000,-foot altitude without tumbling as planned. A tumble system built into the tank to prevent skipping during reentry (and keep debris within a preplanned area) did not work. The Indian Ocean tracking ship, USNS Arnold, said that the tank-debris footprint was larger than expected. Orbit-maneuvering system (OMS) firings (OMS-1 and OMS-2) put Columbia into an orbit with 133.7-nautical-mile apogee, 132.7-nautical-mile perigee, and 40.3° inclination. Ascent went as planned, with all events, through payload-bay door opening, occurring normally. (NASA MOR M-989-81-01 [postlaunch] May 12/81)
NASA announced the selection of scientific instruments to be flown on the Gamma-Ray Observatory scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1988. Produced from the most energetic processes in the universe, gamma rays were the most direct source of knowledge about these processes. Gamma rays to be measured by the observatory would begin at 100,000 electron volts (100 Kev) and continue up to several hundred million electron volts (100 Mev or more). The instruments chosen were a transient-event monitor to detect short intense bursts of gamma rays of unknown origin and localize them to determine their distribution in the galaxy; a high-energy gamma-ray telescope that could measure the energy spectra and arrival directions of the highest-energy gamma rays it finds; an imaging Compton telescope to obtain gamma-ray maps of the celestial sphere at medium energies; and a low-energy gamma-ray spectrometer to look for evidence of nucleosynthesis in supernovas. The observatory, with a planned 2-year lifetime would be one of the largest every orbited, weighing 23,000 pounds (10,432-kilograms) and measuring 25 feet (7.6 meters) in length and 12.5 feet (3.8 meters) in diameter. (NASA Release 81-40)
Nine minutes before launch time, NASA grounded the Space Shuttle Columbia until April 12, because one of five computers in its nose was failing to communicate properly with the other four. The decision to scrub the launch came after a three-hour delay from the original 6:50 a.m. liftoff time; a fuelcell warning light showed in the cockpit just 16 minutes beforehand. No sooner was that problem solved than a second one appeared, when the program in the backup computer did not match that of the four primary computers controlling the ship. (W Star, Apr 10/81, A-l)
