NASA announced the selection of four of five crew members for the first DOD Shuttle mission, STS-10, scheduled for launch from KSC in the last quarter of 1983. The commander would be Thomas K. Mattingly; pilot, Loren J. Shriver; and mission specialists, Ellison S. Onizuka and James F. Buchli. The fifth crew member, an Air Force manned-spaceflight engineer, would be named later. (NASA Release 82-146; MSFC Release 82-90; NY Times, Oct 7/82, A-18)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC since 1972, said that he would retire from NASA after the fifth (and first operational) Shuttle flight, now scheduled for November. He had begun working at the Langley laboratory of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1945. When NASA was established in 1958, he was selected as an original member of the space task group to manage the Mercury project: that group was the nucleus of NASA’s manned spacecraft center, which became JSC in 1973.	Kraft was flight director of all the Mercury missions and many of the Gemini missions; in 1972 he succeeded Dr. Robert Gilruth, who had been the first director of JSC. Kraft said he had no definite plans for the future. (NASA Release 82-62; NY Times, Apr 15/82, B-4; W Post, Apr 15/82, D-2)
Space Shuttle Columbia began a year-long vacation as the second operational Shuttle, Challenger, began final engine tests at KSC in preparation for a three-day mission in January 1983 with a four-man crew. After its landing at Edwards Air Force Base, Columbia was scheduled to return to KSC for “six dozen minor modifications” after completing its first commercial venture, STS-5. The modifications would prepare it for the December 1983 launch of Spacelab, built for NASA by ESA. NASA spokesman said that the first five flights had proved that the Shuttle could launch satellites into space with “remarkable accuracy”; demonstrated that four men could do high-pressure jobs in a cabin the size of a pickup camper; and showed that the Shuttle, like an airplane, worked better the more it was used. (USA Today, Nov 17/82, 3A) —MSFC said that it had sent NASA’s first inertial upper stage (IUS-1) to Cape Canaveral to ready it for launch in Challenger’s payload bay in January 1983. The first of six to be built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command, IUS-1 was an unmanned system for pushing payloads to high altitudes unreachable by the Shuttle in its 150-mile orbit. The two-stage vehicle, 17 feet long and about 9 feet in diameter, weighed more than 16 tons, had more than 64,000 pounds of thrust, and could carry up to 5,000 pounds of payload to geostationary orbit 22,300 miles up. At KSC, the IUS would be mated to a tracking and data-relay satellite (TDRS), first of four planned for launch to replace present ground stations and improve command and telemetry functions for the growing number of operational satellites. NASA hoped to have the four-craft system in operation late in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-103)
NASA launched the fifth flight (STS-5) of Space Shuttle Columbia on time at 7:19 a.m. EST from KSC with a four-man crew, largest ever to take off from Earth at the same time. Feeling none of the motion sickness suffered by three of the first four Shuttle crews, the astronauts were so busy preparing for deployment from orbit of the first of two communications satellites that they had no time for chitchat with mission control. Astronaut Joseph Allen took off his shoes and socks to work barefooted inside the Shuttle cabin: “it’s like having four hands,” he explained. He and William Lenoir maneuvered the first of twin satellites (one U.S., the other Canadian) into space at 3:17 p.m. EST, while Vance Brand and Robert Overmyer flew the 100-ton Shuttle, positioning Columbia to avoid smearing its windows with exhaust from the satellite engine. The astronauts would use the same procedures November 12 to deploy the Canadian satellite on a similar flight path. The first commercial cargo carried by the Shuttle was a 21-foot-tall cylinder worth almost $50 million, owned by Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a firm begun as a partnership of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of Communications Satellite Corporation—ComSatCorp), and International Business Machines (IBM). Boeing, General Motors, and General Electric were among its more than 300 clients who used SBS satellites to transmit coast-to-coast computer traffic and telephone calls. Transmissions to SPS satellites were at 14GHz, twice as high as frequencies used by other U.S. communications satellites and were relayed at 12GHz to avoid interference. President Reagan held a telephone conversation with the astronauts at 10:26 a.m. November 11, repeating his request to an earlier crew to “pick me up and drop me off in California.” He added that “if more of us could see [the earth] from that angle we might realize that there must be a way to make it as united in reality here on earth as it looks from outer space.” Brand replied, “We’re in total agreement on that one.” (NASA MOR M-989-82-05 [prelaunch] Nov 5/82, [postlaunch] Dec 7/82; USA Today, Nov 12/82, 1A; W Post, Nov 12/82, A-l, D-8)
An analysis of NASA’s 1983 budget for research and development, prepared for Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) by the General Accounting Office (GAO), said that more than 25 % of it was for military programs. The New York Times said that the report would lead to more criticism from Congress that NASA was becoming increasingly militarized, at the expense of civilian science and technology. Proxmire said that he asked for the report to “determine the extent to which NASA was merely acting as an agent” for DOD. As nearly half the Shuttle flights would take military payloads, more than $1 billion of the $3.5 billion requested for the Shuttle in FY83 was considered military: $1.1 billion of an R&D budget of $5.33 billion (20.5%) and $400 million support funds (7.77%) could therefore be military related. NASA’s total 1983 budget request was $6.6 PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED **J^LlNT£NTK)NAUr HO ML w billion; total Pentagon direct spending on space was not known but was probably as much as or more than NASA’s annual budget. Proxmire said that he did not object to use of the Shuttle for military purposes, but paying for DOD activities through the NASA budget was “not the way to ensure that dollars spent on national security are spent with maximum effect.” NASA said that it had been tasked with developing the Shuttle as a national endeavor, and reimbursement by other agencies for use of the Shuttle did not change the cost to the government. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-15)
NASA said that the three main engines that powered Space Shuttle Columbia on its five missions would be modified and retested to certify them for operation on the orbiter Atlantis. Rocketdyne would disassemble, inspect, and reassemble the engines before forwarding them to MSFC’s NSTL for acceptance tests and certification. They would be installed in Atlantis for its first mission in 1985. Columbia would get three new engines for its Spacelab mission in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-104)
The Shuttle imaging radar (SIR) flown on STS-2 in November 1981 had revealed previously unknown river channels, geologic structures, and possible Stone Age occupation sites in the eastern Sahara desert. JPL’s Dr. Charles Flachi, principal investigator for SIR, reported that the radar signal could penetrate the virtually featureless desert surface to show subsurface features nearly as broad as the Nile Valley and up to 50-million years old. Drainage networks detected by radar and confirmed by ground studies would explain the location of present oases in the desert. This new tool could serve in the search for ground water in such arid regions. Dr. Alexander Goetz of JPL said that the multispectral infrared radiometer flown on the same Shuttle mission had made the first detection from orbit of clay and carbonite-bearing minerals, an important step in the use of remote sensing for geological mapping. The device used an area in Egypt of known mineral content as a baseline for analysis; its narrow spectral resolution made it able to map mineral content in the area, using specific substances as a guide for exploration and development, previously possible only through laboratory sampling techniques. Dr. Henry C. Reiche, Jr., of LaRC was the principal investigator for the MAPS (measurement of atmospheric pollution from satellites) experiment flown on STS-2, which proved accurate when compared to ground studies. A gas-filter radiometer, part of the first scientific Shuttle payload, measured carbon monoxide ratios in the lower, upper, and middle troposphere, data to be used in 1984 for seasonal variation studies. Besides the desert features revealed by the Shuttle radar, Flachi reported readings over densely forested areas such as the U.S. Appalachians, the mountains covered by rain forests in western Guyana and Venezuela, and other remote locations not covered by ground survey. Geologic features shown in the radar images would help identify causes of change: erosion, fault lines, or previously unknown fractures of the Earth’s crust. The devices recorded their findings because the Shuttle lacked communications capacity. (NASA Releases 82-174, 82-175, 82-176, 82-177; W Post, Nov 26/82, A-l)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Air Force would have to build a $40 million windscreen around its Space Shuttle launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to protect the orbiter while the external tank was being attached. The Air Force was building a second launch complex in California to put the Shuttle into north-south or polar orbit that, combined with Earth’s rotation, would carry it over the entire surface of the Earth. This would not be possible at Cape Canaveral for reasons of safety; from Vandenberg, however, the orbiter’s route would be over the Pacific ocean. Hans Mark, deputy NASA administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the windscreen would be a huge three-sided sheet of metal around the launch pad to protect the orbiter from gusts while attaching the fuel tank. Winds off the Pacific at that location averaged 9 mph year-round and up to 47 mph from January through March, more than enough to break connections between Shuttle and tank. At the Cape, mating took place inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB); Vandenberg had no such building. (W Post, Feb 10/82, A-5)
NASA investigators of the failure of $2-million space suits on STS-5 issued an interim report blaming two missing parts and a faulty sensor. During the mission on Shuttle Columbia, an oxygen device in astronaut William Lenoir’s suit failed to provide required pressure, and the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit and portable life-support system would not operate. JSC program Operations Manager Richard A. Colonna, who headed the team, said that two vital plastic parts the size of a matchstick, worth less than a nickel apiece, that several to hold a pair of screws against a metal piece in Lenoir’s suit, had been removed for a test last August and were never put back. Documentation indicated that the parts were in place, and during repeated tests, technicians failed to spot their absence. The team said that the fan failed because a tiny magnetic sensor no bigger than a pinhead apparently gave way just after Allen put on his space suit. The motor running the fan and pumping water through the suit used the sensors, instead of the magnetic brushes used in most motors, because of the danger of a spark igniting the pure oxygen circulating inside the spacesuit. Colonna said that the team would continue its investigation. He expected it to recommend further and more frequent testing and quality-control inspections by the manufacturer, Hamilton Standard, during space suit production and at JSC and KSC. (NASA Release 82-181; W Post, Dec 2/82, A-l)
NASA launched STS-4, fourth test flight of space shuttle Columbia, from KSC at 11 a.m. carrying Ken Mattingly as commander and Henry Hartsfield as pilot. This was the first time that the Shuttle had lifted off on schedule, but the chase planes televising separation did not show the opening of parachutes on the two reusable solid-fuel booster rockets, and there was no sign on the ocean surface of any of the six main chutes or either of the boosters, which cost $24 million each. Boosters from earlier launches were towed to KSC for refit. After disassembly and cleaning, the first six motor-igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned to Thiokol’s Utah plant for rebuilding at $7 million each; this procedure had saved NASA $36 million per flight for the first three flights. The launch was imperiled the night before by a one-hour hailstorm with pellets “the size of golf balls” denting about 400 of the black protective tiles on the Shuttle’s undersides. Workmen on hastily erected scaffolds had applied a hardener to strengthen the tiles. Enough water soaked the tiles to make the crew need to bake the underside of the Shuttle in the sunlight for 10 hours to dry it out, so that low temperatures on the night side of the Earth would not freeze and further damage the tiles. Mattingly and Hartsfield had begun to power up the 2,000-pound cargo put in the payload bay by the Air Force as well as four experiments managed by MSFC, including the first use of the Shuttle by a commercial firm. Press reports called it “an open secret” that the U.S. Air Force instruments included an extremely sensitive infrared telescope, an ultraviolet telescope, and a new space sextant designed to navigate spy satellites without ground command. Hartsfield, on his spaceflight, suffered nausea but was later able to eat dinner. Instead of televising a view of the payload bay as other crews had done, or using the camera on the end of the 60-foot robot arm to show the Earth as they saw it from space, the crew merely described the view, expressing surprise at the amount of detail discernible. The seven-day mission would “wring out the wrinkles” in the Shuttle not dealt with on the first three flights. NASA said that it would name a board to review “in excruciating detail” how the boosters could sink in 3,500 feet of water although the drogue parachutes were found floating 150 miles downrange. (NASA Release 82-87; MSFC Release 82-56; NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [prelaunch] June 18/82; W Post, June 28/82, A-l; June 29/82, A-2; Dtln Gd, June 28/82; Marshall Star, June 30/82, 1) During June: NASA announced that Dr. Walter C. Williams, chief engineer since July 1975, would retire in July. Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, would succeed him. Williams began his career with NACA, NASA’s predecessor, in August 1940 and worked during the war to improve U.S. fighter planes. He was founding director of the organization that became NASA’s Dryden facility. He went to Langley Field, Va., in September 1959 as associate director of the new NASA space task group created to carry out Project Mercury and later was director of operations for the project. He then became associate director of NASA’s manned spacecraft center in Houston that later was JSC. He went to NASA Headquarters in January 1963, leaving in April 1964 to work for Aerospace Corporation’s vehicle systems. He became NASA’s first chief engineer in 1975. (NASA anno, June 1/82; NASA Release 82-86) —NASA announced the appointment of George F. Page as deputy director of KSC effective July 5. He had directed Shuttle operations there since 1979 and was launch director for the first three launches of Columbia. From 1964 to 1975 he directed KSC operations planning for 19 Gemini and 25 Apollo spacecraft launches, ending with the lunar landings and the successful ApolloSoyuz project. He directed unmanned launch operations from 1975 to 1979, with more than 54 major launches from both KSC and the Western Test Range (WTR) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA anno June 21/82; NASA Release 82-102)
Marine Col. Jack Lousma and Air Force Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, the astronauts scheduled to fly the third Shuttle mission, told a news conference in Houston that the flight was now set for March 22. A major objective of the mission would be to see how well the Shuttle systems withstood the extreme heat and cold of space. Sections of the ship exposed to the Sun would experience temperatures up to 250°F; sections in shadow, down to -250°F. The Shuttle would also be subjected to slightly higher dynamic pressures during launch and landing, to gain additional knowledge about its flight characteristics and limits. {W Post, Jan 22/81, A-16) During January: NASA named Dr. Burton I. Edelson, a senior vice president of Comsat General Corporation, as its associate administrator for space science and applications, effective February 14. He would succeed Andrew J. Stofan, who had been in an acting capacity and would remain as advisor until NASA appointed him to another management position. Edelson, before joining Comsat, had been an engineering officer in the U.S. Navy with assignments on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council at the White House and the Office of Naval Research. (NASA anno Jan 13/82; NASA Release 82-7)
Cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev made a space walk from the orbiting station Salyut 7 to disassemble and partially replace wornout equipment on the station’s exterior and study opportunities for doing various jobs outside it. After they donned space suits, Lebedev left the station for the “zone” of operations, while Berezovoy remained in the open manhole to film his walk for television. They dismantled and passed into the station a micrometeorite-measuring instrument and some panels with optical and various structural materials that had been outside the station since its launch April 19. They also tested the station after exposure of thermomechanical and threaded connections made of different metals that might be used in assembling future craft in orbit. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 30/82) During July: Press reports said that astronauts Margaret Rhea Seddon and Robert I. Gibson were parents of a baby boy, Paul, born July 26 in Houston. Seddon, 34, and Gibson, 35, joined the astronaut program in January 1978 and were married in May 1981. Also, Dr. Sally K. Ride, selected for the seventh Space Shuttle mission as first female U.S. astronaut, announced her marriage to colleague Steven Hawley at her hometown, Salina, Kans. Hawley, an astronomer, had not yet been selected for a mission. (WPost, July 27/82, C-3; St. L P/Dsp, Aug 15/82)
NASA rolled out the first lightweight external tank for the Space Shuttle at its Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. The tank, structural backbone of the Shuttle launch assembly, included an oxygen tank, a hydrogen tank, and a connecting intertank housing the instrumentation. At 66,824 pounds the new tank was more than 10,000 pounds lighter than the one used for the first Shuttle flight in April 1981; the reduced weight would add payload capability almost pound for pound. The new tank, loaded on a NASA barge for shipment to KSC, would be prepared for the sixth shuttle mission scheduled for January 1983. (MSFC Releases 82-81, 82-83)
MSFC shipped the induced environment-contamination monitor back to Kennedy Space Center (KSC) after servicing it in preparation for the third Shuttle flight. The desk-sized detector consisted of 10 instruments to check the environment in and around the Shuttle cargo bay for contaminants that might damage or interfere with sensitive equipment. The monitor would play a dual role on the next mission: besides carrying out its normal functions, the PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED filAMB 32i 1,000-pound package would serve as a load to exercise the remote-manipulator arm. All instruments on the monitor operated successfully in its first flight on the second Shuttle mission; data collected then were still being analyzed. (MSFC Release 82-7) —A month-long analysis of the data produced by the monitor on the second Shuttle flight clearly identified every contamination-producing activity (such as thrust firings and water dumps). On future missions, the monitor could differentiate contamination from other sources. It recorded low humidity in, and successful sealing of, the cargo bay from engine byproducts during ascent and descent; few particles of matter larger than five micrometers, but a number of smaller particles well above expectations; a 90% reduction of water molecules and other early-mission contaminants after about 35 hours in orbit; and a temporary cloud of particles from using the attitude-control system or from dumping of water. Project scientist Edgar Miller of MSFC said that, when the orbiter flew with the cargo bay pointing ahead, molecular readout was high because orbiter-generated particles were deflected back into the bay; action would be taken to keep this from happening while using sensitive instruments. The third Shuttle flight, planned for seven-days, would test the monitor in high temperatures from the planned solar orientation of the cargo bay, compared to the mild levels produced by the Earth orientation of the second flight. The remote manipulator would move the monitor to selected points for readout during the flight. (MSFC Release 82-14; NASA Release 82-13)
MSFC said that it had selected Martin Marietta Aerospace to negotiate a $l-million contract for a tethered-satellite system concept. A tethered-satellite system would go into orbit on the Space Shuttle in the late 1980s, suspended downward from the cargo bay on a 60-mile-long tether to troll the atmosphere for days as a time to. gather magnetospheric, atmospheric, and gravitational data. It could also be deployed upward to study electrodynamic and other phenomena. The area to be studied was too high for airplanes, too low for satellites to, cover for long, and reachable only for brief periods by instrument-laden rockets. Under a letter of agreement signed in 1981, NASA would join with Italy in developing and launching the system, building the deployment system and managing systems integration and mission operations, while Italy built the satellite itself. (NASA Release 82-169; MSFC Release 82-102)
NASA announced the selection of a West German physicist, Ulf Merbold, and a U.S. biomedical engineer, Byron K. Lichtenberg, as the first nonastronauts to fly on the Space Shuttle. The two would be part of a crew of six on the ninth Shuttle mission, scheduled for September 1983, and would use the Spacelab workshop installed for the first time in the Shuttle cargo bay to operate 38 scientific packages representing more than 70 investigators from Europe, Japan, and the United States. ESA, which for 10 years had planned and built the $1 billion joint U.S.-European Spacelab unit, had agreed with NASA that one European scientist would be on all Shuttle missions carrying a Spacelab. Merbold, trained at Stuttgart University, competed for his Shuttle seat with Dutch physicist Wubbo Ockels, trained at the University of Groningen. Lichtenberg, with a Ph.D. from MIT, competed with Michael Lampton, holding a doctorate in physics from CalTech. Winners were chosen in secret ballot by a panel of 36 U.S. and European scientists. (MSFC Release 82-86; ESA Info 31; W Post, Sept 20/82, A-5)
The Washington Post said that STS-5, the first operational Shuttle mission, would include simulation of a space repair job to practice for the salvaging of an orbiting satellite, Solar Max, in April 1984. The 5,000-pound Solar Max cost $70 million at its launch in February 1980 to study the Sun during maximum sunspot activity. Less than six months later, the devices pointing its instrumentation at the Sun broke down, and the satellite wa practically useless. Congress allowed $18 million to put the Shuttle alongside in a 308-mile-high orbit so that astronauts could ground a dozen cables, cut seals holding them to a panel, and pry the entire group from the panel. The greatest expense was for training the spacesuited crew to use tools and to handle the Solar Max as it orbited at 17,500-miles-per-hour alongside the Shuttle. {W Post, Oct 7/82, A-23)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced a revised policy on Shuttle-mission opportunities for payload specialists, heretofore available only to those buying half or more of a Shuttle mission of flying a unique experiment needing the presence of a particular scientist or engineer. Starting in 1984, NASA would no longer require a minimum payload. Flights for payload specialists would be available on a reimbursable basis to all classes of customer: foreign and domestic commercial firms, international cooperative partners, the scientific and applications community, and DOD. The payload specialists would usually be scientists with special skills who would undergo a brief training for spaceflight. The expanded policy reflected a Shuttle-program goal of sending more people into space on a routine basis. (NASA Release 82-158; MSFC Release 82-97)
George Bush, U.S. vice president, unveiled at KSC the flight version of Spacelab, a reusable scientific-research facility designed to fly on the Shuttle. At the ceremony, Mr. Bush called the Spacelab “an extraordinary engineering achievement. . .the largest cooperative space project ever.” Noting that more than 2,000 persons, from 50 European firms and 10 member nations, helped to build it, he added: “If today can be considered Spacelab’s birthday, then there are a great many proud parents celebrating... Let us continue to be partners,” he concluded, “and let me take this opportunity to assure you that we intend to continue our international cooperative programs, just as President Reagan recently reconfirmed the commitment of the United States to a vigorous space program.” The joint venture of NASA and ESA was a cylindrical module built to fit into the Shuttle cargo bay, where both astronaut mission specialists and civilian scientists (payload specialists) would work in a shirtsleeve environment, with a series of unpressurized pallets to support experiments requiring direct exposure, to space. The first Spacelab flight, planned for a seven-day Shuttle mission in September 1983, would carry out some 70 investigations in 5 different disciplines. About 50 firms in ESA’s participating nations had supplied parts to ERNO, prime contractor in Bremen, West Germany, for assembly and integration. The program, which cost ESA about $1 billion, would provide NASA, at no charge, with one engineering model and one complete flight version of Spacelab with associated ground-support equipment and some computer software. NASA was buying, for about $300 million, a second flight-model Spacelab to be delivered in mid-1982. MSFC would manage the first mission with ESA and had been in charge of U.S. development of flight-hardware items, such as the transfer tunnel and other operating equipment. MSFC would manage the second and third (NASA-only) missions alone. (Ofc of VP anno, Feb 5/82; NASA Release 82-14; MSFC Release 82-15; ESA Info 6, Feb 2/82, Feb 3/82)
A formal ceremony in Washington, D.C., marked the acceptance of the Canadian-built remote-manipulator system as “ready for operational use” on the Space Shuttle. NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and Dr. Larkin Kerwin, head of Canada’s National Research Council (NRC), signed an agreement declaring the device (already successfully used on STS-2, STS-3, and STS-4) operational. Although NRC thus fulfilled its obligations under a 1975 memorandum of understanding, it would continue to monitor the arm system on future missions. Next use of the arm would be on STS-7 in April 1983. (NASA Release 82-168)
NASA successfully completed a 30 second flight-readiness firing of the new higher power space shuttle main engines at KSC. The test was to verify llight readiness of the three new engines and demonstrate in a launch-day environment the proper integration of all elements before the STS-6 mission. The successful test was a major step in preparation for STS-6, scheduled for launch in January 1983. Pre- and post-test activities included personnel from KSC, JSC, and MSFC. This was the second time in history for static-firing the primary propulsion system of a manned spacecraft on the launch pad. A similar test of Columbia’s three main engines occurred Febraury 20, 1981, before the first Shuttle launch. Challenger’s more powerful engines, each generating 390,000 pound of thrust at sea level, had been fired individually at NSTL but were fired for the first time today in a flight configuration. The most significant problem was a high level of gaseous hydrogen in the aft compartment. NASA said that so much work remained in the crew compartment that Rockwell employees at KSC were scheduled to work in that area over the holidays. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 21/82; NASA Release 82-187; MSFC Release 82-111)
MSFC said that it had shipped the external tank for the fourth Shuttle mission from Michoud Assembly Facility on the NASA barge Orion for a five-day trip to KSC. The fourth launch was set for mid-1982. (MSFC Release 82-12) —MSFC reported shipment of the monodisperse latex reactor, an experiment “with major medical and industrial applications,” to KSC for flight on the third Shuttle mission. Dale Kornfeld of MSFC’s space sciences laboratory said that the instrument would produce identical-sized microspheres of polystyrene latex, resembling tiny beads, to measure the size of intestinal pores for cancer research and of pores in the eye for glaucoma research and to act as a carrier of drugs and radioactive isotopes for treatment of cancerous tumors. On Earth, the beads could be produced only up to about 3 microns in size; the low gravity of space would permit them to “grow” up to 20 microns while remaining identical. The National Bureau of Standards had indicated interest in using the beads to calibrate medical and scientific equipment. (MSFC Release 82-9)
NASA announced the crews for the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shuttle flights. On STS A, Thomas K. Mattingly would be commander, and Henry W. Hartsfield, pilot. Scheduled for launch early in July, the seven day STS-4 would be the last of four orbital flight tests to verify Shuttle hardware and software. Mattingly, 47, orbited the Moon 10 years ago on Apollo 16: Hartsfield, 48, was a rookie. STS-5, a five-day mission planned for mid-November to deploy commercial communications satellites, would be the first to use mission-specialist astronauts. Vance D. Brand, 50, who was command-module pilot on 1975’s Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, would be mission commander. This would be the first spaceflight for Robert F. Overmyer, 45, the pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. Joseph P. Allen and Dr. William B. Lenoir. Columbia would be the spacecraft for both STS-4 and STS-5. STS-6, planned for January 1983, would be the first flight of the orbiter Challenger, a two-day mission to deploy NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), one of an eventual two-satellite system providing comprehensive voice and data coverage between orbiting shuttles and the ground. Commander would be Paul J. Weitz, 49, who was pilot on Skylab /; copilot would be U.S. Air Force Col. Karol J. Bobko, 44, another rookie. Donald H. Peterson and Dr. Story Musgrave would fly as mission specialists. NASA would no longer assign Shuttle backup crews; its pool of experienced pilots at JSC would readily permit interchange of crewmen. (NASA Release 82-33; JSC Release 82-012; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-9)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles. Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
MSFC reported a joint-endeavor agreement signed by NASA’s Office of Space Sciences and GTI Corporation of San Diego that might lead to flight of a GTI materials-processing device on four future Shuttle flights. The agreement was a new NASA approach to government-industry partnerships in developing future applications or technologies for space-flown devices. The agreement would have three phases: design by GTI of a low-cost multichamber alloy-solidification furnace operable in low-gravity space; development, testing, and integrating the GTI furnace into the Shuttle; and flight on the Shuttle. GTI’s interest was in the manufacturing in microgravity of space alloys that would not be immiscible on Earth, where many theoretical alloys were not possible because of the density variations of the elements and the effect of gravity on the heavier elements. GTI would fund development and testing; NASA, the integration and flight. (MSFC Release 82-13; NASA Release
NASA announced that Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, 58, last of the Mercury Seven astronauts selected in 1958, would leave after 23 years with the space agency. He had retired from NASA in February 1981 but had worked since that time on a temporary basis as a retired annuitant managing the Space Shuttle orbital flight tests at Johnson Space Center (JSC). He planned to work as a consultant to Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, Calif., and to Space Sciences Inc. of Houston, Tex. Slayton joined the U.S. Air Force in 1942, flying 56 combat missions in Europe and 7 over Japan as a B-25 bomber pilot; he was a test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base when selected as a Mercury astronaut. Grounded in August 1959 because of a suspected heart condition, he was later approved for flight and was part of the U.S. crew in the Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975. (NASA Release 82-23) —The New York Times said that friends and associates “wondered why matters were not handled better”: NASA never responded to a JSC request for another year’s extension of Slayton’s employment. His departure reduced the number of the astronaut corps to 79. Several were doctors or scientists without piloting skills; 6 were women. “Many,” the New York Times added, “are young enough to be Slayton’s children.” There had been 108 U.S. astronauts “but only one Original Seven.” (NY Times, Feb 2/82, A-14; Feb 28/82, 30; W Post, Feb 18/82, A-21)
NASA launched Intelsat 5E F-5 at 7:08 p.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,962-kilometer apogee, 165.7-kilometer perigee, and 24.4° inclination. This craft would carry for the first time a maritime communications package for ship and shore use by INMARSAT. ’An apogee kick motor fired October 1 would start it to geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 82-136; NASA MOR M-491-203-82-05 [prelaunch] Sept 22/82, [postlaunch] Oct 26/82) During September: NASA Headquarters announced the reorganization of its Office of Space Transportation Systems and Office of Space Transportation Operations into a new Office of Space Flight. L. Michael Weeks was named acting deputy associate administrator, with assistant associate administrators for policy, space transportation, and institutions. The new arrangement would stress integrated Shuttle operations planning and direction; STS orientation to customers; a manageable span of control for the associate administrator; maximum delegation of authority to subordinate officials and field organizations; and minimum disruption to existing lines of communication with centers and outside NASA. (SP anno, Sept 1/82) —John J. Quann was appointed deputy director of GSFC, effective September 8. He had been director of GSFC’s mission and data operations directorate since October 1980 and had worked at Goddard since 1963. (NASA anno Sept 1/82; NASA Release 82-131) —NASA named Dr. Frank B. McDonald, chief of GSFC’s laboratory for high-energy physics since 1970, as NASA chief scientist, effective September 20.	In this position he would be the principal adviser to the administrator and other senior officials on scientific aspects of NASA activities. Beginning at GSFC in 1959, McDonald had been project scientist on nine NASA satellite programs and principal investigator for many space experiments. He previously taught physics at the Iowa State University of Science and Technology. (NASA anno, Sept 9/82; NASA Release 82-133) —NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, not slated for flight, was still working for the U.S. space program, helping DFRF engineers to predict and avert structural trouble spots resulting from wear and tear. All preShuttle spacecraft had been one-shot items, so that space fatigue was a new problem. As each Shuttle was meant to fly up to 100 missions, NASA needed a reliable way to foresee difficulties before they developed into problems and to detect potential weakness without damaging the structure. A method called modal analysis measuring structural response to shaker acceleration could track changes from baseline data. Piecemeal testing of parts would not give results valid for the entire structure: Enterprise, built to the same dimensions as the four actual orbiters, was “uniquely qualified for the job,” researchers said. (NASA Release 82-139; DFRF Release 82-13) —MSFC said that Lockheed’s contractor facility had successfully extended and retracted an experimental solar-array wing as tall as a 10-story building, scheduled for flight on the Space Shuttle in 1984. Unlike rigid metal structures used on current long-life spacecraft, the accordion-like array consisting of lightweight flexible plastic contained contact solar cells welded directly to the array like a printed circuit. The wing, measuring 105 feet by 13.5 feet, could fold into a package less than four inches thick and expand in orbit to its full length on a coilable extension mast. It could provide 66 watts per kilogram compared to 20 watts in present systems. (MSFC Release 82-84)
ESA said that it would begin a follow-on program with Spacelab. Financial contributions from member states for this purpose had reached 80% of the goal April 15, permitting work to start immediately. Part of the new program would be development of a European retrievable carrier (EURECA) to be launched and retrieved by the Space Shuttle as well as a core payload for the first mission consisting of microgravity research emphasizing material and life sciences, with first flight scheduled for the end of 1986. Weighing about 1,500 kilograms, EURECA would have a design life of six months or more in orbit, providing services for its payload including electrical power and heat protection. Its low gravity-disturbance level would be essential to microgravity research. After deployment, an on-board propulsion unit would put it in a higher orbit with less drag on its large solar arrays. Once in orbit, its experiments, although highly automated, would be operated by remote control and monitored from the ground. It would reassume low orbit for recovery by the Shuttle and return to Earth for refurbishment. (ESA Info
The Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President released budget figures showing funds for all federal research and development as $43 billion in FY83, $4.2 billion over FY82. NASA’s portion of the research and development (R&D) budget ($6.5 billion for FY83, $672 million over FY82) would “assure timely transition of the space shuttle to an operational system [and] continue the highest priority research and space exploration projects,” namely the Space Telescope, the gamma-ray observatory, and the Galileo mission to Jupiter. (NASA anno, Feb 8/82) —James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, said in a budget message that “given the tightly constrained fiscal environment. . .1 believe we did well.... [T]hough there are no new starts, we are continuing with most of our ongoing activity in what we consider to be a balanced way.” (Text, Feb 8/82)
