NASA announced that Rockwell Internatl. Corp. made significant additions to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to accommodate three research experiments that would measure orbiter aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics as it reentered earth's atmosphere. Researchers would use the flight data to develop future generation space transportation systems. The most obvious change was a cylindrical housing that replaced the fintip atop the vertical tail. The new experiment pod, containing equipment for the shuttle infrared leeside temperature sensing (SILTS) experiment, was approximately 20 in. in diameter and was capped at the leading edge by a spherical dome. SILTS would obtain high-resolution infrared images of the upper (leeside) surfaces of Columbia's port wing and fuselage as the orbiter reentered the atmosphere, providing detailed temperature maps at the surface of the leeside thermal protection materials and indicating the amount of aerodynamic heating of surfaces in flight. Tape recorders would store experiment data. Infrared cameras mounted inside the dome would view Columbia's left wing and fuselage through two windows protected during launch from debris by plugs that filled the window cavities and that fell away when the experiment began about 400,000 feet above earth at reentry. Injection of gaseous nitrogen into the cavities would cool the cameras during that period. For the shuttle entry air data system (SEADS) experiment, a new nosecap had 14 penetration assemblies distributed about its surface, each containing a small hole through which local surface air pressure was measured from an altitude of about 56 miles through landing. This would allow precise postflight determination of the arbiter's attitude relative to the oncoming air-stream and the density of the atmosphere through which the vehicle was flying. The shuttle upper atmosphere mass spectrometer (SUMS) would complement the SEADS experiment by providing atmospheric density information at altitudes above 50 miles. SUMS would sample air at Columbia's surface through a small hole, located just aft of the nosecap, to measure the number of molecules of various gas species in order to determine the atmospheric density that, with vehicle motion information, would allow determination of orbiter aerodynamic characteristics at altitudes where the atmosphere was extremely thin. NASA originally developed the SUMS mass spectrometer for the Viking spacecraft that landed in 1976 on Mars and modified it to operate in the orbiter's reentry flight environment. NASA' Langley Research Center developed the experiments as part of the orbiter experiments program managed by NASA's office of aeronautics and space technology. (NASA Release 85-127)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that NASA's first experiments to construct large structures in space were a success [see Space Transportation System/Mission, Nov. 30 and Dec. 2]. EASE (Experimental Assembly of Structures in Extravehicular Activity) and ACCESS (Assembly Concept for Construction of Erectable Space Structures) carried out by astronauts Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring "went exactly as we had planned, and all experiment and Space Transportation System objectives were met," said Ed Valentine, mission manager for the EASE/ACCESS payload flown on Space Shuttle mission 61 -B. Those objectives included gathering data to compare assembly rates and techniques in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tests, evaluating potential space station assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques, and identifying ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. "Preliminary data obtained from live downlink TV looks very good," Valentine explained. "But we won't be able to make a complete analyses until we see the rest of the data," which was in the form of videotape and film shot while Ross and Spring performed the construction tasks. Once the data were analyzed and reported, Valentine said, it would give large space structure designers baseline data on the two construction approaches studied. "They can then determine which approach would be appropriate for a particular task," he explained. On December 11 Valentine said he would meet for a debriefing with the Space Shuttle crew and principal investigators. Then in about three weeks the principal investigators would receive the videotape and film shot during the experiments, and Valentine would publish a final report in about three months. (NASA Release 85-66)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that M. Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, and Ing. Heise, executive vice president and president of the Space Systems Group of Messerschmidt/Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno, signed a contract for the development of the European Retrievable Carrier, EURECA, a payload carrier intended for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle. MBB/Erno would serve as EURECA prime contractor with support from some 24 European industrial firms. The approximately $95 million contract called for delivery of the EURECA flight unit to NASA by the end of 1987 for launch from the Space Shuttle in March 1988 and recovery, by the Space Shuttle, six months later. The first EURECA payload, developed by European national institutes and space agencies, would consist primarily of experiments in the microgravity sciences (life and material sciences) and a limited number of experiments in space science and technology. Work on the payload would proceed in parallel with the development of the carrier, and plans called for delivery of all payload elements to MBB/Erno by spring 1987 for integration onboard EURECA before shipment to the U.S. The EURECA payload carrier incorporated the more attractive features of Spacelab and in addition provided for relatively long duration flights (up to eight months), higher power and mass capability for the payload, and lower costs compared with Spacelab and many conventional satellites because the system occupied only about 2.5 m of the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay. ESA also envisioned EURECA's eventual use in association with the proposed U.S. space station, with the EURECA operating either in a free-flying mode (co-orbiting with the space station or in polar orbit) or as a man-tended, semipermanent payload carrier with modified docking facilities. (ESA release July 1/85)
NASA announced a new launch date of no earlier than March 7 from KSC for the 51—E Space Shuttle mission with landing at KSC on March 11. Routine checkout of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite had disclosed that one cell in a 24-cell flight battery would not accept a charge. Rescheduling the launch would permit battery repair and retesting. The three nickel-cadmium batteries would supply full power to the satellite during orbital-flight, solar-eclipse periods when its solar panels could not provide the required electrical power. Final checkout of the Space Shuttle orbiter systems was progressing satisfactorily. The 51 —E launch date would cause an STS 51-D launch date of no earlier than March 22. (NASA Release 85-29)
In testimony today before the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration, Smithsonian Institution Secretary Robert McCormick Adams said the Smithsonian opposed a bill introduced by Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) that would authorize funds to construct a museum administered by the National Air and Space Museum for historic airplanes and spacecraft at Dulles International Airport, the Washington Post reported. He said the Institution had more immediate legislative priorities, although it would support planning appropriations. In 1976 Goldwater was instrumental in pushing funds through Congress for the National Air and Space Museum. The bill Goldwater introduced in June called for $42.6 million in government appropriations in FY 89 and beyond, contingent on an equal amount in matching donations from the private sector. Adams questioned whether the Institution should, or could, raise that much money, particularly because the Institution had more pressing fund-raising commitments. Although Goldwater was on the Smithsonian's Board of Regents, he was pushing the issue now, Terry Emerson, his legislative assistant said, because "its just an interest in priorities." Emerson noted that politicians had a greater sense than did Smithsonian officials of the interest in technology-related museums. "Later they'll come in once they see the overwhelming interest in it," he added. "Once enabling legislation is enacted," Goldwater said, "I believe numerous private individuals and firms will begin a major fund-raising campaign that will produce enough matching monies to get the first construction going by fiscal year 1989." The Smithsonian's Board of Regents initially approved in September 1983 the concept for the air museum, citing insufficient space at the National Air and Space Museum and the difficulty of transporting large aircraft and spacecraft to the Mall building. Under the plan, the Federal Aviation Administration would lease 100 acres of its land at Dulles without compensation. Proximity to a runway was essential, because many of the aircraft and spacecraft, such as the Concorde and Space Shuttle, were too large to be transported on roads. The committee would rule on the proposed legislation in September. (W Post, July 25/85, B9)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis, scheduled October 3 for its maiden voyage, would deploy two defense satellite communications system (DSCS-III) satellites to support all three military services and to carry a single channel transponder used to transmit emergency messages from the president to nuclear forces, the Washington Post reported the Federation of American Scientists said on September 9. The group said the classified mission could be determined by anyone including the Soviets, who carefully scrutinized public documents, and that it was revealing the payload because keeping the mission secret "inhibits public awareness and discussion of U.S. military activities in space." The group indicated it found reference to the satellites in various military publications, the most recent of which was a December 28, 1984, issue of Defense Daily that said two DCSCs would "be launched together next year on a single space shuttle mission, apparently on the Atlantis mission . . ." (W Post, Sept 10/85, A5)
Recently completed agreements between insurance underwriters and Hughes Communications Services acknowledged loss of the disabled Leasat-3 spacecraft but established a plan under which Hughes and the underwriters would share in communication lease revenues if a plan to repair the satellite during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission was successful, Aviation Week reported. Under the agreement with American and European underwriters who insured Leasat-3, Hughes would provide the funds, estimated at about $10 million, for the rescue attempt. If the rescue was successful, Hughes would regain the cost of the salvage mission through initial lease revenues. The agreements recognized a loss of $85 million for the spacecraft and launch costs. The loss resulted from the failure of the spacecraft on April 13 to activate during an automatic deployment sequence after the spacecraft was ejected from the Space Shuttle orbiter Discovery's cargo bay [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 17]. Hughes and NASA v/ere developing equipment and procedures to mount the rescue attempt, johnson Space Center had concluded a critical design review for rescue hardware such as a worksite, stowage assembly, and the capture, handling, grapple, and spinup bars that would be used to stabilize, restrain, and spin the satellite once modifications aimed at restoring ground control were made on orbit. The design review also covered components Hughes was building, such as the remote power unit, spun bypass unit, and a checkout box that would be used to test electronic components on orbit prior to the rescue attempt. Completion of the critical design review enabled NASA to obtain information on the electronic components Hughes was building and to build rescue equipment for the mission, conduct vacuum chamber testing, and begin training for the salvage mission. NASA had already conducted initial neutral buoyancy training in the weightless training environment facility and mass simulation tests in preparation for the mission. (AvWk, July 8/85, 24)
NASA postponed for 24 hours the first classified Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch the afternoon of January 23, as freezing temperatures threatened to cause severe icing on the external fuel tank, the Washington Post reported. Officials said ice chunks could drop off, damaging the Space Shuttle, and also that NASA staff was conducting inspection of fuel and water pipes to determine if they had frozen shut. The Department of Defense (DOD) had classified nearly all aspects of the mission. The crew consisting of Navy Capt. Thomas Mattingly, AF Lt. Col. Loren Shriver, Marine Lt. Col. James Buchli, AF Maj. Ellison Onizuka, and AF Maj. Gary Payton would not conduct the traditional prelaunch news conference nor hold one after landing. The U.S. Air Force would not disclose how long the crew would stay in orbit or what flight path they would take on the premise it might help the USSR determine mission purpose or interfere with the mission. Previously the Washington Post had reported that Challenger would carry into orbit a sigint (signals intelligence) satellite that could intercept telemetry from Soviet missile tests. The Associated Press later had reported that the satellite could pick up radio, ground-to-space communications, and longdistance telephone calls made by microwave relay. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger would not comment on the reports' accuracy. The USAF had not filed a flight-path plan with the United Nations, and the location of two ships that would recover the solid-fuel rocket boosters was also secret. There would be no public air-to-ground communications during the flight. (W Pbst, Jan 23/85, A3)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-C would carry the first of two experiments to investigate effects of different diseases on red blood cell aggregation and blood viscosity. The experiment was originally scheduled for mission 51-A in November 1984 but withdrawn due to orbiter weight and center-of-gravity considerations. The Department of Defense (DOD) had agreed to add the experiment to 51-C, a dedicated DOD mission. Called aggregation of red blood cells (ARC), the experiment would determine rate of formation (kinetics) and internal structure and organization (morphology) of red cells and the thickness (viscosity) of whole blood at high- and low-flow rates. Healthy donors and donors with various medical conditions such as heart disease, hypertension, diabetes, and cancer would provide blood samples. Researchers would compare results obtained in microgravity with results from a simultaneous and identical ground-based experiment to determine what effects gravity had on the kinetics and morphology of the blood and, therefore, whether researchers could use information obtained in microgravity to formulate new diagnostic tests or improve existing tests for the benefit of clinical research and medical practice. Flight hardware, weighing about 165 lb. and installed in three mid-deck lockers in the crew cabin, would consist of a container housing a blood pump/storage subsystem, parallel plate slit capillary viscometer, photo/opti-cal subsystem, thermal control system, pressure transducer, and an electronics equipment package to provide automated control and data acquisition. A crew member would activate the experiment; the electronics package would automatically operate all other procedures. Running time would be about eight hours. Dr. Leopold Dintenfass of the Kanematsu Institute (Department of Medical Research), Sydney, Australia, had developed the experiment and experiment hardware. Marshall Space Flight Center had responsibility for the flight experiment. After landing, data from the flight experiments would be delivered to Dintenfass for analysis and comparison with ground-based experiment data. (NASA Release 85-6; NASA MOR E-420-51-C-21 [prelaunch] Jan 23/85)
Taylor Wang, the first space traveller of Chinese origin who performed materials science and fluids studies in weightlessness during the April 1985 Challenger Space Shuttle flight 51-B, arrived in Beijing, China, for a two-week visit at the invitation of the Astronautics Industry Ministry. Wang, a scientist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was born in China's Jiangxi Province and had not been in China for over 30 years. Wang said the purpose of his trip was to exchange views with Chinese scholars and to conduct academic exchanges with Chinese specialists in Beijing, Xian, and Shanghai. During a welcoming ceremony July 8 at the Ministry, Vice-Minister Bao Kerning said that China's open policy in recent years had given great impetus to the development of its space technology. He concluded by saying that Wang's visit would further promote the friendship and cooperation between scientists of the two countries and that Sino-American space science and technology collaboration and exchanges were promising. (FBIS, Beijing XINHUA in English, July 6/85, July 7/85, July 8/85)
Hughes Communications Inc., manufacturer and owner of the Syncom 4 satellite launched August 27 from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, today declared it a failure due to a faulty cable between the satellite's UHF radio transmission system and its broadcast antenna, the Washington Post reported. Failure of the $85 million satellite, known as Leasat 4 after its lease to the Navy, pushed satellite insurance losses to $234 million in a single week and to about $570 million for the past 18 months. Satellites insured for $84 million and $65 million were also lost that week when Arianespace blew up a malfunctioning Ariane rocket. (IV Post, Sept 17/85, All)
Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) qualification tests had shown the Star 30C apogee kick motor, designed to place satellites in orbits around the earth and manufactured by Morton-Thiokol Inc., was ready for production, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sverdrup Technology Inc., operating contractor of AEDC's propulsion test facilities, had conducted qualification checks in one of AEDC's high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated altitude of about 100,000 feet. Test objectives were to demonstrate component structural integrity and to determine ballistic performance. Sverdrup temperature conditioned the motors and then test fired them while they spun about their axial centerline to simulate spin stabilization during firing in space. The Star 30C, designed to be carried by the Space Shuttle, was the propulsion system for the RCA C-STAR satellite. Once in space, it would ignite and carry the satellite to its designated orbit. (AFSC Newsreview,. Mar 29/85, 6)
In their last full day aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51-B, the crew concluded an array of experiments and prepared for their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Answering questions radioed from reporters at Johnson Space Flight Center, the astronauts reported progress not only in working out space station construction techniques, but also in developing a gravity-free pharmaceutical factory to be based on the proposed space station. Payload specialist Charles Walker of the McDonnell Douglas Corp. was in charge of the experiment for development of a space-based factory for purification of a human hormone produced by genetically engineered bacteria. Astronauts on previous flights had tested the basic purification technique, called continuous-flow electrophoresis in a gravity-free environment; the current experiment simulated an actual production run of the hormone, which might prove useful in treating certain forms of anemia. During the questioning, astronauts Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring and Maj. Jerry Ross acknowledged that they were extremely fatigued after each of their spacewalks and that their hands were stiff and numb after the practice assembly, manipulation, and disassembly of a 45-foot-long truss and a pyramidal module. Nevertheless, the two deemed the exercise a success. "We don't know yet what this will mean for a future space station," Spring commented, "but it's a start. Personally, it was really exhilarating for me out there, face to face with the universe." (NYT, Dec 3/85, C3)
NASA announced that interdisciplinary teams of teachers, scientists, and engineers selected seven finalists in the fifth national Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program (SSIP), a joint venture of NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, judges based selection of finalists' entries upon individual scientific or engineering merit for possible flight aboard the Space Shuttle. The national winners and their teacher-advisors would attend in August a special Space Shuttle conference at Kennedy Space Center and view the launch of the Discovery Space Shuttle mission 51—L. NASA would present the finalists and their teacher-advisors with orbiter models, and their schools would receive orbiter models for trophy case display. The sixth year of SSIP competition would open in September 1985. (NASA Release 85-79) During August: NASA announced that the newest solid-fuel rocket booster retrieval ship, the U.S. Air Force's Independence, arrived at Kennedy Space Center for outfitting with retrieval gear. The Air Force specifically designed the ship for retrieval of expended boosters after Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Independence would be the mother ship for west coast booster retrievals, towing one of the boosters and providing room for the majority of the crew and the six main parachutes and the bottoms for both boosters. The ship's first booster retrieval would be mission 51-F set for launch no earlier than July 15. The Air Force would lease another smaller ship to tow the other booster and carry the remainder of the 42-member retrieval crew. Independence, at 199 feet long and with a beam of 40 feet, was larger than its sister retrieval ships, the Liberty Star and the Freedom Star. Those two ships were 176 feet long and had beams of 37 feet. The Independence has both fore and aft water jet thrusters, making it highly maneuverable. The other two ships had only stern thrusters. Halter Marine in Moss Point, Mississippi, built Independence. (NASA Activities, Aug 85, 11)
The 3M Corp. and McDonnell Douglas joined as a team to produce and market a proprietary drug that McDonnell Douglas produced on board the Space Shuttle to treat patients who had lost their ability to produce red blood cells, Aviation Week reported. The ability of the drug erythropoietin to stimulate the body to produce red blood cells could benefit persons who were anemic or had a variety of other disorders in which red blood cell levels were a factor. And it had the potential in a number of medical situations to reduce the need for blood transfusions that carried the risk of complications. Erythropoietin was not widely used because current production techniques could not filter out by-products harmful to the body. A batch of the material to be produced in an electrophoresis machine on the next flight of Space Shuttle, mission 61-B, would be given to the first human test patients soon. It was expected the drug could be available for sale in 1988 pending Food and Drug Administration approval. McDonnell Douglas was completing arrangements to bring 3M's Riker Laboratories Div. into the program as the drug company that would market the product in place of Johnson & Johnson's Ortho Pharmaceuticals Div., which recently dropped out of the program in favor of producing the substance through earth-based bioengineering. Ortho believed it would be able to bring the drug to market a year sooner, while McDonnell Douglas believed space processing would be far more efficient and less costly. McDonnell Douglas was also completing arrangements with a French drug company, Roussel Pharmaceuticals of Paris, to begin processing starting the next summer of a French drug on the Space Shuttle as a second commercial space product. The French product would be purified in the same mid-deck unit that brought erythropoietin to the animal and human test phase. NASA and McDonnell Douglas were completing arrangements to keep the middeck system operational for research and to help generate new products under their joint endeavor agreement. (AvWk, Nov 18/85, 16)
National Space Transportation System manager Dr. Glynn Lunney, who was a member of the Space Task Group that inaugurated U.S. manned space flight, announced he would leave NASA in the near future, the Johnson Space Center Space News Roundup reported. Lunney, whose career almost exactly spanned the period of U.S. efforts in space, began his government service in 1958 with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, NASA's predecessor, at Lewis Research Center. He then moved to the Space Task Group and with it to Houston when it became the Manned Spacecraft Center. Later he became head of the mission logic and computer hardware section, chief of the flight dynamics branch, flight director for the Gemini program, and, in July 1968, one year before the first manned landing on the moon, chief of the flight director's office. He then served as special assistant to the manager and then manager of the Apollo spacecraft program. With the advent of the Space Shuttle program, he became manager of the Space Shuttle payload integration and development program responsible for directing the planning and implementation for all payloads and payload carriers in that program. Since 1981 he served as manager of the National Space Transportation Systems Program with responsibility for overall systems management and integration of all elements of the program. Among the awards received by Lunney were the Lawrence Sperry Award, the Arthur S. Fleming Award, the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award, the Allan D. Emil Memorial Award, the W. Randolph Lovelance II Award, three NASA Group Achievement Awards, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, an Outstanding Leadership Medal, Senior Executive Service designations, and an honorary doctorate of laws from the University of Scranton. Lunney was a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (JSC Space News Roundup, Apr 12/85, 1)
A computer failure 25 minutes before launch today forced postponement for at least two days of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the NY Times reported. Launch crews planned to replace the malfunctioning computer, inspect the Space Shuttle's fuel plumbing, and try to launch Discovery on August 27 at 7:02 a.m. EDT. At 7:15 the Space Shuttle crew and Johnson Space Center (JSC) flight controllers almost simultaneously noted warnings that a backup guidance and control computer was registering errors. This came as the backup computer was undergoing a final check to see that its programs agreed with those driving the Space Shuttle's four main computers. NASA halted the launch countdown while engineers at Kennedy Space Center and JSC examined data retrieved from the malfunctioning computer and compared it with data from one of the regular computers. They concluded that the trouble was an apparent failure in the computer, which could not be remedied in time for a launch. That the computer worked perfectly in tests before August 25 and worked in tests after the failure, although it showed signs of trouble, puzzled engineers. NASA was about 99% sure that it was a hardware failure, although only an inspection of the computer by JSC engineers would determine the exact nature of the problem. It was the second postponement in two days for the Discovery and its crew of five, and NASA officials were growing concerned that Discovery might not reach orbit in time for repair of the crippled Leasat 3 satellite. Any delay beyond August 29 would cancel the repair effort, and the crew would have to confine themselves to deploying three communications satellites in the first three days of the mission. The flight would thus fall short of the eight days then planned. Arnold Aldrich, manager of the Space Shuttle program at JSC, said NASA would not reschedule beyond August 29 any attempt to repair Leasat 3, as that would have too disruptive an effect on other flights scheduled in the next few months. If it had been only a matter of replacing the computer, the delay would have been a day. However, the need to inspect insulated ducts that carried liquid-hydrogen to the Space Shuttle's three main engines necessitated the twonday postponement. After NASA had pumped the super-cooled fuel into the Space Shuttle system two consecutive mornings and drained it again, there was a chance that the contractions and expansions caused by the alternating freezing cold and Florida heat might have damaged the engines, which in extreme cases could cause them to explode in flight. (NYT, Aug 26/85, All) November27: NASA announced that it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base until mid-July 1986. NASA originally scheduled this mission, STS 62-A, for no earlier than March 20, 1986. Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward "Pete" Aldridge, Jr. said, "There are no major problems at the Vandenberg site. We have repeatedly stated that safety and quality would not be sacrificed for schedule. Our decision reflects our continued commitment to this philosophy." Aldridge added that, "We have had to make some facility modifications because of what we learned from routine Air Force/NASA operational readiness inspections. We have also added time to the schedule to allow for better preparation and evaluation of the operational systems tests and we have extended the training period for the launch crew of this historic, first West Coast shuttle mission. "This revised schedule will permit us to complete ongoing modifications, inspections, rework and operational testing with higher confidence than could be permitted with the March 20 schedule," he added. "It also minimizes the potential for conflict with the NASA Ulysses and Galileo planetary missions scheduled in May." NASA Office of Space Flight associate administrator Jesse Moore concurred, adding, "NASA agrees completely with the Air Force regarding Vandenberg. Our first commitment is to the safety of the crew and the reliability of the vehicle and launch systems. The development of the Vandenberg site is proceeding very smoothly. This readjustment gives us all more time to carry out our commitment to safety and reliability." The decision to delay meant NASA would deliver the orbiter Discovery to Vandenberg around March 1, 1986, and NASA and Air Force officials would continue to evaluate the STS 62-A schedule in order to establish after January 1 a firm launch date. (NASA Release 85-158)
NASA announced that it had completed with the Italian National Research Council's National Space Plan Office (PSN/CNR) selection of U.S. and Italian principal investigators for the cooperative tethered satellite system (TSS), which NASA had scheduled for a first flight in 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle. The system, using the Space Shuttle as a base of operation, would provide a unique reuseable facility remote from the orbiter for space science investigations in the upper atmosphere and in plasma-electrodynamic interactions. 101 The overall objectives of the TSS program were to demonstrate the successful operation of a tethered satellite, perform the initial electrodynamic science and plasma investigations, and develop a reusable facility capable of supporting a broad range of electrodynamic experiments in the ionosphere. On the first TSS mission, a NASA-supplied deployer mechanism would send the Italian-developed and -built satellite upward from the Space Shuttle orbiter to a distance of as much as 12 miles. The motion of the conducting tether across geomagnetic field lines would generate several thousand volts of energy to provide a broad range of electrical operating conditions. Researchers could also use the overall system to artifically generate and study field-aligned currents and associated plasma effects. On the second TSS mission, the satellite would be at the end of a nonconducting tether at 62 miles in the earth's atmosphere, an area previously explored only sporadically, mainly with sounding rocket payloads. The tethered satellite would permit investigation of the region on a global scale over several days. The TSS-3 mission would be a follow-up to the TSS-1 electrodynamics mission, with deployment from either the Space Shuttle or the proposed space station. A memorandum of understanding signed in 1984 by NASA and PSN/CNR established the TSS program. NASA's Marshall Space flight Center had responsibility for project implementation. NASA's office of space science and applications selected Peter Banks, Stanford University (Shuttle Tether Electrodynamic Tether System); Robert Estes, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation of Electromagnetic Emissions by the Tether); Gordon Gullahorn, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation and Measurement of Dynamic Noise in Tethered Observatory Satellite Systems); Konstantinos Papadopoulos, Science Applications, Inc. (Theory and Modeling of the Tether); and Nobie Stone, Marshall Space Flight Center (Research on Orbital Flight Plasma-Electrodynamics). PSN/CNR selected Silvio Bergemaschi, Instituto Meccanica, Padova University (A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of TSS Dynamics); Marino Dobrowolny, Instituto Fisica Spazio (Research on Electrodynamics Tether Effects); and Franco Mariana, University of Rome (Magnetic Field Experiment for the TSS Missions). (NASA Release 85-115)
The Space Shuttle Enterprise arrived the afternoon of November 18 at Washington Dulles International Airport after a two-hour delay due to inclement weather, the Washington Post reported. NASA had announced earlier that it would transfer title to Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum [see Smithsonian Institution, Nov. 8], NASA delayed Enterprise's takeoff from Kennedy Space Center until an early morning fog burned off so more people along the route could see the craft. Enterprise, atop a Boeing 747, was visible to onlookers in Annapolis and Baltimore before it began a counterclockwise circuit over Washington's Capital Beltway. Officials at Dulles would store the spacecraft in a temporary shed about two miles from the airport terminal until a permanent facility was constructed. (IVPost, Nov 19/85, Bl) SPACE SCIENCE AND APPLICATIONS
NASA announced that its Comet Halley Active Monitoring Program (CHAMP), a middeck payload to obtain wide field visible and ultraviolet data on Comet Halley using handheld equipment, would have its primary flight January 1986 on the Space Shuttle (STS) mission 51 —L. It was during that time that the comet would be most active but viewing from earth would be most difficult due to the narrow viewing angle between the comet and the sun. The first flight of CHAMP would be on STS mission 61-C in December 1985; the third, on STS mission 61 —E March 1986. The December and March flights would provide important pre- and post-perihelion baseline data that would assist with the interpretation of the January flight data. NASA considered CHAMP data supplemental to the extensive and detailed space-based data to be obtained from the flight of the ASTRO payload on STS mission 61-E, the Spartan-Halley payload on STS mission 51-L, the UVX payload on STS mission 61-C, and the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft. However, the CHAMP data would be unique in its nature and ability to provide a single context for all of these activities, because it would make observations on three Space Shuttle missions. Before each observation, the assigned mission specialist would set up the experiment by mounting the CHAMP equipment in the appropriate window. On the January flight, the mission specialist would use the orbiter Challenger's UV transmissive side hatch quartz window. On the other two flights, data probably would be acquired through the aft flight deck windows. During observations, the orbiter would be oriented so the appropriate window was pointed to within 5° of the celestial coordinates of the comet, with attitude drift rates of less than 1.002° maintained. Each observation required exposing a series of one to four calibration shots plus six to eight frames of film for images or spectra during the approximately five-minute period occurring in each orbit when the comet was in view and the sun was at least 8° below the earth's horizon. NASA hoped there would be an observation for each flight day during the seven-day December and March missions, and up to 20 observations during the January flight. However, conflicts with other operational requirements might reduce the actual number of observations, although unusual cometary behavior could require additional time allocated to the experiment. (NASA MOR E-420-61-C-20 [prelaunch], Dec 17/85)
USA Today reported that its debate for that day would explore the pros and cons of U.S. manned space missions. In its editorial, USA Today said, "Human brains can adapt to change. Machines cannot. Without men and women in space, there would be no one to even try to fix the Navy's stranded satellite" [Navy communications satellite carried on the Discovery 51-D mission], ". . . Space is our last frontier. Without humans aboard to ride rockets to the stars and beyond, man will never embrace what he has envisioned," the editorial concluded. USA Today guest columnist Geoffrey Keller, a professor of astronomy at Ohio State University, wrote that one of the values of the manned space program was that it would help to lengthen the useful life of expensive space telescopes (for example, the Hubble Space Telescope), by permitting astronauts to replace worn-out telescope parts and to make telescopes more powerful as new and more efficient cameras were invented and installed. In an opposing view, James Van Allen, a professor of physics at the University of Iowa, wrote that nearly all of what he considered the really important and durable products of space technology were "achieved by much-less-expensive unmanned spacecraft, operating automatically and under cornmand control from ground stations, often for many years in earth orbit or in the far reaches of the solar system. ". . . The public acclaim for the Apollo program has left a permanent imprint on NASA and has, in effect, committed it to an overriding emphasis on further development of manned space flight," Van Allen continued. "This emphasis is simultaneously NASA's greatest strength and its greatest weakness. Manned space flight, with all its mythological foundations, has assumed the aura of a religion. The space shuttle and the proposed permanently manned space station are primarily embodiments of this religion," he wrote. But, he added, "the relevant results to date are far too meager to justify such hyperbolic expectations and such enormous expenditures. Meanwhile, the proven applications of space technology are languishing for lack of resources." (USA Today, Apr 16/85, 8A)
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) prime contractor for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster motors, Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division, successfully static fired today a new lightweight version of that motor at its facility in northern Utah, the Marshall Star reported. The firing was the second and final test of the development version of that motor, which contained major sections made from graphite epoxy materials manufactured by Thiokol's subcontractor, Hercules, Inc. Thiokol would perform a final qualification static test of the flight version of the new filament-wound motor in September. NASA had scheduled the first use of the filament-wound motor segments for early 1986 during the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Lawrence Mulloy, manager of MSFC's solid-fuel rocket booster project, said each of the filament-wound boosters would weigh about 28,000 lb. less than the current steel boosters, making possible an increase in Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity of about 4,600 lbs. (Marshall Star, May 15/85, 2)
U.S. Rep. George Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), author of an amendment to prohibit tests of the antisateilite miniature homing vehicle (MHV-ASAT) against objects in space, suggested that in light of the successful ground-based laser test with the orbiting Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation System, Military Applications, June 21], the U.S. should drop the MHV in favor of a laser antisatellite system, Defense Daily reported. Brown said that ". . . This very successful demonstration raises the question of whether the United States should spend several billion dollars on the technologically less-advanced MHV ASAT system, still in the testing stage, when we could have a more technologically advanced, far more versatile system available for deployment in the same timeframe . . . and probably at a lesser cost." Brown emphasized the significance of the laser test, which he noted had hit a target on the Space Shuttle "less than a foot in diameter, much smaller than an ICBM, traveling faster than a missile, and there is no question but that a missile would be just as easy to hit." Although lethality was not demonstrated in the test, the U.S. had "demonstrated lethality more than 10 years ago when we knocked down a drone airplane with a laser, and we have now in the inventory lasers with about a million times the energy of the one that was used" in the Space Shuttle test, Brown added. "There is no question that lethality is achievable with existing technology." (D/D, June 26/85, 318)
"Let's face it, these brakes are right at the edge in a vehicle that lands as heavy and as fast as the shuttle does," said astronaut Daniel Brandenstein, commander of the next Space Shuttle mission. "My guess is we'll be landing for awhile out in the Mojave, where there's no end to the runways and there's almost nothing on either side of the runways to worry about either." Also, studies suggested that the Space Shuttle nose gear might require rebuilding to provide better steering during landing in a crosswind, a situation more likely to occur at KSC than at Edwards. Cost of such rebuilding could run as high as $3 million for each orbiter. (W Post, May 30/85, A19)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force completed for the first time Space Shuttle vehicle stacking at Vandenberg AFB's Space Launch Complex-6, the Marshall Star reported. Begun January 12, the stacking consisted of inert solid-fuel rocket-motor segments, an external tank, and the orbiter Enterprise. Unlike facilities at KSC where NASA stacked the Space Shuttle in the vehicle assembly building and rolled it to the launch pad, at Vandenberg NASA and the Air Force stacked the Space Shuttle vehicle on the launch mount (pad). Workers at Vandenberg rolled a mobile service tower and a shuttle-assembly building to the launch mount, then brought booster segments to the launch complex from the booster facility and lifted them into place by a mobile service-tower crane. This first vehicle stacking at the Vandenberg launch complex was part of facility-verification testing before the first Space Shuttle launch from the complex in early 1986. Col. Walter Yager, commander of the Air Force shuttle assembly task force, said minor problems had occurred, but "that's why we have facility verification. We want to ensure properly working systems before we start handling actual flight hardware." Fit and function checks, payload operations, and launch-processing simulations would complete facility verification. (Marshall Star, Feb 7/85, 1)
NASA launched at 11:15 a.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis, the maiden voyage of the orbiter and the 21st mission in the Space Shuttle program, on mission 51 -J, a secret flight for the Department of Defense (DOD), the NY Times reported. The secrecy was part of DOD's efforts to make it difficult for the Soviet military to monitor the Space Shuttle takeoff and find out the identity and mission of the payload. Despite these precautions, it was widely reported that a primary goal of the flight was to launch a pair of $100-million military communication satellites. DOD apparently planned to station the satellites, designated DSCS III for Defense Satellite Communications System, 22,300 miles above earth, where they would relay messages to U.S. military forces around the world. The commander of Atlantis was Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, flying his third Space Shuttle mission; the pilot was Air Force Lt. Col. Ronald Grabe. Other crew members were Maj. David Hilmers of the Marine Corps, Army Lt. Col. Robert Stewart, and Air Force Maj. William Pailes. The first four were members of NASA's astronaut corps; Pailes was an Air Force pilot assigned to the mission to assist in deploying its secret payload. In accordance with security rules, NASA gave out little information about the flight. There were no space-to-ground communications released to the public and no postlaunch news conference. Nearly five hours after the launch, mission control in Houston said, "On the maiden voyage of Atlantis, the crew is doing well and all systems on board the orbiter are performing satisfactorily." NASA officials said it would issue no other status reports during the mission, which might last a week or more. Atlantis was the lightest and most advanced of the four orbiters. In its planning and construction, engineers removed minor design flaws found in earlier versions and incorporated the latest in electronic technology and light-weight, high-strength structural materials. NASA strengthened Atlantis mainly so it could withstand more vigorous launchings from the Air Force's facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base. These launches, which would take the Space Shuttle into orbits around the earth's poles, required greater thrust from the Space Shuttle's engines. Although the mission was devoted to the military, NASA officials said there was a civilian experiment on board to study exposure of the orbiter and its crew to cosmic rays, which were extremely high-energy particles from space that bombarded the earth and the orbiting Space Shuttles. (NY Times, Oct 3/ 85, A18, Oct 4/85, B5)
During a news conference today at Johnson Space Center, Space Shuttle mission 51—F commander Gordon Fullerton said the Challenger's crew members could not endorse either the Coca-Cola or Fepsi-Cola they carried into space for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Both drinks were warm, fizzy, and full of froth whenever the crew tried to drink them. "They both failed miserably, mainly because we had no refrigerator. Warm cola is not on anybody's favorite list of things . . . They just weren't at the right temperature and we had no desire to drain the cans the two drinks came in," Fullerton said. He added that, although the crew suffered no gastric distress from drinking the two colas, "I just can't extrapolate to any great desire to want them." When reporters asked the seven crew members if they would forsake the fruit juices they usually drank for the colas if the colas were refrigerated, they all shook their heads. "The drinks we have on board now are quite attractive," said astronaut Anthony England. (W Times, Aug 15/85, A8)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) would transfer spacecraft tracking and data acquisition operations from its Beltsville Tracking Station to its Wallops Flight Facility by early 1986, consolidating the operations to support balloon, sounding-rocket, and aeronautical-flight research. Diminishing need for ground stations due to the new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) necessitated the realignment. TDRSS would consist of three communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit, providing global coverage by earth-orbiting satellites and replacing the worldwide network of ground stations. NASA had launched the first TDRSS satellite in April 1983 and would launch the second about February 20. GSFC would phase out or transfer to other agencies most of its tracking stations. In addition to Wallops, however, GSFC would maintain ground stations at Bermuda and Merritt Island, Florida, to support Space Shuttle launches from KSC. The White Sands, New Mexico, station was the ground terminal for orbiting TDRSS satellities (NASA Release 85-11)
NASA announced it had rescheduled for July 29 launch of Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger and delayed by as much as two weeks the previously scheduled September 19 maiden voyage of the orbiter Atlantis that was to carry a secret Pentagon payload into orbit, the Washington Post reported. The July 12 Challenger launch abort forced NASA to design a new schedule that maintained a Discovery blastoff for August 24, delayed another Challenger mission from October 3 to early November, and kept a November 27 Atlantis flight and a December 20 Columbia mission. Kennedy Space Center (KSC) work crews had removed three parts from Challenger's No. 2 engine that engineers suspected could have triggered computers into ordering all three engines to shut down on the launch pad. One was a valve that failed to close when it should have, a second was a hydraulic actuator that ordered the valve to close, and the third was a controller that sent commands to the actuator. "We still suspect the actuator, and nothing we've found suggests anything else," KSC spokesman Hugh Harris said. "We are replacing all three parts and continue to analyze and test the parts we remove." NASA would test fresh parts on the pad, leading to a July 23 flight readiness review. This included electronics and leak checks of parts like pumps, turbines, and valves, not a test-firing of the engines. The delay meant a July 30 flight readiness firing test for Atlantis would take place September 12, which would delay Atlantis's maiden flight from September 19 to late September at the earliest. (WPost, July 16/85, A4)
Rep. Norman Mineta, (D-Calif.) introduced legislation today for the planning and construction of an expansion of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum at Washington Dulles Airport, the Congressional Record reported. When introducing H.R. 3403, Mineta said, "This legislation is proposed to solve two major problems confronting the Air and Space Museum. First, as my colleagues know, this is perhaps the most popular museum in the world. The public's demand for exhibits and information concerning our aviation history is enormous, and growing. We need the additional facilities to respond to this demand. "But why Dulles? Why not build the new facility in downtown Washington? The answer is simple: there is no site large enough for the needs envisioned and of paramount importance, there is no other site adjacent to a major airport. "An airport site is critical because of the second problem we are trying to solve, which is how to display objects of the scale of the space shuttle or other modern aircraft. The museum needs to be at Dulles Airport because that is the only site to which these exhibits can be transported and displayed. "In particular, this legislation authorizes the transfer to the Smithsonian of land at the airport. This bill authorizes a total of $2.4 million in funds for planning of the new museum, to be appropriated in the 1986 to 1988 period. "In addition, the bill authorizes the appropriation of $42.6 million in Federal funds beginning in 1989 to finance half of the cost of actually constructing the museum. These Federal funds would not be available unless and until a private fundraising effort has raised an identical amount." (Cong. Record, Sept 20/85, E4165)
NASA launched at 12:02 p.m. EDT today from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger mission 51 —B carrying seven astronauts, Spacelab 3, 24 rats, and two squirrel monkeys for the most intensive science mission to date, the Washington Post reported. Launched 17 days after Discovery left the same launch pad, the Challenger flight bested the previous "turnaround" record of 34 days. Challenger carried the oldest crew ever to fly in space. Marine Col. Robert Overmyer, commander, was 49; Frederick Gregory, pilot, and Taylor Wang, payload specialist, were 44; Don Lind, mission specialist, was 54; Lodewijk van den Berg, payload specialist, was 53; William Thornton, mission specialist, was 55; and Norman Thagard, mission specialist, 41. The crew called the flight one by scientists for science. "This mission marks the first time that scientists who designed their own experiments will be executing those experiments in space," said Lind, who had been waiting 16 years for the flight. The five scientists would work in around-the-clock shifts on the 15 experiments inside the European-built Spacelab. Before liftoff NASA decided not to have the crew launch two Get-Away Special satellites, one a student experiment and the other a Pentago payload, because a nine-volt battery had failed on the last Space Shuttle flight. Ground tests showed that three other batteries from the same batch failed after 18 hours in vacuum. The satellites would return to the ground with the Space Shuttle. The crew successfully deployed a satellite intended to calibrate air traffic control radars on the ground, but encountered difficulties when trying to deploy a U.S. Navy satellite that would locate drifting weather buoys. The satellite would not move from the cargo bay despite repeated signals to trigger deployment. Later the crew discovered they had no fresh water from their galley faucet and had to bypass the faucet and reconnect themselves to their water supply using an all-purpose hose carried for such emergencies. Other problems ranged from an overheated hydraulic system power unit to a urine collection device that one crew member said sprayed water "all over the place." The monkeys and rats appeared to be doing well. Four of the rats had surgical implants in their hearts to record changes in heartbeat and blood flow. The others were testing cages and equipment for future animal experiments. The monkeys were on a shakedown flight to determine how they tolerated living in orbit. If they didn't get nervous or frightened in space, later flights would carry squirrel monkeys with surgical implants to test for space sickness and heart changes. (W Post, Apr 28/85, A18, Apr 29/85, A3, Apr 30/ 85, A7)
Wesley Hymer, a biochemist at Pennsylvania State University and one of 20 researchers who analyzed tissue samples from 24 rats flown aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in April, said today the rats suffered significant reductions in the release of growth hormones, the NY Times reported. The findings could signal a problem for astronauts, in that weightlessness could affect the ability of special cells in their pituitary glands to produce growth hormones that govern development and maintenance of muscle and bone tissue. Richard Grindeland, a researcher at NASA's Ames Reseach Center, reported the previous month that the same rats lost bone and muscle strength. Grindeland said that they "were limp, like dishrags," and that dissection revealed "very drastic changes" in bone and muscle strength. However, researchers would need more test results before they could link growth hormone reduction to muscle and bone atrophy, Hymer said. But he added, "I think there's probably a good chance that there is a relationship." After a battery of tests that included implanting normal rats with growth hormone cells from the space rats, Hymer noted a reduction of up to 50% in release of the hormone. "Something is radically changed in those pituitary glands as a result of the space flight," Hymer said. And he added, "I think the surprising thing was these changes occurred so quickly. They happened in seven days in flight." However, Hymer said researchers did not know if astronauts suffered the same kind of changes. "I can tell you that there are data that show that the blood levels of growth hormones in the astronauts from Skylab were reduced by a significant amount," Hymer said. Hymer planned to send growth hormone cells, some of which would contain inhibitory and stimulatory chemicals, on a Space Shuttle flight the following September. He said he also would like to see similar experiments on primates. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C8)
France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) space agency was planning to select by midyear a prime contractor for the Hermes manned shuttle and would open the program to participation by other European countries before the end of 1985, Aviation Week reported. CNES had established a competition between Aerospatiale and Dassault-Breguet for the Hermes leadership role, and the two companies would make technical presentations in April. After review of the data, CNES would make a selection within several months. Normally the two companies had their separate niches in the aerospace field, but CNES had forced them into head-to-head competition over Hermes. In the competition, Dassault-Breguet would draw on expertise gained from its Mirage, jaguar, and Alpha jet military aircraft and related electronics/ avionics systems; Aerospatiale would emphasize its work on military missiles, reentry vehicles/nuclear warheads, the Ariane launcher, communications satellites, and civil aircraft such as the Concorde and Airbus Industrie A300/A310/A320. CNES Director General Frederic d'Allest said several countries had shown interest in joining the Hermes program following the European Space Agency's (ESA) council meeting at which ministers approved Phase B definition work for the Ariane 5 launcher [see Feb. 4], Ariane 5 would be capable of orbiting Hermes. France planned to retain a 50% share in the Hermes program and open the rest to participation by other European nations. The 1985 and 1986 budgets for Hermes totaled $12 million, followed by about $20 million in study work in 1987. France would supply most of this money in 1985, because other European countries wouldn't be involved until at least October. Hermes would carry two to six crew members and be about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Its approximate length would be 59 ft. and wingspan, about 33 ft. Payload bay volume would be 377 sq. ft.; diameter of the bay, 9.8 ft. A typical mission would carry 7,700 to 9,900 lb. of useful load to a 248.5-mile circular orbit inclined 0-30°. Mission duration with four to six crew members would be eight days, extending to 30 days with a reduced crew. Start of full-scale Hermes development in mid-1988 would permit a first flight in 1997, according to CNES scheduling. (AvWk, Mar 11/85, 19)
NASA officials confirmed a schedule calling for the next Space Shuttle orbiter to land at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Aviation Week reported, as a result of the successful hard-surface runway landing December 3 at Edwards Air Force Base by the orbiter Atlantis on mission 61-B. The landing was the first on a concrete surface since the orbiter Discovery damaged its brakes and tires while landing April 19 at KSC. NASA scheduled the orbiter Columbia on mission 61-C to land at KSC following its planned December 18 launch. Columbia was equipped with the necessary nosewheel steering system upgrades and would use steering instead of brakes as a primary control method for the KSC landing. During the December 3 landing, control inputs by mission commander Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, Jr. appeared to cause Atlantis to float slightly just before landing on the 15,000 ft. runway. The orbiter's wheels touched down approximately 2400 feet from the runway threshold, and Shaw applied only light braking during a 17,759-ft. landing roll. NASA slightly altered the Space Shuttle post-landing processing in an effort to remove Atlantis from the runway as soon as possible to allow the Air Force to reopen it for aircraft use. Normally personnel removed the orbiter's brakes in parallel with other close-out tasks before towing the vehicle back to NASA's Ames-Dryden Space Shuttle processing area at Edwards. They left on the brakes so that Atlantis could be moved to an apron area at the end and off to the side of the runway. H.W. Widick, chief of the Space Shuttle Integration Div., said a preliminary inspection of the brakes did not reveal any damage and that overall condition of the orbiter was good. (AvWk, Dec 9/85, 23)
NASA announced plans to deploy for the first time two small experimental satellites from Get Away Special (GAS) containers mounted in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger during the STS 51-B mission scheduled for launch in late April. Under the GAS program, NASA would deploy for $10,000 each the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) and the Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) in hopes of establishing an inexpensive way to deploy small satellites during routine Space Shuttle operations. Clarke Prouty, technical liaison officer for the GAS program at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said the GAS containers had been upgraded with ejection systems for the 51-B mission and that GSFC had developed a motorized door (full diameter motorized door assembly) for the can similar to the one first flown on the seventh Space Shuttle mission, which would allow the GAS payload to be exposed to space. The door assembly permitted GAS container insulation before and after satellite deployment and provided a means for keeping the satellite in the container in case of malfunction. GSFC had also adapted the spacecraft separation system used in the Delta rocket program for the GAS ejection systems. The GLOMR satellite, designed and built by Defense Systems Inc. was a data relay, communications spacecraft that was expected to remain in orbit for about a year. The NUSAT, designed, built, and tested by Weber State College, Ogden, Utah, in coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration, was an air traffic control radar system calibrator that would measure antenna patterns for ground-based radars operating in the U.S. and member countries of the International Civil Aviation Organization. NASA would first launch the NUSAT, then the GLOMR, at the end of Spacelab 3 science activities on the sixth day of the seven-day 51-B mission. Independent user ground stations would operate the satellites following deployment. The GAS program was available to anyone wishing to fly a small (for containment in 2Vi- by 5-ft area) scientific research and development experiment. The Space Shuttle had flown 29 GAS containers, including those for materials processing, life sciences, biology, seed and crystal growth, and cosmic radiation. (NASA Release 85-35)
NASA Administrator James Beggs criticized the Air Force and NOAA for plans to launch some satellites aboard surplus Titan II missiles rather than using the Space Shuttle, saying it would cost NASA $500 million, the Washington Post reported. "You know the old syndrome," he said, "if it wasn't invented here [at the Air Force] it can't be all that good ... I don't like it. It is not good for our short-term future and makes it that much more difficult for us to get on an even footing in the next five years." The controversy had begun with an Air Force decision to refurbish and redevelop obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch up to 12 Air Force satellites that NASA had assumed would be flying on the Space Shuttle. When NOAA heard of the Air Force decision, its acting administrator, Anthony Calio (a former NASA official), had contacted the Air Force about launching over the next seven years three advanced weather satellites, called Metsats, into polar orbit. When questioned, Calio had said the Air Force offered a deal that would save NOAA $90 million—it would cost $100 million to redesign the Metsats to fly on the Space Shuttle and $105 million in launch fees versus an Air Force charge of $115 million for the three Titan II launches, resulting in a net saving of $90 million. "This agency has a budget of $1 billion a year so we're talking about 10% of our annual budget. This is strictly a business deal," Calio concluded. Beggs responded that he always assumed the Air Force and NOAA would use the Space Shuttle, although they had not signed a formal agreement. He said he did not believe NOAA would save that much and that the Air Force would bear the refurbishment cost to redevelop the Titan II, estimated by Beggs at $100 million. "I believe what we're talking here is a savings to NOAA and a net loss to the U.S. Treasury," Beggs said. "I think this whole scheme should be looked at very carefully by the administration and by Congress." And he mentioned his concern that the Air Force plan could set a dangerous precedent. (W Post, Feb 25/85, A1)
At the halfway point in Space Shuttle mission 61-A in which the orbiter Challenger carried Spacelab D-1 [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Missions, Oct. 30], a slow air leak in one of Spacelab's vacuum chambers developed, but flight controllers in Houston did not consider it serious, the NY Times reported. Terry White, a public affairs officer at Mission Control, said the oxygen leak was so slight that, "provided there are no additional fluctuations, we have enough gases to go to the end of the mission." After encountering some Spacelab equipment malfunctions during the mission's first two days, Challenger's crew indicated they had achieved encouraging success with nearly all of the Spacelab's 76 scientific experiments on the effects of microgravity on metals, biological growth, and human physiology. Mission planners in Houston and scientists at the West German science control center near Munich were studying the possibility of extending the flight by a day to permit more time for experimentation. The crew reported preliminary results showing that, as expected, seedlings growing in the virtual absence of gravity developed roots that curved in odd directions. "The roots, lacking gravity, do not seem to know which way to go," a crew member commented. In another experiment, the Bacillus subtilis bacteria showed a higher rate of growth than anticipated. Mission control scientists said this "may be taken as an indication that bacteria do react differently in space." Most of the studies in processing metal alloys and growing crystals for electronics were still underway, so results were unavailable until completion of the mission. Earlier in the mission, crew member Dr. Ernst Messerschmid, a West German physicist, reported being "disoriented" when he awoke, a symptom of the space motion sickness that had plagued nearly half of all Space Shuttle astronauts. (NYT, Nov 3/85, A27)
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
Jacques Louis Lions, president of the French National Center for Space Studies, announced today that Aerospatiale and the Dassault-Breguet Aviation Company under the center's auspices would work together over the next several years to build two models for the European space shuttle Hermes, FBIS Hong Kong AFP in English reported. The European Space Agency (ESA) would likely also sponsor the project, and the center would undertake negotiations with European partners who would develop the main Hermes subsystems. Aerospatiale would lead the project and assemble Hermes components in its Toulouse factories; Dassault would be in charge of aeronautical aspects. Hermes, about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle, would carry two to six astronauts and cargo up to 4.5 tons into low earth orbits. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Oct 19/85) During April: In response to a request from the Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory to acquire more information on how to predict ocean wave behavior, the Wallops Flight Facility's P-3 aircraft participated October 1984 in NASA's Seasat Imaging Radar B (SIR-B) experiment to monitor ocean waves while, 140 miles above it, the Space Shuttle Challenger produced images of the same waves with its radar. Scientists knew what caused waves to swell, but found it difficult to predict exactly how they would behave. Researchers hoped they might be able to predict through the use of satellite data the occurrence of dangerous waves before they caused serious damage to ships and coastal towns. Analysis of previous data from the SIR had indicated that a synthetic aperture radar could observe ocean waves from space, but the lack of information on the actual directional wave spectrum on the ocean at the time of the SIR observations made it difficult to obtain an accurate assessment of the radar's performance. During Challenger's eight-day flight, the P-3 underflew the spacecraft for five nights off the coast of Chile to obtain sea surface observations. Each night the aircraft flew along several hundred kilometers of the Space Shuttle's imaging radar taking sea-surface observations with its complement of remote sensing instruments. The P-3's airborne oceanographic lidar provided laser elevation profiles of the wave field and the radars (surface contour radar, radar ocean wave spectrometer, and advanced applications flight experiment altimeter) measured significant wave height and provided information on the directional wave spectrum. Because state of the sea varied over the series of flights from low seas to waves with 6-m height and 400-m wavelengths, the data sets collected should become classic and provide a basis for the quantitative evaluation of synthetic aperture radars in space. (Inside Wallops, Apr 85, 1)
Western European cabinet ministers in a two-day meeting in Rome agreed to participate in the 1992 U.S. launch of a permanently manned space station, the European Space Agency (ESA) announced. The ministers also increased the ESA budget and approved funding for Ariane 5, making clear their intent to pursue independent European space activities, but failed to decide on a French-sponsored plan for a small space shuttle (called Hermes). ESA would base its participation in the U.S. space station on an Italo-German project called Columbus, with an estimated $2-billion project cost. Although W. Germany, Britain, and Italy had made funding commitments, France had not announced its project share. The ministers' decision ended controversy over European cooperation with the U.S., which had resulted from an earlier U.S./European cooperative effort that ended negatively when a $750 million investment in the 1973 Spacelab produced little significant research or technological spinoffs, the Washington Post reported. ESA also announced its annual expenditures would increase 70% to almost $1.3 billion by 1990. (ESA release Feb 4/85, Jan 31/85; W Post, Feb 1/85, A23) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED PMI \3 lf INTENTlONAtlT BIAN*
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $139,000 follow-on contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study a system for reclaiming unused propellant from Space Shuttle external fuel tanks and transferring it to an orbiting space station, Aerospace Daily reported. Martin Marietta Corp's New Orleans, Louisiana, manufacturing facility would perform the work on the preliminary design study. The contract followed one let in February 1984 and valued at $250,000 to examine the basic "propellant scavenging" concept. The system under study would consist of two to four propellant collecting or scavenging tanks in an aft cargo carrier affixed to the rear of the Space Shuttle external tank. After Space Shuttle launch and cutoff of the main engines, residual liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen would drain from the external tank into the collection tanks aided by a thrust system designed for zero-gravity conditions. Once filled with fuel, the scavenging tank assembly would separate from the aft cargo carrier as a self-contained, remote-controlled vehicle with its own propulsion system. After the vehicle moved into position beside the space station, technicians aboard the station would send an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV) to bring it to the space station fuel depot for transfer of the reclaimed propellant to permanent tanks. When out of fuel, the scavenger vehicle would return to earth in the Space Shuttle cargo bay for reuse on later missions. The proposed system would be capable of reclaiming and transporting up to 25,000 lb. of propellant per mission, depending on the Space Shuttle payload. Unused fuel on Space Shuttle missions to date had ranged from 9,500	to 28,300 lb. of the total 1.6 million lb. of propellant carried by the external fuel tank on each flight. It was currently estimated that the space station would require some 250,000 lb. of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants each year. Martin Marietta said the proposed system would result in reduced costs for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the space station; the company estimated the system could provide propellants at an average cost of approximately $350 per lb. NASA had studied other methods of scavenging fuel from the Space Shuttle external tank but found them to have a higher cost per lb. or to provide fewer opportunities for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the station. (A/D, July 12/85, 61) During July. Yvonne Clearwater, in an article in Psychology Today, described the work of the Space Human Factors team, an interdisciplinary team of which she was a member, to determine what could make the proposed space station a congenial habitat for living and performing highly sophisticated work. The team—representing psychology, architecture, and engineering— was defining what "habitability" meant in space by looking at the critical relationships among environment, psychological well-being, and performance. Clearwater said the team would begin by developing architectural and interior-design guidelines based on behavioral research. NASA contractors and development engineers at Johnson Space Center would then use the guidelines in designing and building the space station. The team would then turn to examining social and psychological issues such as crew selection, training, and support; organization and management; and operations planning. Although recommendations would focus on the physical and social-psychological environments separately, the team had to consider all the factors together in the planning process, because they interacted in the real world, whether on earth or in space. In contrast to the Soviets, who placed a high priority on the mental wellbeing of their space crews, NASA originally had focused on technological engineering rather than behavioral science. In addition, the early astronauts had little interest in psychological support or intervention; reportedly the first seven U.S. astronauts announced they would not tolerate psychologists. Clearwater pointed out, however, that NASA had grown more sophisticated and more sensitive to the fact that body-mind-environment interactions affected the health and performance of people. The formation of the Space Human Factors Office at Ames Research Center reflected NASA's commitment to psychological as well as physical health of space workers. The challenge was to troubleshoot the proposed space station systems and settings while they were still being developed conceptually by, first, identifying the environmental conditions likely to be significant stressors; second, defining the kinds of psychological, emotional, and behavioral problems these could produce; and finally, showing how such problems might affect work performance. Clearwater concluded that by defining and meeting human needs in space environments, it might be possible to create more supportive places for living and working on earth. (Psychology Today, July 85, 34)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-1 took time August 29 to observe Hurricane Elena, the Washington Post reported. Commander Joe Engle took photos of the storm, a dense white circular mass that stretched across almost half of the Gulf of Mexico, and noted a second storm in the western part of Gulf. Among the contingencies NASA faced was the possibility that the storm could strike the Houston area and knock out communications with the Johnson Space Center. A NASA spokesman said they could quickly switch operation to the Goddard Space Flight Center. The crew also that day launched the Syncom IV-4 satellite, which was almost identical to the satellite the crew would attempt August 30 to salvage. (IV Post, Aug 30/85, A3)
NASA's newest Space Shuttle orbiter, Atlantis, arrived about 5:00 p.m. April 14 at KSC after a two-day flight from California, the Marshall Star reported. KSC workers removed the Atlantis from the 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) and towed it to the processing hangar, where others would reconfigure it for its maiden flight, mission 51—J, scheduled for September. The SCA made a brief stop at Ellington Air Force Base, Texas, during the journey to KSC. (Marshall Star, Apr 17/85, 2)
NASA announced that the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) selected the Space Shuttle to launch July 1988 and mid-1989 two communications satellites in INMARSAT'S second generation series. The spacecraft would enhance INMARSAT'S existing maritime satellite network and the communications services the organization provided to 43 member nations including the U.S. British Aerospace Corp. would build the spacecraft; Hughes Aircraft would supply the spacecraft communications payload. A McDonnell Douglas spin-stabilized upper stage, the PAM-D, would boost the spacecraft from low-earth orbit into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. An apogee kick motor, a smaller rocket motor on the spacecraft, would position the spacecraft in a circular 22,300-nautical-mile geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 85-111)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced preliminary scientific results from Spacelab 3 flown on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-B launched April 29, 1985. Researchers and participants in the seven-day flight gathered in December at the Center to present their initial findings. "The mission has made some major contributions in the physical and life sciences," said Dr. George Fichtl of MSFC's Systems Dynamics Laboratory. "We have gained a lot of insight for future Spacelab and space station research. And I think we can now say that space research is becoming routine." Initial results from the three Spacelab 3 crystal growth experiments were very promising, Ficthl noted. The two triglycine sulfate crystals and the single mercuric iodide crystal grown in the space laboratory were at least as good as the best crystals grown to date on earth. And they might actually be better, although additional testing was necessary to confirm this, Fichtl said. "This is of major significance, because normally we must grow between one and two thousand crystals on earth to get just one crystal that is equal to the quality of those grown on Spacelab 3. Mercuric iodide crystals have application in X-ray detectors, and triglycine sulfate crystals are used in infrared detectors," he said. In addition, the flight proved the reliability of the methods used to grow the crystals. Triglycine sulfate crystals were grown from a solution as part of an experiment provided by Alabama A&M University. The mercuric iodide crystal grew using a vapor transport process in an experiment provided by EG&G Energy Measurements Inc. The third crystal growth experiment, provided by France and which also used mercuric iodide, performed as expected and added to researchers knowledge about the process of crystal nucleation, a process difficult to study on earth because of gravity-induced convection. The Drop Dynamics Module, a fluid physics experiment developed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, enabled researchers to do some experiments not possible on earth. Results confirmed some of the theories on how drops behaved when rotated, the first opportunity to test theories posed centuries ago including those by Isaac Newton. The experiment also proved that using sound waves was a viable technique for manipulating liquids in a microgravity environment, which had direct application to containerless materials processing in space. The technique allowed processing of materials without incurring the contaminating effects of the container. The experiment showed that the "acoustic bottle" or "crucible of sound" containing the droplet had much better characteristics than originally theorized. Drop dynamics experiments confirmed theories on how drops behaved when rotated slowly; however, experiment data showed violation of some basic theories relating to the behavior of drops rotated at higher rates. It was found, for example, that drops tended to transition (change) to a new shape at rotation rates lower than predicted. "All this tends to indicate that some of our theories may need to be modified," Fichtl said. Researchers for the Geophysical Fluid Flow Cell Experiment reported that all 102 hours of data looked good, confirming existing theories of convection, and were expected to lead to a better understanding of the dynamics of stellar interiors and planetary atmosphere. However, the research team noted that at higher heating rates—such as those that might be found on the sun— the data showed some significant departures from that anticipated. After the mission, researchers developed computer models of some of this new information. The Atmospheric Trace Molecules Spectroscopy (ATMOS) experiment, sponsored by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, for the first time simultaneously measured the concentrations of chemical compounds associated with carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and other chemical cycles in the atmosphere. This would provide better insight into the chemical processes that governed the distribution of minor and trace gases in the atmosphere between 10 and 100 kilometers. The instrument recorded concentrations of gases as low as parts per 100 billion, the first time such sensitive measurements were made, and detected and measured traces of nitrogen pentoxide, a compound previously undetected in the atmosphere. Results from the Research Animal Holding Facility showed that the apparent case of space adaptation syndrome in one of the monkeys supported the contention that this species would be a good model for future studies of vestibular adaptation in microgravity. Results from studies of the largest group of rats flown aboard a single spacecraft showed their hind muscles became 11 to 36% smaller and the bones were less strong after their flight. (MSFC Release 85-73) UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) issued a request for proposals to LTV, Martin Marietta, and TRW to compete for a contract to design, develop, and manufacture an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). The three companies worked previously on OMV definition studies and had until December 20, 1985, to respond. NASA expected to award the contract in June 1986 and planned the first OMV flight for early 1991. The contract would include provisions for testing and hardware flight testing before the OMV's actual operational missions. The company selected would build one vehicle, with NASA having an option to request construction of a second. Often called a "space tug," the OMV would transfer satellites and other objects between earth orbits and would extend the reach of the Space Shuttle by about 1000 miles. It would have the ability to retrieve satellites from high orbits, bring them back to the Space Shuttle for maintenance and repair, then return them to their operational orbits. The OMV would also be able to reboost satellites as their orbits gradually decayed. The OMV would be an unmanned spacecraft, 15 feet in diameter and approximately 4 feet long. Its life would be about 10 years with refurbishment and on-orbit maintenance included in the design. NASA expected initially to deploy the OMV from the Space Shuttle for short duration missions; later the OMV would remain in orbit for extended periods for use in both Space Shuttle-based and space station-based modes of operation. (NASA Release 85-151) Civilian Programs
before liftoff and delaying STS mission 61-C until early in 1986, the NY Times reported. The shutdown came four seconds before ignition of the three main engines. NASA had called for a delay of 54 minutes earlier in the morning when clouds moved over the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA aborted the countdown when a computer on the ground sensed that a pump on one of the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket boosters was spinning at 86,000 rpm, exceeding the turbine's "red line" limits by almost 7,000 rpm. The device, described as a hydraulic power unit, provided power so the nozzle of the solid-fuel rocket booster could pivot slightly in flight, helping to control the direction of the orbiter's ascent. NASA officials indicated there was a backup pump on the booster, but that, if a single pump failed before liftoff, safety precautions called for abort of the countdown. That particular hydraulic power unit had flown twice before on the resuable solid-fuel rocket boosters, NASA officials said, and similar devices had flown up to four times before requiring replacement. It was the first failure in the Space Shuttle program of that particular part. NASA would have to repair or replace the failed pump and said it had rescheduled the launching for January 4, 1986, so there would be no interference with the holidays. The delay until January would also allow NASA to avoid paying the Air Force to keep open its Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral and paying launch pad workers triple-time pay for working between Christmas and New Year's, the Washington Post reported. "The team is obviously disappointed," said Robert Sieck, director of Space Shuttle operations at KSC. "But we're going to isolate the problem and fix it and get on with the launch process." NASA said the delay would have no impact on the 16 Space Shuttle missions, including 61-C, that it had scheduled for 1986. (NY Times, Dec 20/85, B10; W Post, Dec 20/85, A2) Main Engines
Commander Robert Overmyer landed the Space Shuttle Challenger today on a lake-bed runway at Edwards Air Force Base, after it had caused two sonic booms that triggered burglar alarms and calls to police, the Washington Post reported. Of the 15 experiments flown on Spacelab 3, 12 apparently operated successfully and two at least partially so. Among the successful experiments was photography of the Northern and Southern lights, which sent streaks of brilliant flashes at the extreme latitudes near the north and south polar regions at that time of year. Challenger's crew photographed 18 auroras. Another successful device was a laser spectrometer that for the first time measured from orbit the ozone layer that protected the earth from the sun's ultraviolet light. Crew members were able to restore two experiments that had initially been inoperable. One was an experiment to study the dynamics of droplets of fluids in weightlessness, the other an instrument that counted and measured cosmic rays striking Challenger in orbit. They were unable to deploy the wide-field camera intended to study the ultraviolet light of hot stars. The afternoon of the landing NASA personnel removed the monkeys and rats in their cages for a flight to Kennedy Space Center, where researchers would kill and dissect the rats to examine their vital organs under a microscope for changes caused by weightlessness. Physician/astronaut William Thornton said they had brought back two monkeys that were even friendlier than they were before the flight—"Those primates are part of the crew right now," he commented. During the flight, one of the monkeys experienced motion sickness for several days, requiring Thornton to feed it by hand. On May 4 the Greensboro News & Record reported that Thornton said, "Our feeding crisis is over. I wouldn't have believed the effect of a caring human hand." However, on May 14 Overmyer told reporters at Johnson Space Center that, "NASA has a problem that NASA has to solve if we're going to fly those cages again," the W Post reported. "I never dreamed that all that stuff would come out of those cages and escape into our atmosphere" [see May 2], He added that the experience with the animals "never took away the luster" of spaceflight, a sentiment echoed by pilot Frederick Gregory, an Air Force colonel who became the first black astronaut to take the Space Shuttle's controls. (W Post, May 5/85, A4, May 6/85, A3, May 7/85, A1, May 14/85, A3; Greensboro News & Record, May 4/85, A4)
Assured access to space is one of the Defense Department's "bottom lines" in fulfilling its mission, said Col. Victor Whitehead, deputy for the Air Force Space Command's (AFSC) Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV), "and we're quite proud of our record," AFSC's Newsreview reported. "We've gone three years in a row without a launch failure. In that time we have launched 30 totally successful ELVs. "We've learned over the years what makes a successful launch; we don't go until everything is ready." The Space Command was examining what might be beyond the Space Shuttle and ELVs for space transportation, considering both manned and unmanned systems as a follow-on. "But I don't think you'll see a future scenario in which we will be dependent on a single system," Whitehead said. "There will be alternative ways of flying payloads. Our job is to determine what they are." The colonel pointed out that the Space Shuttle was a very good system, but that the Air Force recognized that if it stopped using ELVs and was dependent on the Space Shuttle alone, "our access to space would be limited if the shuttle, for some reason, is not available. We therefore found we needed a complementary ELV." Whitehead noted the follow-on Titan 34D7 would fulfill this alternative need. "This new booster will give us into the mid-1990s a totally separate way to launch a payload," he said. "We determine it should have the same capabilities as the shuttle in terms of performance, payload, and volume. This way, a payload that could fly on the shuttle can also fly on the Titan 34D7." But it was a true complement to the Space shuttle in that it had "no common modes with shuttle. We have a completely separate set of contractors and separate launch facilities for the shuttle and Titan. If one system is down, the other continues on and flies those payloads," Whitehead concluded. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 26/85, 3) November 2Ch NASA announced it had scheduled an Air Force AF-16 satellite for launch December 12 aboard a Scout launch vehicle from Wallops Flight Center. NASA and the Department of Defense entered into agreements in June 1962 for joint use of the Scout launch vehicle. NASA and the Air Force Systems Command continued the agreement under a memorandum of understanding dated April 19, 1977, and amended May 17, 1983. Under the agreement, NASA maintained the Scout launch vehicle system, and DOD used the system for appropriate missions. The Air Force had requested NASA to provide Scout launch vehicles for the Instrumented Test Vehicle Program. The Air Force would pay in accordance with the existing interagency agreements the costs associated with this launch of a Scout vehicle. (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [prelaunch], Nov 20/85)
At the third in a series of hearings on assured access to space NASA and Defense Department officials said today before the House Science and Technology space science and applications and Armed Services research and development subcommittees that available data did not support the need for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in the early 1990s. But the officials acknowledged that there could be a period around 1992 and beyond in which unforeseen launch demands would strain capability, Aerospace Daily reported. Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) pointed out that earlier testimony had revealed a launch demand for 26 to 33 Space Shuttle equivalent flights per year in the post-1992 timeframe, and Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, acknowledged that a flight capability of 30 per year would require a fifth orbiter. He said that NASA projected the annual launch capability of a four-orbiter fleet in the 1990s timeframe to be 24 flights, 20 from Kennedy Space Center and four from Vandenberg AFB, with the ability to surge temporarily to 28 flights per year. When asked to factor in potential extended downtime of one orbiter, Moore replied that NASA had not made a projection of lost flights because it would be directly related to the length of the downtime and when it occurred. He added that NASA could probably fly 20 to 24 flights with the three remaining orbiters if one were out of service for periods up to one year; a sustained launch capacity for three orbiters would be in the range of 15 to 20 flights per year, he said. Edward Aldridge, undersecretary of the Air Force, said that, although the Department of Defense (DOD) was committed to at least eight Space Shuttle missions per year, its current known requirements through the mid-1990s averaged 10 launches per year. Including the one-to-five Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year projected through 1995 for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research, he said the total DOD requirement became roughly 11 to 15 Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year. Those numbers excluded any mission supporting potential deployment of SDI-related systems, he added. At the same hearing, Gen. Robert Herres, commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), said he thought the "time had passed" during which the U.S. might have built a fifth orbiter. He pointed out that resources needed for it might better be devoted to new technology and options, "which afford us more flexibility and versatility." Offering an opposing view, Hans Mark, chancellor of the University of Texas System and former NASA deputy administrator, said that the argument for a fifth orbiter could not be based either on currently projected flight rates or on backup requirements. He said only the proposed space station and SDI requirements could increase space operations to the point where a fifth orbiter was necessary. (A/D, July 26/85, 137)
The first test of a Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) component on June 19 ended in failure when crew members of the Space Shuttle Discovery found themselves 180° out of position to receive an Air Force signal beamed at them from Maui, Hawaii; another beam of laser light was sent on June 21 from the same spot, and it successfully bounced off a reflecting mirror on Discovery, which was flying at 17,500 miles per hour and 230 miles high, the Washington Post reported. It was not clear why Discovery was out of position for the first attempt or why the crew had not realized it in time to correct it. Flight directors at Johnson Space Center took the blame for what the newspaper called easily one of the worst navigating mistakes in more than 20 years of American manned space flight. After the successful attempt, the Air Force noted the test was not intended to solve any of the most difficult problems of setting up an SDI defense system, nor was it the first laser tracking test. Air Force Lt. Col. Thomas Meyer, manager of the laser test program, said the experiment was more a test to see how the atmosphere distorted the laser beam than a test of the beam's ability to track the Space Shuttle, as atmospheric distortion could limit the usefulness of ground-based lasers against targets in space. In the June 21 attempt, the laser beam "painted" a blue-green light on the nose of Discovery for at least two-and-one-half minutes, three times longer than the minimum time set by the Air Force. So tight and steady was the beam that it never wavered from the nose of orbiter, which measured 110 feet from nose to tail. "We were able to pulse the beam and change the size of the beam from a fine point a quarter of an inch across to a beam 30 feet across at the point where it tracked the shuttle," Meyer said. "We did everything we wanted to do." Discovery's crew observed from the port windows the beam shining on them, which they could do without danger to their eyes due to the low power output of the four-watt beacon. "We demonstrated today that we can track a fast-moving target with a laser on the ground," Meyer said. "Our next step is to perform the same kind of test with rockets fired to an altitude of 260 miles to see if ground-based lasers can stay with them all the way to altitude." A far more difficult and important goal than tracking objects with lasers was the Pentagon's plan to develop more powerful lasers as weapons. The Defense Department would test a 2-million-watt laser soon at White Sands Missile Range, and it was building a 5-million-watt laser. (W Post, June 20/85, A3, June 22/85, A3)
NASA announced that a cubic crystal art work, the first nonscientific payload to fly aboard a Space Shuttle, would go into space in the spring of 1986. "The Boundless Aperture," created by artist Lowry Burgess, was one in a series of seven works in a project entitled "Quiet Axis," intended to express through art the scientific observation of order and harmony in the universe. The De Cordova Museum, the New Works Program of the Massachusetts Council on the Arts and Humanities, and the Massachusetts Artists Foundation funded and would pay for launch of "The Boundless Aperture," which was a six-lb. five-inch sq. cube of bronze-tinted transparent glass. The cube contained such materials as water from 18 of the world's rivers and minute amounts, or an appropriate substitute, of each of the elements in the periodic table. After flying in a middeck locker of the Space Shuttle orbiter, the work would be placed inside a petrified sycamore tree obtained from the Grand Canyon; and both would hover in a permanent magnetic field inside a rock formation on the grounds of the De Cordova Museum. Burgess was a professor at the Massachusetts College of Art in Boston and was director of its graduate program in fine arts and design. He was also a fellow and senior consultant at the Center for Advanced Visual Studies of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NASA would determine the final cost of flying the work when it arrived at Kennedy Space Center. (NASA Release 85-175)
The Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A landed at 9:44 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported, before an estimated audience of 9,000. "The bird fspace flight, said at a post-landing news conference. "The brakes look like it's in good shape," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator good coming in and we are very, very pleased with the results of the nosewheel steering test." During the landing, Challenger commander Henry Hartsfield tested a new steering mechanism built to reduce tire and brake damage that had occurred during several Space Shuttle landings. An orbiter had not landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) since the previous April, when both main landing gears collapsed and one tire blew out. The test called for Hartsfield to engage the new steering mechanism seconds after the nosewheel touched down on the runway so he could steer Challenger 20 feet off course and then bring it back to the centerline. One more successful test later in the year would clear orbiters to resume landing in December at KSC. Officials in West Germany, which paid NASA $64 million to fly Spacelab D-1 on Challenger, called the mission "highly successful" and predicted that 90 to 95% of all the science studies would be completed. Earlier, a West German official at the science control center near Munich said only one study, a heat diffusion test on a sample of salt, would be unfinished by the time Challenger returned to earth. Crew members Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, Col. Guion Bluford Jr., Dr. Ernst Mes-serschmid, Dr. Reinhard Furrer, and Dr. Wubbo Ockels did not attend a postflight press conference, the Washington Post reported, but traveled to Dryden Flight Research Center where researchers would run tests on them to determine how well they readapted to gravity after a week in weightlessness. Later the five would go to Kennedy Space Center for more elaborate tests. The European Space Agency (ESA) announced after the flight that it was particularly satisfied with results from Spacelab D-1, on which ESA had 38% of the payload in terms of critical resources (mass, energy, and crew time). All ESA facilities on Spacelab D-1—the Space Sled, for studies of man's behavior under microgravity conditions; the Biorack, a multi-purpose facility for biological investigations of microgravity and cosmic radiation effects on life forms; and the Fluid Physics Module, for studies of basic fluid phenomena in space—performed perfectly with no operational or technical failures. (NASA FOR M-989-61-A [postflight] Nov 8/85; NYT, Nov 7/85, A21; W Post, Nov 6/85, A4; ESA release Nov 11/85)
In a study important to the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) missile defense program, Space Shuttle crew aboard Challenger on mission 51-F briefly fired the orbiter's rocket engines while scientists in Australia attempted to analyze the effect on the ionosphere, the Washington Post reported. Challenger's engines burned 600 lb. of fuel as the spacecraft passed over an observatory in Tasmania where telescopes measured the effect of the rocket exhaust on the charged gas particles, called plasma, that made up the ionosphere. A second shorter rocket firing took place over observatories in Massachusetts. (W Post, Aug 5/85, A4)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced today the 10 finalists in the NASA Teacher in Space Project. The finalists would travel July 7 to Johnson Space Center for medical examinations and initial spaceflight suitability testing. The NASA Spaceflight Participant Committee would then interview the teachers in Washington, D.C., submitting results of the examinations and interviews to NASA Administrator James Beggs who would select the primary and backup candidate. NASA had tentatively scheduled the teacher for a January 1986 Space Shuttle flight. Finalists were Kathleen Beres, Kenwood High School, Baltimore, Maryland; Robert Foerster, Cumberland Elementary School, West Lafayette, Indiana; Judith Garcia, Thomas Jefferson School for Science and Technology, Alexandria, Virginia; Peggy Lathlaen, Westwood Elementary School, Friendswood, Texas; David Marquart, Boise High School, Boise, Idaho; Sharon Christa McAuliffe, Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire; Michael Metcalf, Hazen Union School, Hardwick, Vermont; Richard Methia, New Bedford High School, New Bedford, Massachusetts; Barbara Morgan, McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho; and Niki Wenger, Ven-dervender Junior High School, Parkersburg, West Virginia. (NASA Release 85-99)
During his 13-year career at RCA, Cenker held a number of engineering positions in the Satcom program that included work on spacecraft design, integration and test scheduling, cost control, and launch site activity planning. During November NASA would launch the first RCA Satcom Ku-Band satellite, KU-2, on Space Shuttle mission 61-B. Three RCA Satcom Ku-Band satellites would complement the operating Satcom C-Band system in providing distribution of TV services to customers in metropolitan areas. (NASA Release 85-90)
Arnold Engineering Development Center completed the fourth and final qualification test firing of the Payload Assist Module-D (PAM-D) II rocket motor, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The PAM-D II featured increased propellant capacity (7200 lb.) over its predecessor, the PAM-D (4400 lb.), and could boost both military and commercial communications satellites into geosynchronous orbit about 22,300 miles above earth. A Space Shuttle would deliver the motor and its payload into space at an altitude of 160 to 180 miles, where the PAM-D II satellite package, spinning at 30 to 85 rpm, would spring-eject from the orbiter's open bay doors. At a safe distance from the orbiter, the PAM-D II, which served as a perigee kick motor, would ignite and propel its payload more than 22,000 miles higher. PAM-D II would then separate from the payload, which was positioned by its own apogee motors activited by signals from earth. AEDC test-fired the motor in one of its high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated pressure altitude of approximately 100,000 feet while spinning it about its thrust axis at 70 rpm. Test objectives were to determine ballistic performance and to take plume (exhaust) radiation measurements, which were important in determining if the exhaust radiation would damage the motor case or satellite. With the fourth test completed, the Air Force considered the motor ready for production and flight. Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division was the rocket's manufacturer. NASA had tentatively scheduled PAM-D ll's first flight for November 1985 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger to place the RCA SATCOM satellite into orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, July 12/85, 7)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) announced it had extended an existing contract with Planning Research Corp. (PRC) to provide engineering services for the Directorate of Engineering Development at KSC and at Vandenberg Air Force Base (VAFB). The $12,421,841 extension brought the total contract value to $66,187,413 and extended the period of performance from January 1, 1986, through September 30, 1986. Under the contract, PRC would design ground-support systems for the Space Shuttle/Centaur program, which NASA would use to inject space vehicles into interplanetary trajectories after deployment from the Space Shuttle. PRC would also provide designs for Space Shuttle launch-support equipment for the Department of Defense (DOD) at VAFB, which would become the second launch and landing facility for the Space Shuttle in the mid-1980s, particularly for launching DOD payloads into polar orbit. Another PRC task under the contract was to provide KSC with designs for Space Shuttle cargo ground-support equipment. (KSC Release 186-85)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that July 1 marked the center's 25th anniversary. MSFC currently managed a budget of about $2 billion annually and employed some 3,300 people, while thousands more worked with numerous aerospace and other high-tech organizations in the Huntsville, Alabama, area to support the center's projects. During the 25 years, MSFC had moved beyond its initial role as NASA's developer of launch vehicles and propulsion systems to that of a scientific and engineering organization also responsible for spacecraft and scientific experiments. The center was currently responsible for a number of NASA programs including the Space Shuttle's engines, propellant tank, and booster rockets; the Hubble Space Telescope; Spacelab orbiting research laboratories; the Space Shuttle upper stage systems; and a significant portion of the proposed space station. (MSFC Release 85-31)
Michael Burch, assistant secretary of defense for public affairs, said beginning in 1987, two years earlier than planned, two Space Shuttle flights a year would carry experiments for President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research program, with initial experiments testing the ability to detect, track, and aim against targets in space, the Washington Post reported. The tracking and targeting tests, developed in a Pentagon research program that antedated the Reagan Administration, would include a mounting device for attaching the telescope-like sight to the Space Shuttle and sensors that could pick up at a distance equal to the width of the U.S. the "signature of objects" such as the booster plume of a missile. The Department of Defense had canceled a Space Shuttle test of the system's main telescope, though sources said it would continue land-based tests to develop a more capable telescope. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the previous year's congressional SDI program budget cuts would delay by one year an integrated-system demonstration. (W Post, Feb 20/85, A5)
NASA indicated it might remove squirrel monkeys from an April 30 Space Shuttle flight because the species carried a herpes virus known to cause cancer in some subhuman primates, the NY Times reported. Research had shown the virus could not survive in high-order primates, including humans, and NASA officials emphasized it was not one of the forms known to cause a variety of ailments in humans. The agency had spent more than a year trying to assess the risk possibilities to astronauts. (NYT, Feb 14/85, B8)
Japan nominated three astronaut candidates, one a woman, to fly in January 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, a UPI bulletin in NASA Current News said. The one selected to fly would become the first Japanese in space. Those selected were Takao Doi, a researcher at a NASA center; Mamoru Mori, assistant professor of nucleonics at Hokkaido University; and Chiaki Naito, an assistant at Keio University's Medical School in Tokyo. Japan's National Space Development Agency selected them from among 533 applicants. The Japanese astronaut would conduct a 12-minute experiment during Columbia's one-week mission. The other two candidates would serve as backups. The three would take further medical and space simulation tests at Johnson Space Center and then undergo training before selection in May 1987 of the astronaut to fly on the mission. (UPI bulletin in NASA Current News, Aug 7/ 85) Launch Vehicles
NASA Administrator James Beggs told the U.S. House Science and Technology Committee that the agency's launch service's market position had eroded "very severely" and that he had to be "a little bit pessimistic" about NASA's ability to hold a lion's share in the future, Aerospace Daily reported. Beggs made the comment in response to a question about the need for a 5th Space Shuttle orbiter. During the previous 14 months, NASA had won five new commercial launches; The European Space Agency's (ESA) Ariane, five. Beggs said the Europeans were "coming along very aggressively" in using the Ariane 4 and 5 vehicles to improve launch capabilities and that agreement by ministers attending the ESA council meeting [see European Space Agency, Feb. 4] to further Ariane 5 development "was significant." (A/D, Feb 7/85, 1)
The military crew of the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51—J deployed today two communications satellites for Department of Defense, the NY Times reported, citing reliable sources. After release from the Space Shuttle, the satellites, known as Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS III) and weighing a ton each and measuring 38 feet long with solar panels extended, rocket engines boosted them to a point 22,300 miles above the earth. According to General Electric Co., which built the satellites but would not confirm their presence on the Space Shuttle, both satellites were strengthened to withstand radiation from distant nuclear blasts and had a device to send emergency action messages from the President to the nation's nuclear forces. The Department of Defense (DOD) scheduled Atlantis to land at Edwards Air Force Base on a date that was classified; NASA and DOD said they would announce the time of landing 24 hours in advance. (NY Times, Oct 5/85, A46)
NASA announced that its Administrator selected Dr. Charles Chappell of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and Dr. Dirk Frimout of the European Space Agency (ESA) to serve as alternate payload specialists for the first Earth Observation Mission (EOM), which would use the Spacelab scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis in the latter half of 1986. Chappell and Frimout would serve as backups to flight payload specialists Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and his alternate, Dr. Michael Lampton. Chappell was chief of the Solar Terrestrial Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC and was responsible for directing a research group that studied the physics of the sun-earth environment. He served as mission scientist for the 10-day Spacelab 1 mission, during which 70 investigations were carried out. Frimout was the senior engineer supporting European researchers who would have experiments on the mission, and he had served as ESA crew coordinator and operations manager for Spacelab 1. Chappell and Frimout would train with the flight crew and serve as members of the mission management team in the Payload Operations Control Center during the flight. They would communicate directly with the crew on orbit, assist the payload operations team during normal operations, and aid in trouble shooting problems and in changing crew procedures when necessary. They would also advise the mission scientist, Dr. Marsha Torr, of the possible impact of problems and timeline changes. The EOM flight was the first in a series of Space Shuttle missions primarily dedicated to measuring solar irradiance and the chemical composition of the earth's stratosphere and mesosphere during an 11-year solar cycle. NASA would refly several instruments originally carried on the Spacelab 1 and 3 missions to accomplish these measurements. The mission would use the short version of the Spacelab module, in which a single Spacelab pallet and special support structure would hold instruments that required exposure to the space environment. The mission would consist of 15 experiments conducted in six disciplines—atmospheric science, solar physics, plasma physics, earth resources, astronomy, and life sciences. The international mission included experiments sponsored by Belgium, France, Japan, Federal Republic of Germany, and the U.S. ESA would provide operations support for the European investigations. The Investigators Working Group (IWG), which consisted of the principal investigator for each of the mission experiments, recommended alternate payload specialist candidates for selection by NASA's administrator. (NASA Release 85-179) External Tank November 27r The U.S. Senate awarded Martin Marietta Corp. the United States Senate Productivity Award for the state of Louisiana for manufacturing improvements and costs savings in production of the Space Shuttle's external tank, Defense Daily reported. The Senate cited the company for its innovative across-the-board productivity program that included plant modernization, installation of automated production processes, and development of an employee participation program that led to a number of improvements in the manufacturing process. "Estimates are that this increased productivity will save NASA and ultimately the American taxpayer more than a billion dollars over the long run," said Louisiana Senators J. Bennett lohnston (D) and Russell Long (D) in a joint statement. The two also cited the "flawless performance" of the tanks in Space Shuttle missions to date. (D/D, Nov 27/85, 142) Launch and Landing Facilities
NASA launched at 7:29 p.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B to practice methods for building a space station and to launch three satellites, the Washington Post reported. People more than 400 miles away in South Carolina and Key West, Florida, saw the launch. There had been only two other previous U.S. night launches: in 1972 when the Apollo 17 crew left for the moon in the middle of the night and in 1983 when the Space Shuttle Challenger departed in early morning. Nine minutes after launch, mission control reported Atlantis was in a secure orbit about 200 miles high, and launch director Gene Thomas said the countdown was the smoothest yet in the Space Shuttle program. Crew onboard Atlantis were Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, commander; Lt. Col. Bryan O'Connor, pilot; mission specialists Dr. Mary Cleave, Maj. Jerry Ross, and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring; and payload specialists Rudolfo Neri Vela (Mexico's first astronaut) and McDonnell Douglas engineer Charles Walker. During the mission the crew would launch Mexico's Morelos B satellite, Australia's AUSSAT 2, and RCA's Satcom KU-2. Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring would also take two long spacewalks to assemble 93 aluminum struts into a 45-foot beam and six 12-foot beams into a 64-lb. inverted pyramid to test techniques that might be used to build the proposed permanently manned space station. Following each spacewalk, the mission specialists would disassemble and stow the beams. Cameras would record every move so that later a computer could reduce the photos to a motion study that engineers would use to determine how construction work could best be performed in the zero gravity of outer space. (NASA Release 85-153; W Post, Nov 27/85, A3)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) opened the Microgravity Materials Science Laboratory (MMSL) to aid scientists on earth in determining what was and was not feasible for science experiments in space [see NASA Installations/Lewis Research Center, Aug. 26]. "The MMLS will permit U.S. government, university, and industry researchers to conduct scientific experiments using equipment that functionally duplicates equipment aboard the Space Shuttle," explained Salvatore Grisaffe, chief of the LeRC materials division. "Access to such a laboratory will give U.S. companies a competitive advantage in developing better materials through microgravity research." Other microgravity research facilities at LeRC included two drop towers in which experiment packages could free-fall up to 500 feet, achieving a weightless condition for up to five seconds, and the Lewis Lear jet, which could fly parabolic trajectories to achieve a microgravity environment inside the plane for up to 22 seconds. The MMSL was one part of NASA's microgravity science and applications program, which fostered research in the science and technology of processing materials in low gravity. The aims of the program were to obtain a clearer understanding of the factors controlling earth-based processes to guide their improvement and development of new materials that could not be made on earth and procedures to support long-term space operations. The Space Shuttle then offered up to seven days for microgravity experimentation; the proposed space station eventually would provide a very longterm microgravity research and materials processing capability. However, the most efficient use of such space resources demanded that experimental procedures be based on a firm scientific understanding with extensive prior ground-based examination. (NASA Release 85-123)
Scientists at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory's (AFGL) Space Physics Div. developed a computer program that predicted the electrical effects of the highly charged polar space environment on spacecraft. These effects could range from the production of noise in circuits to system failure in extreme cases, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Called Potential of a Large Object in the Auroral Region (POLAR), the code simulated in three dimensions the electrical interaction of the Space Shuttle or any other space vehicle with the polar space environment in the region from 100 to 600 miles above earth. Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base would orbit through the polar region, and the polar charging code could provide important data for the design of large space structures such as space stations. Lockheed Corp. used POLAR to predict the effect of charging on the Space Shuttle in low-altitude polar orbits with payloads funded by the Air Force Space Test Program Directorate and other Air Force and NASA programs. RCA performed calculations with POLAR for the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program vehicles. NASA's Spacelab 2 mission scientists used POLAR to predict the electrified gaseous environment, or plasma, of the Space Shuttle when the Plasma Diagnostics Package, a free-flying satellite, deployed. And NASA's LAGEOS Satellite Project Office would use POLAR to study charged particle drag on this laser reflecting satellite. POLAR was a successor to NASCAP (NASA Charging Analyzer Program), the computer code AFGL developed with NASA to model charging of Air Force satellites at geosynchronous altitude. The European Space Agency (ESA) had used that code to design weather and TV relay spacecraft, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used it to design the Galileo satellite. POLAR would incorporate data derived from future spacecraft flights and would become a computer-aided design tool for the construction of the advanced extravehicular mobility unit, the manned maneuvering unit, the NASA-proposed space station, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 20/85, 7) Transatmospheric Vehicle
NASA said today it postponed the December 18 launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia on mission 61-C for 24 hours because tired workers had fallen behind in countdown tasks, the Washington Post reported. "Essentially there were too many tasks to complete and too little time to complete them," NASA spokesman George Diller said. "We felt it was more prudent to delay than to take a chance on making a mistake." Diller added that crews used up more than eight hours of contingency time built into the countdown as they worked through the night December 16 to complete checkout of the engine compartment. NASA rescheduled the launch for 7 a.m. December 19. (WPost, Dec 128/ 85, A17)
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
The turnaround clock began running when the Space Shuttle Discovery left the KSC launch pad at 8:59 a.m. April 12 and stopped 70 hours and 35 minutes later when NASA declared the orbiter Challenger, configured for launch of the Spacelab 3 mission, “hard down" on the pad, the KSC Spaceport News reported. The tightly coordinated effort began approximately one minute after Discovery's launch. After launch control center's firing room 1 issued the command for automatic washdown of the pad structures, an operational TV scan, ordnance system resistance checks, and statusing fire and leak detectors commenced operation. About 15 minutes after launch, when it was certain the Space Shuttle would not return to the launch site, a convoy of waiting vehicles moved into action. Workers dumped small cryogenic (hydrogen and oxygen) tanks at the 155-foot level of the fixed service structures (FSS). Two Lockheed and EG&G teams inspected in minutes the hydrogen and oxygen farms, high-pressure hydrogen gas battery, and the gaseous battery beneath the pad, clearing the way for another team to safe and secure the oxygen and hydrogen farms. Following dumping of the cryogenic tanks, two other teams began a level-bylevel quick-look inspection of the FSS and rotating service structure, setting the stage for safety and security procedures, including configuring purge line valves and doors, making environmental checks in the mobile launch platform (MLP), and checking operation of elevators. At the same time, others removed ordnance from the external tank vent arm and tail service masts, secured guard rails where necessary, and cleared the pad for entry of general repair crews. Some damage was anticipated during a launch. In this case, pins had melted off some of the solid-fuel rocket booster holddown posts on the MLP; burnaway (or sacrificial) plates needed repairing; FSS light bulbs had blown at various levels; and some SRB waste residue was present. A 40-foot piece of waterpipe at the 95-foot level of the FSS, part of the Firex system, was bent at a 90° angle. The KSC integrated control schedule called for removal of the MLP by 7 p.m. the day after launch and for it to be at the doors of the vehicle assembly building (VAB) by midnight. To accomplish this, workers had to mount service platforms, disconnect waterpipes, and move flame deflectors. They also serviced the hydrogen burn pond and its several igniters. On schedule, the crawler/transporter crew moved into position to begin the return of the MLP to the VAB. At 11:30 p.m. April 13, crawler 1 and MLP 1 reached the entrance of high bay 3; at 12:17 the next day the crew started the journey to the pad with Challenger. The Space Shuttle was "hard down" on the pad at 6:25 a.m. April 15. (KSC Spaceport News, Apr 26/85, 4)
NASA announced today that Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), chairman of the subcommittee on space science and applications, would fly as a payload specialist aboard Space Shuttle mission 61-C scheduled for launch no earlier than December 20. NASA said it was willing to schedule flights for the chairmen of its four Congressional appropriations and authorization subcommittees in connection with their NASA oversight duties. Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the subcommittee on HUD/independent agencies, was a payload specialist the previous April aboard mission 51-D. NASA assigned Nelson to mission 61-C after reassigning Gregory Jarvis, a Hughes Communications, Inc. payload specialist, from that flight to mission 51—L which was scheduled for launch January 22, 1986. Hughes's decision not to launch its Syncom IV-5 spacecraft on the December mission eliminated the need for a company payload specialist on that flight. Jarvis would conduct experiments in fluid dynamics on the January flight. (NASA Release 85-141)
The expected January 23 flight of the orbiter Discovery would be the first of 15 Space Shuttle flights devoted wholly to military purposes, Science reported, increasing the visibility of the military role in the program. Discovery would carry a reconnaissance satellite designed to intercept a wide variety of electronic communications, radar signals, and telemetry from intercontinental ballistic missile tests. After several orbits, the Space Shuttle would discharge the satellite from its payload bay and a booster rocket would push it to an altitude of about 35,000 km, where it would "park" over the USSR. NASA estimated about 30% of Space Shuttle flights over the next 10 years would be military missions, although NASA's civilian budget had paid almost all basic costs of the Space Shuttle and associated launch and servicing equipment (estimated at more than $15 billion). In addition, military needs had dictated that the Space Shuttle have unusually large wings, rugged thermal protection, an unusually large payload bay, and unusually powerful engines; however, the Pentagon had borne none of these added costs. Although some NASA expenditures were for items serving both military and civilian functions, such as improved engines for both the orbiter and a rocket booster and onboard experiments in flight aerodynamics, plasma physics, astronomy, biology, chemistry, and radiation, NASA paid for all these projects without any Department of Defense assistance. (Science, Jan 18/85, 276)
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
"The Dream Is Alive," a new IMAX movie that was perhaps the most advanced film of its kind ever made, opened today at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Post reported. The $3.6 million production, narrated by Walter Cronkite, was the first ever shot almost completely on location in space and was an informal sequel to "Hail, Columbia," the story of the U.S.'s first Space Shuttle. Because the film was shot on three of the most dramatic and action-packed Space Shuttle flights of the previous year, it was essentially a video yearbook full of special happenings, the Washington Times reported. The film showed the rescue and repair of the Solar Max satellite, the deployment of the 100-foot-tall solar array that someday could help power the space station, launching of two communications satellites, and the first spacewalk by an American woman. Among what appeared to be special effects produced in Hollywood were the immensity of Hurricane Josephine as seen from 200 miles overhead and the silence of a satellite drifting noiselessly in the blackness of space. The astronauts who shot the footage said the IMAX format came as close to capturing the real view and the true feel of spaceflight as any format ever had. IMAX expert Graeme Ferguson, who produced and directed the film, said the next step was to modify an IMAX camera so it could be taken outside the Space Shuttle. (W Post, June 22/85, D1; W Times, June 20/85, 3B)
U.S. Air Force's imaging reconnaissance spacecraft had observed the USSR's 200-foot tall oxygen/hydrogen-powered rocket hardware, to be used in both their space shuttle and new unmanned heavy booster programs, being frequently mounted and removed from its Tyuratam launch pad, suggesting Soviet dissatisfaction with the ground test results and leading U.S. space experts to believe the troubles could greatly slow the Soviet's ability to launch large new space station elements or space weapons such as laser battle stations, Aviation Week reported. The Soviets had not test flown any of the new heavy space shuttle or new unmanned-booster hardware, and serious delays in their flight test schedules would undoubtedly arise from the ground test problems. However, U.S. reconnaissance had also discovered the Soviet shuttle program recently had added a significant new element—a second large space shuttle orbiter vehicle—observed sitting partially in a hangar at the Soviet Ramenskoye Flight Test Center east of Moscow. The other Soviet heavy orbiter was sitting outside the hangar. The orbiters were almost identical in size and design to the U.S. Space Shuttle orbiter, and the discovery of the second vehicle showed a forward program direction. (AvWk, May 27/85, 21)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
Chilean government member Admiral Jose Toribio Merino said today that he favored accepting the NASA request to build a Space Shuttle emergency landing airfield on Easter Island and that it was essential to build a port for the operation of larger and faster ships, FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish reported. "If someone offers to extend the Easter Island airport," Merino said, "we should accept because Chile does not have the money to do it." The need to supplement the project with the construction of a port for security reasons was a new element added by Merino to the NASA proposal. Merino explained that the operation of an international airport near the sea called for fast ships to act in case a plane went down in the ocean. It was imperative to have a port for the operation of such ships, and Easter Island had only a small bay, he said. "If someone offers to build a port, I would let them," he added. In referring to criticism of the project because of possible military uses of the airfield, Merino said that those who said that about the project were "ignorant people who were politicians in the past but not now." (Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish, June 12/85)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51 —J landed just after 10 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, ending a four-day flight operated under secrecy rules imposed by the Department of Defense (DOD), the Washington Post reported. "Of course, I can't say anything about our mission," said flight commander Karol Bobko, an Air Force colonel and one of five military men on the mission, "but I can say Atlantis performed superbly its first time in space. I've flown Challenger, Atlantis, and Discovery now, and I think that NASA really has quite a fleet of orbiters and that we have a great national asset here," he added. NASA ground operations manager Fritz Widick said Atlantis was in "excellent condition" at the end of the 1.7 million-mile flight, although engineers were inspecting an underside area of the left wing to see if tile-insulation damage might have exposed its aluminum mainframe to reentry heat. Such heat might have discolored a region along the portside engine pod under the Space Shuttle's tail. Widick said Atlantis's brakes came through the 190 mph landing on the lake-bed with only "minor damage" to one of four brake assemblies on the main landing gear. Bobko appeared to apply minimum braking after landing into a stiff headwind that brought Atlantis to a stop on the center line halfway down the 15,000-foot desert runway. Fewer than a dozen reporters and about two dozen NASA employees were present for the landing, an event that usually drew hundreds of spectators, the NY Times reported. The military gave just 24 hours notice of when the mission would end and had barred members of the public from watching. (W Post, Oct 8/85, A3; NYT, Oct 8/85, C3) Air Force Maj. Ronald Rand said the Department of Defense (DOD) approved dissemination of information about the payload because it was experimental and not designed to carry out an operational mission. He said there were two payloads: an assembly of six space physics experiments that would remain in the Space Shuttle's open cargo bay and an experimental airplanedetecting experiment. "In light of the mounting Congressional and public interest in this historic first manned polar orbit and first west coast shuttle mission, we've made an exception to our policy with the understanding that we'll continue to protect performance data and results of these two experiments," Rand said. "This doesn't mean we've changed our policy of classifying DOD payloads." Flying aboard Discovery, which was scheduled for launch March 20, 1986, would be Comdr. Robert Crippen of the Navy; pilot Guy Gardner; astronauts Jerry Ross, Dale Gardner, and Richard Mullane; Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward Aldridge; Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson; and a DOD specialist to tend the cargo. (NYT, Oct 11/85, A6)
NASA announced it selected April 29, 12:00 noon EDT, for launch of STS mission 51-B, the Spacelab 3 flight, and Dryden Flight Research Center/Edwards Air Force Base, California, as the primary end-of-mission landing site, with KSC as an alternate. Landing was set for May 6 at 12:03 EDT. NASA selected Dryden over KSC for the landing as a result of problems encountered during the STS 51-D mission when the orbiter Discovery's right-hand braking systems locked causing a tire to blow out. Landing conditions had included a crosswind—the first experience at KSC of such conditions—and a higher-than-usual sink rate. A landing at Dryden would provide a greater safety margin for Challenger's tires and brake systems due to the availability of the unrestricted lakebed and the smoother surface. The decision to land at Dryden for the next flight only would enable engineers to determine what corrective actions were appropriate before returning to the KSC runway for nominal end-of-mission landings. (NASA Release 85-63) During April: NASA announced it had scheduled for launch on April 12 from KSC the remanifested Space Shuttle 51-D mission with landing on KSC's Space Shuttle runway after the five-day 78-orbit flight. NASA originally scheduled mission 51-D for March 1 for deployment of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility, but cancelled the 51—E Challenger mission and revised the 51-D cargo to include LEASAT-3 and the Canadian communications satellite Anik C-1. Other payloads were the continuous-flow electrophoresis system and the American echocardiograph experiment [see Apr. 12], two middeck student experiments, and two Getaway Special canisters. (NASA Release 85—47)
The first in a series of laser experiments in the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program was only partly successful because laser operators were unable to lock on to a fast, high-flying rocket target, the NY Times reported. A laser station on the island of Maui succeeded in focusing a laser beam on the rocket but failed to bounce the beam off an eight-inch reflective shield attached to it, said unidentified sources. The Pentagon had announced it was preparing a new round of laser tests similar to one conducted in June when a low-power blue-green laser was reflected off the Space Shuttle Discovery. On July 16 the Pentagon issued a statement saying the first of five planned experiments was conducted in the early morning of July 14 and that "it was only partially successful due to technical difficulties not associated with the experiment." Officials in the SDI office refused to elaborate beyond that saying the Navy's Pacific Missile Range Facility launched a Terrier-Malemute rocket that traveled almost 450 miles into space and that the laser had been fired. (NYT, July 16/85, C7)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced that 10,690 teachers applied for a Space Shuttle flight. The Council was responsible for application and screening processes; NASA would choose the teacher to go into space. The Council's review panel would screen all applications to eliminate those not meeting basic requirements and forward the remaining applications to state-review panels to select two teachers per state by May 1, 1985. A national panel would then review applications of the approximately 118 nominees (two per state plus the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, territories and trusts, and Department of Defense and independent schools) to recommend 10 semifinalists to NASA's spaceflight participant evaluation committee. All nominees would attend a teacher-workshop and orientation program from June 24 to 28, 1985, in Washington to learn of current developments in the aeronautics and space-education program and to undergo further evaluation and screening; 10 semifinalists would report to JSC for thorough medical examinations, in-depth briefings, and interviews by NASA's evaluation committee. NASA's administrator and the evaluation committee would select a primary and a backup candidate to undergo training. NASA had not decided on a specific flight opportunity, but was aiming to fly the teacher on a mission in late 1985. California had the greatest number of applications, 926. (NASA Release 85-26)
NASA announced it was donating a 26-m antenna located at the Orroral Valley Tracking Station, Australia, which had ceased operations in December 1984, to the Australian University of Tasmania. NASA, which had used the antenna in programs such as Skylab, the Apollo Soyuz test project, and the Space Shuttle, had offered to assist in antenna dismantling and transfer to Hobart, Tasmania. The University of Tasmania's physics department, one of Australia's major centers for astronomy and astrophysics, would use the antenna as part of its teaching and research activities, including operation with the Australian telescope under construction in New South Wales to improve telescope performance. Researchers would also use the antenna in conjunction with other instruments for very-long baseline interferometry, a system employing a number of separate antennas to construct a radio telescope with a high-resolution capability, to obtain more accurate measurements of earth's surface. Researchers would also make the antenna available to NASA for its future geodesy, geodynamics, and astronomy projects. (NASA Release 85-28)
During NASA's general management status review, the office of space flight reported on the agency objective to undertake a pricing and marketing strategy that would capture for the STS a dominant percentage of the planned free-world, commercially launched payloads, as measured yearly by payments for launch reservations, through the end of CY 88. R. Wisniewski, assistant associate administrator, noted that a NASA recommendation for full-cost recovery sent to the White House would likely undergo close scrutiny. He anticipated strong competition as NASA marketed the Space Shuttle capability, with 28 to 36 STS launches of the approximately 58 planned payloads through 1988; Ariane would capture a sizeable portion of the remaining launches. Wisniewski reported $140 million in Space Shuttle receipts in FY 84 and predicted $188 million in Space Shuttle revenue in FY 85. (GMSR Report, Jan 15/85, 35)
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-F made major progress in fixing the instrument pointing system (IPS) for a $60 million solar telescope, the Washington Post reported; and flight planners moved closer to extending the mission one day to make up for lost sunwatching time. The extension would have Challenger landing in California after eight days in orbit. The IPS's improved operation enabled the astronauts to increase the pace of their observations of the sun, the only star close enough for detailed study. Although the balky telescope mount late in the evening again failed to work properly, the Space Shuttle scientists manually locked the telescope on target. New computer commands radioed earlier from earth had helped solve some initial problems with the IPS, and it aimed its three solar telescopes precisely at specific spots on the sun, holding them there for a few minutes each time. However, the steadiness did not last. During one long sun-sighting period, astronaut-physicist Loren Acton said the solar chronosphere, a layer of gas that resembled a flaming forest, appeared more active than he had suspected. The phenomenon was dubbed the "Acton effect." A decision to extend Challengers's mission depended largely on the orbiter's supply of hydrogen for generating electricity. {W Post, Aug 3/85, A10)
The Washington Post reported that Fairchild Industries would sell its 50% interest in American Satellite Co. and Space Communications Co. for $105 million to Continental Telecom Inc., which owned the other half of the two joint ventures. Observers considered the two satellite communications subsidiaries Fairchild's leading growth opportunities. American Satellite of Rockville (Amsat) provided private and general satellite communications services. It transmitted regional editions of The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, and other newspapers and had won a large number of government contracts. Space Communications of Gaithersburg (Spacecom) owned and operated the tracking and data relay satellite system for NASA, provided communications to the Space Shuttle, and was building a $122.8 million communications network for the Air Force. Fairchild president Emanuel Fthenakis said the company decided to sell its interests in Amsat and Spacecom to consolidate its other businesses. "We are addressing the same market with more than one company," he said. "The main reason is to consolidate our activities and address these markets with our wholly owned subsidiaries." Analysts said the move showed Fairchild was unwilling or unable because of troubles in its other operations to invest the large amounts of capital required to continue to expand the two companies. (W Post, Aug 9/85, B1)
Sudden squalls almost on top of the launch pad early today forced postponement for at least a day of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the Washington Post reported. A series of unforecasted thunderstorms blew in from the mainland directly across the flight path, and dark thunderheads surrounded the launch pad for five miles in almost every direction. NASA aborted the launch five minutes before liftoff. NASA officials were concerned not only about the Space Shuttle climbing through rain and lightning but also about the crew's ability to see the KSC runway in case they had to make an emergency landing the early minutes of the flight. Rain could damage the orbiter's tiles, and lightning could harm its computers and guidance systems. NASA rescheduled Discovery's launch for between 7:57 and 8:11 a.m. EDT August 25. Among the factors necessitating that launch window were the position of the satellite planned for salvage and timing of deployment of three communications satellites. If an August 25 launch was impossible, there were launch opportunities the following three days. NASA had announced earlier that highlights of the eight-day mission included an attempt to repair and salvage the Leasat/Syncom IV-F3 satellite and deploy it for normal operation, and deployment of the ASC 7/PAM-D for the American Satellite Co., the AUSSAT //PAM-D satellite for the Australian government, and the Leasat IV-F4 satellite for the U.S. Navy. The physical vapor transport of organic solids (PVTOS) experiment sponsored by 3M Corp. would also fly on the mission. PVTOS was the second of some 70 experiments the 3M Corp. planned to conduct aboard the Space Shuttle over the next ten years. On the 51-1 mission, solid materials would vaporize into a gaseous state to form thick crystalline films on selected substrates of sublimable organics. Researchers at 3M would study crystals produced by PVTOS for their optical properties and other characteristics that might ultimately have important applications to 3M's businesses in electronics, imaging, and health care. The company's first experiment, flown in November 1984, dissolved materials that led to a solid crystalline product. (NASA Release 85-118; W Post, Aug 25/85, A3)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
NASA launched Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today through the worst weather of the Space Shuttle program, the NY Times reported. After two postponements in three days because of bad weather and a computer failure, Discovery barely got off the ground before the darkening clouds moved over the launch pad and the rain descended in torrents. "We could see large holes in the system 50 or 100 miles across so we prayed for the breaks that would let us thread the needle when the time came," launch director Robert Sieck said later. "We had two things in our favor: There was no lightning in the cloud cover, and most of the rain was south of the launch pad, not right over it." Launch directors gambled that rain would not be falling on the pad at liftoff time, which was delayed three minutes to make sure the gamble was the right one. As heavy rain fell on the press site three miles to the west, Discovery roared away from the pad through a hole in the clouds and sped into the air 10 minutes before the pad was pelted with rain. Commanding the flight was Air Force Col. Joe Engle, who commanded the second Space Shuttle test flight in 1981 and on August 26 turned 53. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Covey was pilot; mission specialists were John Lounge, Dr. James van Hoften, and Dr. William Fisher. A malfunction encountered two hours into the flight forced the astronauts to deploy a day early one of the three satellites in the orbiter's cargo bay. During a cargo inspection by remotely controlled cameras, a shield that was to protect Australia's AUSSAT 1 from direct exposure to sunlight stuck in a partly open position. An astronaut then used the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm to nudge the sunshade completely open so they could release the spring-loaded satellite. Any delay of more than six hours could have resulted in radiation damage to the exposed satellite's electronics. Less than five hours after deploying the Australian satellite, Discovery's crew deployed ASC 1 for the American Satellite Co. The second deployment marked the first time a Space Shuttle crew deployed two satellites in one day. (NYT, Aug 28/85, D18)
NASA announced it would transfer on December 6, 1985, the title to the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum. The NASA Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, on November 16 would deliver Enterprise to Washington Dulles International Airport, where cranes would remove Enterprise from the top of the 747 and lower it to Dulles's tarmac. Rockwell Internatl., NASA's Space Shuttle prime contractor, constructed Enterprise, which was the first orbiter built. NASA used Enterprise, Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle 101 (OV 101), to test airframe loads, flight dynamics characteristics, and other aspects of the orbiter as it flew through earth's atmosphere. NASA also used Enterprise as a test bed for manufacturing techniques, aerodynamics, and flight control tests, and mating and fit checks for the remainder of the Space Shuttle components—the external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and mobile launch platforms at both Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base. On September 17, 1976, Enterprise rolled out from Rockwell's assembly facility at Palmdale, California, and was first flown on February 15, 1977, aboard the modified 747 in taxi tests at Edwards Air Force Base. There were then five approach and landing tests, commanded and piloted alternately by astronaut teams of Fred Haise, Jr. (commander) and C. Gordon Fullerton (pilot) and Joe Engie (commander) and Richard Truly (pilot). After ground vibration tests, engineers at Kennedy Space Center used Enterprise for fit checks with the other Space Shuttle components and the mobile launch systems. More recently, engineers used Enterprise for fit checks at the Space Shuttle launch complex at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 85-150)
Hughes Communications faced the possibility of a $10,000 per day fine, up to a total of $5 million, if the Leasat communications system was not fully operational by November 30, Aviation Week reported. The potential of a fine resulted from the failure of its Leasat 4 satellite following deployment from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, reducing significantly the likelihood of three Leasat satellites being operational by the November 30 deadline. Hughes could avoid the fee if the repaired Leasat 3 activated in late October; otherwise the firm had the option of launching a ground spare. Telemetry data from Leasat 3, repaired during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission, continued to confirm the satellite's functioning. The liquid propulsion system was intact, and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures were rising toward acceptable levels. However, the satellite could explode when its main rocket fired late in September, and Hughes officials gave it no more than a 50-50 chance of reaching geosynchronous orbit. Leasat 1 and 2, launched in August and November 1984, respectively, were operating according to specifications, and the Navy was leasing them. Hughes had to provide the U.S. Navy with four operational satellites by March 31, 1986, to meet the second contract deadline and could at that time again face fines for noncompliance. Company officials estimated December as the earliest date for a Leasat 5 launch. Albert Wheelon, Hughes Aircraft Co. senior vice president and president of Hughes's space and communications group, said the Leasat 4 loss and other recent spacecraft losses were having an impact on the industry. "My reading is that generally the whole insurance market for satellites has just gone belly-up," he commented. "I think it's going to have a major impact on startup companies. I think it's going to be a narrowing, both on the operator and the development side." He added that the status of spacecraft underwriters would have less of an impact on companies like Hughes, because it could provide self-insurance. (AvWk, Sept 23/85, 21)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with Space Industries, Inc. (Sll) for the company to construct and operate an industrial space facility (ISF), the first habitable privately owned commercial platform in space, which NASA would deploy from the Space Shuttle. Sll also signed a separate agreement with NASA's space station office that would provide for exchange of information during the definition and preliminary design phase of the space station. The agreement laid the groundwork for subsequent discussions and negotiations during the space station development period to begin in mid-1987. Sll was the first private company to sign an agreement with NASA's space station office to share information that could result in a commercial facility capable of compatible operations with the space station. The modular ISF would initially measure 35 by 14.5 feet. Although not intended to be permanently manned, it would be habitable and provide a shirt sleeve work environment for astronauts when docked with either the Space Shuttle or space station. NASA Administrator James Beggs said, "We hope the ISF will be the first of many such platforms to be funded and built by private industry that will complement the permanently manned space station and lead eventually to an industrial park in space." Max Faget, president of Sll, said, "The facility is scheduled to be deployed in 1989 and will respond to a variety of private research and manufacturing needs. Industry could take advantage of the unique gravity-free environment of space to conduct experiments that cannot be effectively duplicated here on earth." Sll considered the cost of building the ISF to be proprietary. Under the novel agreement, a provision stipulated that Sll would reimburse NASA for all costs incurred by the government associated with the deployment of the ISF when it became operational and was revenue generating. (NASA Release 85119)
In his "State of the Union" address, President Reagan commented on funding requested for activities in space, the Washington Post reported. "We have seen the success of the Space Shuttle. Now we are going to develop a permanently manned space station and new opportunities for free enterprise because, in the next decade, Americans and our friends around the world will be living and working together in space. "In the zero-gravity of space, we could manufacture in 30 days lifesaving medicines it would take 30 years to make on earth. We can make crystals of exceptional purity to produce supercomputers, creating jobs, technologies, and medical breakthroughs beyond anything we ever dreamed possible." (W POst, Feb 7/85, A16)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it had scheduled for September 12 at Kennedy Space Center a 20-second on-the-pad test firing of the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis's three main engines to verify the flight readiness of Atlantis—the fourth and newest of the Space Shuttle orbiter fleet. The flight readiness firing in a launch-day environment would exercise the Space Shuttle's main propulsion system and computer programs to demonstrate the proper integration of all elements prior to the first Atlantis launch scheduled for October 3 for mission 51-J. Engineers had previously test fired each engine individually at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories. On September 9 a firing simulation would kick off preparations for the test. The one-day test would check out critical flight and ground computer systems that controlled the actual engine firing and give the Space Shuttle launch team a chance to re-review test procedures. Countdown for the flight readiness firing would begin at 4:00 a.m. September 10, with the clock at the T-43 hour mark, and culminate with the 20-second static firing. Three days of preparations would precede the firing countdown, including purging the external tank with inert gases, installing special firing instrumentation, and mounting a radiation shield on the deck of the mobile launcher platform to protect the solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank structures during the test firing. Total flight readiness firing, including pre- and post-test activities, would span six days and require support from personnel and operations from various NASA centers including MSFC and Kennedy and Johnson Space Centers. Events leading to the September 12 engine firing would be nearly identical to those that preceded an actual Space Shuttle launch, with built-in holds distributed throughout the countdown at the same times they occurred in an actual launch countdown. An automated ground launch sequencer would control the final nine minutes of the countdown. The sequencer performed the final series of events in a specific order, monitored various measurements of out-of-tolerance conditions, and detected system malfunctions for which it would automatically stop the countdown. Following the test, technicians would inspect externally and internally the three main engines to verify their readiness for flight. These post-firing activities would take about 11 days. (MSFC Release 85—44)
The European Space Agency (ESA) launched at 9:15 p.m. EST today from Kourou an Ariane rocket that successfully deployed two telecommunications satellites including a U.S.-built G-Star 1, the Washington Post reported. A breakdown in timing between the rocket and the ESA's various earth-based satellite tracking stations delayed launch 79 minutes. ESA officials described the launch as "another success" in the agency's competition with the U.S. Space Shuttle to capture the world market for satellite launches. The Ariane rocket was the 13th fired, including two aborted launches, since 1979. The previous launch February 9 also put two satellites into orbit. Officials said they had nearly 30 orders to launch commercial satellites, compared with about 60 orders for the Space Shuttle. The Ariane rocket deployed the G-Star 1 satellite, owned by the GTE Spacenet Corp., and the French Telecome-1B 20 minutes after liftoff at about 22,000	miles above the equator. (W Post, May 8/85, A26)
In reporting on NASA's concerns over the effects of vibrations and noise on the Space Shuttle's passengers and cargo, the Washington Post quoted astronaut Air Force Col. Frederick Gregory saying that after his return from a Space Shuttle mission that "Nothing prepared me for the sensation of those main engines starting and those solids lighting up underneath us. That son-of-a-gun really rattles and rolls when it takes off." Although NASA maintained that the Space Shuttle was no rougher a ride than the Titan launch vehicle, doubts were creeping into the minds of some people planning the Space Shuttle program, the Post said. Troubles arose on Gregory's flight when astronauts discovered the latch that released the airlock holding the Spacelab wide-field camera was badly bent—possibly because of the rough ride. In another Spacelab incident, all pressure was lost after four days in the laser spectrometer at the heart of an experiment to measure molecules of synthetic chemicals that could be attacking the earth's protective ozone layer. Space Shuttle managers were quick to defend the spacecraft, the Post reported. Columbia, Challenger, and Discovery had flown 17 times in four years without a serious incident. At least two of the three satellites that failed in space did so because of onboard rocket engine difficulties, not because the Space Shuttle was too rough. Johnson Space Center Director Gerald Griffin said in an interview with the Post that "occasional" mistakes had led to mishaps, but he insisted that "we are not repeating our mistakes." He used as an example the Syncom (Leasat-3) satellite deployed in April with no power to raise it to a higher orbit. He said that NASA would not have deployed the Syncom without any power if NASA had insisted that Hughes Communications Corp install a device that flashed a warning to the Space Shuttle's cockpit that the satellite had no power. "We've always insisted our customers adhere to our safety standards to protect the crew and the shuttle, but we've never insisted they do anything else," Griffin said. "We don't want to be 'Big Brother' but we're beginning to think that some of the [the customers] design features are not good for us. I'd like to see more data for the crew in the cockpit." (W Post, May 24/85, A1)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)
NASA today rolled the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger to launch complex 39B two miles from where NASA had installed the orbiter Columbia for mission 61-C, the first time a pair of orbiters had been on the launch pads at the same time, the Washington Times reported. Columbia was on Pad 39A until repair of a faulty power unit that aborted a launch attempt December 19 [see Space Transportation System/Launch Schedules, Dec. 19]. NASA had scheduled Challenger on mission 51-L for launch on January 22. (IV Times, Dec 23/85, 4A) Solid-fuel Rocket Boosters
The U.S. Air Force announced today that it had selected Air Force Undersecretary Edward "Pete" Aldridge to fly on the first Space Shuttle mission launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Arizona Daily Star reported. The Air Force said Aldridge and Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson would serve as payload specialists with five astronauts named by NASA for the Defense Department's mission set for launch March 20, 1986. Aldridge, 47, who had been Air Force undersecretary since 1981, said in a statement, "I'm thrilled at the opportunity and thrilled at the prospects that I will be able to apply what I have learned to expanding U.S. efforts in space." NASA and the U.S. Air Force were building the Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch facility primarily for military missions. Because the Space Shuttle could be launched from there directly south, it could go into a north-south orbit that covered the entire globe, passing over both poles and allowing Space Shuttle crews to observe Soviet military forces anywhere in the world. Space Shuttles launched from Kennedy Space Center could not go directly north or south because they would fly over inhabited areas during the initial minutes of flight, possibly endangering the population if something went wrong. Those Space Shuttles launched into east-west orbits did not fly any closer than about 2000 miles to the poles. (Ariz. Daily Star, Sept 12/85, A3)
NASA launched from KSC at 5:00 p.m. EDT today Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger carrying Spacelab-2. The flight was the eighth for Challenger and the 19th Space Shuttle mission. The flight commander was Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, who served as pilot on the third Space Shuttle mission. Air Force Col. Roy Bridges, Jr. was pilot; mission specialists were Dr. Anthony England, a geophysicist; Dr. F. Story Musgrave, a physician; and Dr. Karl Henize, an astronomer who at the age of 58 was the oldest American to travel in space. Payload specialists were Dr. Loren Acton, a solar physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, and Dr. John David Bartoe, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory. Approximately 5 minutes and 45 seconds after launch onboard computers shut down Challenger's center engine (SSME 1) due to failure of the orbiter's two high-pressure, fuel turbo-pump discharge temperature sensors. Challenger was 70 miles above earth at the time, about 50 miles below the orbit considered safe for a manned spacecraft. The two remaining main engines ran smoothly and burned about a minute and 10 seconds longer than originally planned, putting the Space Shuttle into a lower-than-scheduled orbit. The crew then used two auxiliary engines to raise the orbit in steps from an initial 122 miles to 194 miles at 10:30 p.m. the night of launch. The crew also dumped as much as 4,400 lb. of fuel to achieve the higher orbit. In explaining the problem with SSME 1, NASA associate administrator Jesse Moore said the onboard sensors first indicated that the center engine might be overheating four minutes after liftoff, the Washington Post reported. "Computers then ordered the center engine fuel pump to bypass one valve and use another to feed fuel into the combustion chamber," he said. Two minutes later computers again sensed that the fuel pump was overheating and automatically shut down the center engine.The mission control center in Houston also received indications of dangerously high temperature readings on a second engine and instructed the crew to disconnect a backup sensor to prevent the second engine from shutting down before the spacecraft reached orbit. The crew encountered the next problem when attempting to operate a $60 million telescope-pointing device. The instrument pointing subsystem (IPS) and its four solor telescopes were one of 13 experiments carried on the European-built Spacelab-2. Mission specialist Henize told mission control that the pointing attempts were "rather dismal," the NY Times reported. Lee Briscoe, flight director, elaborated to reporters. "It appears that we are able to find the sun, find the stars, get into what we call a rough track mode," he said. "But we never appear to get into a fine track and actually finish the total tracking." Since the problem appeared to be with the computer programming that drove the unit, NASA radioed up a new version of the programming. However, it initially failed to correct the problem, and NASA told the crew to try harder. Eventually the IPS operated successfully after the crew inserted a series of software patches developed at Marshall Space Flight Center. NASA extended the mission duration by one day to allow additional collection of engineering and scientific data. The Spacelab-2 aboard Challenger was the second of its two verification test flights and consisted of an igloo attached to a lead pallet, the IPS mounted on it and a two pallet train behind, with an experiment special support structure. Experiments conducted during the Spacelab-2 mission were in the fields of life sciences, plasma physics, infrared astronomy, high-energy physics, solar physics, atmospheric physics, and technology. Experiments were located on the IPS, the three pallets, the special support structure, the orbiter mid-deck, and one on the ground (NASA FOR M-989-51-F [postflight] Sept 27/85, [prelaunch] July 9/85; NASA MOR M-977-51-F-03 [prelaunch] July 1/85; W Post, July 30/85, A1, July 31/85, A3; NYT, July 31/85, B4)
Hermann Oberth, considered by some to be the father of spaceflight, watched on TV at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) the landing of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A, the Washington Post reported. Oberth is the last scientist survivor of the group that transformed theory into modern space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the Russian who worked out some of the early theory of rocket propulsion, died in 1935; Robert Goddard, the American who experimented with early rockets and for whom GSFC is named, died in 1945. But Oberth, who made the most complete analyses of the problems and prospects of human space travel, lived to "see it happen." In 1932 Oberth wrote a paper in which he not only showed mathematically that it was possible to escape earth's gravity, but also anticipated a host of other aspects of spaceflight not seriously approached for the next 30 years. Oberth described in the book a spaceship's propulsion system and architectural form down to the rocket engine's nozzles; designed spacesuits and methods of eating in weightlessness; conceived of astronauts performing spacewalks; proposed space stations in earth orbit as transfer points for interplanetary travel; considered the problems of weightlessness and motion sickness (which astronauts still faced); proposed that the stations spin slowly to create an artificial gravity; and suggested the use of flying shuttles that could take off like a rocket, visit the space station, and land back on earth like airplanes. Oberth also worked out the physics of joining two spacecraft in orbit (referred to now as rendezvous and docking), anticipated that photos of earth from space would be useful for studying the ground and forecasting weather, foresaw that telescopes in earth orbit could gather far better astronomical data than those that looked through the atmosphere, and claimed that practical uses for space travel would someday make it a profitable enterprise. Working unaware of Tsiolkovsky or Goddard, Oberth wrote the paper as an amateur physicist and mathematician while serving as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. Oberth's commanding officer sent the paper to the War Ministry, where the generals rejected it as obvious fantasy. After the war, when Oberth was at the University of Heidelberg, he submitted as his dissertation a longer version of the paper, complete with elaborate mathematical formulas proving his ideas. Again it was rejected. Eventually Oberth paid to have the paper published. "The Rocket Into Interplanetary Space" gained a wide following and attracted Wernher von Braun, who worked as Oberth's assistant and then left to join the German military rocket research program at Peenemunde. Von Braun brought Oberth to work on the V2 rocket, the first major device based on Oberth's ideas. During three years in the 1950s, Oberth joined von Braun in the U.S. where he was developing the Redstone rocket. In 1958 Oberth retired to West Germany. Oberth had concluded in his book that "the foregoing demonstrates that it is possible, with present day science and technology, to construct vehicles which could attain cosmic speed and that it is probably possible for men to ride in these vehicles," but that it would take more than a decade to realize these possibilities. At GSFC today, Oberth said it had "proven to be much more complicated that I thought." (W Post, Nov 7/85, C1)
Researchers would install actual Space Shuttle tiles on the leading edge of a flight test fixture mounted below the F-104's fuselage. Some tiles were unused; others had flown in space on the orbiter Columbia. During initial flights in the 16-to-18 flight test program, the F-104 would fly at subsonic speeds behind a KC-135 tanker aircraft, which would emit a water spray to create artificial rain. Tanker personnel could control the flow rate, nozzle pressures, and size of the artificial raindrops. Pilots would fly additional flights at subsonic speeds near Vandenberg Air Force Base, a future Space Shuttle launch site, to observe and measure the effects of mist and low stratus clouds. Pilots later would fly at transonic and supersonic speeds flights at high altitude through ice particles in clouds. A particle-measurement probe located on the F-104's wing pylon would record moisture particle size, while high-frequency load sensors would measure impact forces. A noseboom on the flight test fixture would record velocity, and test fixture pressure orifices would measure pressure distribution. Video cameras, one pylon-mounted and one mounted on the F-104's lower fuselage looking back at the flight test fixture, would also record data. (NASA Release 85-135)
NASA announced selection of 13 new astronaut candidates, six pilots and seven mission specialists, who would report to the Johnson Space Center in late summer to begin a one-year period of training and evaluation. Upon successful completion of the training, they would be eligible for assignment to Space Shuttle flights. The candidates would join 90 current astronauts. Including the new group, NASA had named 157 astronauts since the beginning of the program. In making the latest selections, NASA considered 33 civilians from the selection rosters developed during the 1984 selection process and 133 nominees from the military services. Those selected as pilot candidates were LCdr. Michael Baker (USN), Maj. Robert Caban (USMC), Capt. Brian Duffy (USAF), Stephen Oswald (civilian), and LCdr. Stephen Thorne (USN). Mission specialist candidates were Jerome Apt (PhD—civilian), Capt. Charles Gemar (US Army), Linda Godwin (PhD— civilian), Richard Hieb (civilian), Tamara Gernigan (civilian), Capt. Carl Meade (USAF), and Lt. Pierre Thuot (USN). (NASA Release 85-84)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it awarded a three-year, $35,181,700 contract to the Space Transportation Systems Division of Rockwell International for Space Shuttle systems integration work at MSFC, Kennedy Space Center, and Vandenberg Air Force Base. The contract called for provision of management, personnel, equipment, materials, and resources from July 1, 1985 to June 30, 1988. (MSFC Release 85-34)
Vice President George Bush announced that Sharon Christa McAuliffe would be the teacher to go into space in January 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. McAuliffe, a social studies teacher at Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire, was the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Program that was announced by President Reagan in August 1984. Her backup was Barbara Morgan of McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho. McAuliffe proposed that, while in space, she would gather information for a personal journal, "just as the pioneer travelers of the Conestoga wagon days kept personal journals. My journal would be a trilogy. I would like to begin it at the point of selection through the training program. The second part would cover the actual flight. Part three would cover my thoughts and reactions after my return," McAuliffe said. Vice President Bush, in his announcement of the selection at a White House ceremony in the Roosevelt Room, where McAuliffe was accompanied by the other nine finalists selected from among 11,416 applicants, said, "We're here today to announce the first private citizen passenger in the history of spaceflight . . . We're honoring all [the teacher applicants] today, and we're doing something else because the finalists here with me and the more than a hundred semifinalists will all in the months ahead serve as a link between NASA and the nation's school system." McAuliffe, a teacher of 15 years and the mother of two children, would work a year for NASA. She and Morgan would report in September to Johnson Space Center for 114 hours of training over four months. The Washington Post reported that a top NASA official said McAuliffe was an early favorite of the 20-member selection panel. The official said "the judges thought McAuliffe appeared to be a good team player and—vital to her image-making duties—stood out as a good communicator," the Post reported. (NASA Release 85-107; Admin of Ronald Reagan, July 19/85, 913; W Post, July 22/85, A1)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that NASA would sponsor an exhibition July 22 through July 30 at the 1985 National Scout Jamboree at Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia. The jamboree, celebrating scouting's 75th anniversary, was expected to draw more than 35,000 U.S. and international scouts and leaders and many thousands of general public participants. The NASA exhibit, for which LaRC was serving as lead coordinator, would include information on subjects ranging from current aeronautics research to the Space Shuttle and man's future in space. A 100-seat theater would have video presentations and live programs throughout each day. Astronaut Frederick Gregory, a former scout and long-time scouting enthusiast, would participate in the jamboree's opening program on July 24 and would talk with scouts in the NASA exhibition area on that day. NASA would sponsor July 24 through 28 model rocket launch demonstrations and presentations on earning the Space Exploration merit badge. (LaRC Release 85-38)
Continuing a project begun in 1984, some of the world's most prominent lightning experts gathered during the summer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to study lightning strikes and their effects, the Spaceport News reported. KSC attracted scientists with a variety of research interests because it was one of the nation's areas of highest frequency of strikes and the presence of French experts who had mastered the technique of triggering lightning. Taking part in the summer's project were representatives of NASA, the U.S. Air Force's Wright Aeronautical Lab, the Federal Aviation Administration, the U.S. Naval Laboratory, France's Center for Nuclear Studies, three U.S. universities, and two industry organizations. Since late May, the 36 lightning investigators had conducted studies at a specially equipped lightning research facility located on the shore of Mosquito Lagoon about nine miles north of the vehicle assembly building. The facility included a launch site for the three-foot rockets used to trigger lightning and two nearby trailers that housed the research teams and their equipment. From their control center, the French experts triggered lightning events by launching a small rocket that trailed a thin copper wire to an altitude of about 2000 feet. The wire acted as a trigger, attracting a stroke, which vaporized the wire while traveling down an electrical pathway to the ground. Special instruments and cameras near the launch site recorded the strike in detail. The triggered lightning events allowed researchers to obtain ground measurements that they could use in atmospheric and lightning research. Researchers might eventually use information from the studies to design advanced lightning protection systems for KSC facilities and for greater protection for aircraft such as the Space Shuttle that contained electronic flight control systems. Other research at the facilities included using a Convair C-580 to obtain measurements on a lightning strike; a study to determine how lightning strokes gained access to power lines; investigation of the Maxwell Current, which developed in a particular pattern before, during, and after thunderstorms; and attempts to obtain three-dimensional photos of lightning strikes. In addition to hosting the project, KSC was contributing funding to some of the university research. Project managers hoped to attract more participants in the future with the promise of research leading to tangible benefits in lightning protection and prediction. (Spaceport News, Aug 16/85, 7)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) service and contractor personnel completed within 90 days installation of a launch environment instrumentation system (LEIS) for Space Shuttle launches at Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Spaceport News reported. The LEIS, a 400-channel instrumented system, was designed to acquire data on the environment in the vicinity of the launch pad and support facilities during launch. The system's transducers measured in the launch pad vicinity pressure, acoustics, strain, vibration, and temperature for use in determining baseline data, sources of problems, and possible solutions. Such equipment at KSC, for example, pinpointed engine gas leaks during the first mission of the orbiter Challenger and provided design measurements of the overpressure problem that occurred during the first Space Shuttle launch. The KSC engineering development directorate, with the assistance of Planning Research Corp., completed design, management, and integration of the system, which Fairchild Weston Systems Inc. built under the direction of KSC for the Air Force. Fairchild began work on the system in March 1984 under a $4,549,256 contract. (Spaceport News, Aug 2/85, 7)
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to industry to develop a space platform providing five years of on-orbit services to NASA payloads while allowing the developer to market it to commercial users, an innovative approach considered a first step toward creating a closer partnership between government and industry in space. Industry would finance, develop, own, and operate the platform with first use planned in late 1988 and would be free to market the platform (totally separate from NASA's plans for a government-developed, permanently manned space station) for materials processing or other manufacturing activities. NASA stipulated that the platform be capable of providing services for four future projects: the extreme ultraviolet explorer (EUVE), the x-ray timing explorer (XTE), a zero-gravity payload, and an as yet unidentified project. The Space Shuttle or other launch vehicle would place the commercial platform in orbit. Commercial payloads would reimburse the government for use of the orbiter and facilities. (NASA Release 85-7) Johnson Space Center
NASA announced that astronauts Paul Weitz, Dr. Kathryn Sullivan, and Dale Gardner would support NASA activities at the 36th Paris Air Show at Le Bourget from May 31 through June 9 [see Space Station Program, Mar. 22], Weitz, then chief of astronaut appearances at Johnson Space Center, was a member of the first Skylab crew in 1973 and later commanded the first flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger in April 1983. He had logged 793 hours in space. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED i m ..JNWiTIOlunj Sullivan, an astronaut since 1978 with 197.5 hours in space, served as a mission specialist on the October 1984 Space Shuttle mission 41-G and was the first American woman to perform an extravehicular activity or space walk, during which she and astronaut David Leestma conducted a 2.5-hour demonstration of the potential of refueling satellites in space. Gardner, an astronaut since 1978 with 337 hours in space, had flown on the August 1983 Space Shuttle mission STS-8, the first night launch and landing using the orbiter Challenger, and in November 1984 on the 51-A mission, during which the crew retrieved two communications satellites that had failed to achieve proper orbits after launch from an earlier Space Shuttle flight. NASA refurbished the satellites for reflight. During the Air Show, the astronauts would make numerous public appearances, participate in media interviews, and assist NASA's marketing efforts at its exhibit in the U.S. pavilion. (NASA Release 85-72)
NASA deputy associate administrator for space science and applications Samuel Keller, speaking at a weekly staff meeting, said "We expect 1986 will be the most demanding year we've ever had,'' the Washington Post reported. In January Voyager would encounter the planet Uranus. In March the Space Shuttle would fly a mission dedicated to observing Halley's comet. In May NASA would launch Ulysses, which would fly to Jupiter and use the planet's gravity to "slingshot" itself around the sun, and Galileo, which would orbit Jupiter. In August the Space Shuttle would carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit. The three spacecraft cost $2 billion not including launch costs. Keller's toughest time would occur in May, the Post said, when Ulysses and Galileo at the same time would be in the cargo bays of two Space Shuttles on their launch pads. NASA would try May 15 to launch Ulysses and then Galileo four days later. If anything delayed the May 15 launch, NASA had 24 days to get the Space Shuttle into space, a launch window that allowed the two spacecraft to fly to Jupiter using the least amount of fuel. "I'll be glad when 1986 is over," Keller said. (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21) October24: NASA announced that an October 29 conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies would provide a forum for government executives to discuss the Reagan Administration's program to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. Following welcoming remarks by Dennis Whitfield, chief of staff to the Secretary of Labor, and David Braunstein, director of NASA's productivity programs, conference participants would be briefed on several perspectives on the President's productivity improvement program. Stephen Scholossberg, deputy under secretary for labor-management relations, Department of Labor, would then provide a labor-management view of quality and productivity. In the afternoon, NASA astronaut Bruce McCandless, first human to freely maneuver in space without a tether, would speak on the importance of quality and productivity in the space program. John Franke Jr., assistant secretary for administration, Department of Agriculture, would then give case examples of management's commitment to quality; and Commodore John Kirkpatrick, commander, Naval Aviation Logistics Center, would discuss quality improvement through total quality management. (NASA Release 85-146)
NASA announced it was negotiating an agreement with Hughes Communications, Inc. (a wholly owned subsidiary of Hughes Aircraft Co.) to develop jointly plans for a Space Shuttle mission to attempt salvage of the Hughes Leasat 3 satellite then in orbit [see Space Transportation System/ Missions, Apr. 17], As a result of Hughes's negotiations with New York- and London-based underwriters insuring Leasat 3, Lloyd's and other European underwriters had agreed to proceed with the attempted salvage. Hughes was continuing negotiations with U.S. underwriters. Although the joint salvage effort would include activities never before attempted, it was based in large part on experience gained by NASA during its April 1984 repair of the Solar Maximum Mission satellite and its retrieval November 1984 of the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites. Pending an independent review of safety considerations by the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, the mission would occur during Space Shuttle flight 51 —L scheduled for no earlier than August 24. The salvage plan called for modification to the satellite by two of the Space Shuttle crew during rendezvous with it to permit ground command of the satellite. Ground command would then perform the activation sequence, normally performed by an automatic timer onboard the satellite. Modification made during the rendezvous would bypass all hardware likely to have caused the Leasat 3 failure. (Although Hughes had identified satellite activation components and circuits as the cause of the failure, the company had not determined, due to limited flight data, a specific cause of the failure.) In its dormant state, the satellite was experiencing temperatures well below the design and test limits of the liquid- and sold-fuel propellant systems, electronic units, batteries, and all other components. These factors, combined with the complexity of the modifications by the Space Shuttle crew, limited the chances of success. Hughes Communications, Inc. would contract with NASA for the costs, at that time under assessment, for preparation and execution of the mission. (NASA 85-77)
Digital computers would serve as the focal point for the Centaur flight-control system, processing data from the other flight boxes including the multiplexer units. They would also provide the hardware capability to interface with the orbiter and ground system^ NASA scheduled the first Centaur launch—the Ulysses mission—for May 15, 1986, from the Space Shuttle payload bay followed on May 21, 1986, by the Galileo mission. (LeRC Release 85-58)
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B celebrated Thanksgiving in space today, saying it was one of the best Thanksgivings they ever had, the Washington Times reported. It was the first U.S. manned spaceflight during that holiday since the third Skylab flight in 1973. The crew's main job for the day was deployment of the 4,144-lb. SATCOM KU-2 satellite owned and operated by RCA American Communications (RCA Americom). The uninsured $50 million satellite was the last of three KU-brand domestic communications satellites that operated in the 12 to 14 gigahertz range. It had 16 operational transponders and six spares, each transmitting 45 watts of power, more than the 12 to 30 watts used for C-Band transponders. The payload assist module (PAM) on the satellite was instrumented with radio frequency telemetry that would downlink data to ARIA (advanced range instrumentation aircraft) during burn of the solid-fuel rocket motor, a mission requirement for this first flight of a PAM-D2, the Kennedy Space Center Spaceport News explained. The uprated upper stage was identical to the PAM-D, except for size and weight. The spinup would be noticeably slower due to the larger mass and inertial components of the payload. NASA designed PAM-D2 to place up to 4,200 lb. in geosynchronous orbit, compared to the 2,800-lb. PAM-D version. The crew's dinner menu—chicken consomme, smoked turkey, cranberry sauce, green beans, corn, pasta, butter cookies, and lemonade—sounded traditional, but the turkey was preserved before launch by irradiation, sealed in foil, and had to be heated in a device similar to a toaster oven. Crew added warm water to the consomme, vegetables, and pasta to make them edible. (IV Times, Nov 29/85, 3A; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
NASA announced that a Pepsi-Cola dispensing technology would fly aboard Space Shuttle mission 51-F, scheduled for launch on July 12, provided time permitted completion of NASA qualification procedures at the Johnson Space Center. The container, developed by Pepsi-Cola USA and Enviro-Spray Systems (a subsidiary of Grow Group) at their own initiative and expense, was capable of dispensing carbonated beverages, as well as other liquids in space, because pressure within the can was automatically renewed, whenever necessary, to maintain a steady flow of liquid. Pepsi-Cola had granted NASA a license for unrestricted use of the dispensing technology for testing carbonated beverages in space, and NASA would receive the technical information necessary to fabricate its own cans. (NASA Release 85-97)
A fare war had broken out in space, Fortune reported, and Arianespace, a consortium of European governments and private companies that operated the European-built Ariane rocket, was grabbing communications satellite launches away from the U.S. Space Shuttle by aggressively underpricing it. Although NASA had launched 30 satellites, nine aboard the Space Shuttle, over the previous four years and the Ariane less than 12, the Europeans would become major competitors, Fortune predicted. A Space Shuttle launch cost $25 million; Arianespace charged $24 million. And Arianespace had cut that price by as much as $3 million to lure some U.S. customers. Arianespace officials said its throwaway rockets were more efficient at the single task of launching satellites than was the complex Space Shuttle, which NASA had designed to perform a range of scientific and military missions. "Using the shuttle for launching satellites," Charles Bigot, director of Arianespace, said, "is like flying a supersonic Mirage jet fighter when all you need is a puddle jumper." American entrepreneurs who wanted to get into the satellite-launching business complained that prices charged by both Arianespace and NASA were ridiculously low as a result of government subsidies. Transpace Carriers Inc., for example, held the rights to buy the Delta rocket from its manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp., but couldn't launch a satellite for less than $45 million. The U.S. Department of Transportation, which wanted to encourage private companies like Transpace Carriers, was encouraging President Reagan to set Space Shuttle launch rates high enough to make the commercial launches profitable. So the future of the launch business, Fortune said, would rest with President Reagan's decision on Space Shuttle pricing—and on Arianespace's reaction. If Reagan boosted Space Shuttle launch fees, it would please entrepreneurs anxious to get into the space business. But that would also give the Europeans a bigger opening into the space business than they've had so far. (Fortune, May 27/85, 138)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
The Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger made a three-mile, six hour journey from the launch pad back to a hanger as a result of mission cancellation due to problems with the intended payload, a tracking and data relay satellite, the NY Times reported. NASA would replace Challenger on the launch pad with the orbiter Discovery on about March 15 and would combine elements of the scrubbed mission with some from Discovery's flight originally scheduled for March 22. Officials had selected Discovery for the mission because they decided it could be modified more easily and quickly than Challenger. (NYT, Mar 6/85, B10)
NASA announced that the governments of Chile and the U.S. signed agreements concerning use of Mataveri Airport on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) as an emergency landing site for the Space Shuttle. The intergovernmental agreements provided the basis for contingency planning for launches of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base beginning in March 1986. This planning was consistent with arrangements already in place to support launches from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning had to provide for emergency landing options for all phases of a flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. The Vandenberg launches would also have a requirement (analogous to those from KSC) for one or more trans-Pacific landing sites in the Pacific Basin. Although the probability of a contingency Space Shuttle landing was extremely remote, identification and preparation of suitable contingency landing sites was consistent with prudent operational planning. A Chilean contractor had prepared designs, in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island, for improvements at the air field that were necessary to support a Space Shuttle landing. These improvements included an extension of the existing runway and associated lighting system, construction of a storage building, and enhancement of certain permanent and temporary navigation equipment in the area. The modifications would not affect the historical treasures for which Isla de Pascua was known. As part of the agreement, the two countries would undertake enhancement of the existing program of scientific cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, thereby building upon a long and successful relationship of technical cooperation in this arena. (NASA Release 85117)
As a result of White House prodding, the Air Force had signed an agreement to use NASA's Space Shuttle for at least eight flights a year for 10 years starting in 1988, and the Air Force would get a discount when NASA worked out a new pricing policy for the start of FY 89, the Washington Post reported. The Air Force would pay a fixed fee at the start of each fiscal year, then a per-flight charge less than commercial and other government customers would pay. Under the agreement, NASA would drop opposition to an Air Force plan to buy 10 single-use unmanned rockets to orbit two satellites a year for five years starting in 1988, and NASA and the Department of Defense would work together to ensure a fully-operational and cost-effective Space Shuttle. NASA hoped the Space Shuttle would begin to break even in 1987, as the agency anticipated making from that time on 24 Space Shuttle flights yearly for 10 years. The new agreement called for the Air Force to use one third of all Space Shuttle flights for the 10 years starting in 1988. The agreement also permitted the Air Force to pick the single-use rocket it would use to orbit secret satellites too small for economical use of the Space Shuttle. (W Post, Feb 27/85, A22)
Three quarters of a million gallons of water flooded Space Launch Complex-6 at Vandenberg AFB during a March test to determine whether the system, intended to suppress sound waves from the Space Shuttle during a launch, would operate properly, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sound waves, reflected off the launch mount and flame ducts, could seriously damage the orbiter and its payload. To prevent such damage, nozzles on the mount would begin spraying water into the three pad exhaust ducts seven and a half seconds before the Space Shuttle's main engines ignited. By ignition time, the spray system would reach its full flow rate of 985,000 gallons per minute and maintain that rate for nearly 30 seconds before tapering off after the Space Shuttle left the pad. Although Vandenberg officials had tested the spray system six times previously, the March test was the first time the nonflying prototype orbiter Enterprise, inert solid-fuel rocket boosters, and an external tank were in place on the mount during a test. Remotely controlled by the launch control center, the splash pattern of the gravity-fed water system resulted in no water splashing up into the main engines, where ice might form before ignition. The system sprayed water exactly where it would be needed at launch—down into the flame ducts and out over the concrete pad surface. George O'Gorman, site manager for complex-6, said most of the complex's construction work was complete, although some modifications were scheduled before the orbiter Discovery would arrive in September for launch in January 1986. The Air Force expected to make about four Space Shuttle launches a year by the late 1980s from Vandenberg AFB. The facility could handle as many as ten launches a year. (AFCS Newsreview, Apr 12/85, 3)
The Indian Department of Space announced today the selection of two Indian astronaut candidates, one of whom would fly aboard the Space Shuttle carrying India's INSAT-1C satellite, FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English reported. The candidates were N.C. Bhatt of the Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore, and P. Radhakrishmam of Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, Trivandrum. The chairman of India's Space Commission, Professor U. R. Rao, said the commission would select one of them to fly on the mission scheduled for July 1986. (FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English, Nov 8/85) "There has to be a difference between some senator or Arab prince and the qualified scientists who fly aboard the shuttle," said Ulf Merbold, crew interface coordinator for the D-1 mission. "We demand that the science astronaut concept be developed so that these proficient crew members can be designated for such a flight," said Hans-Ulrich Steimle, Spacelab D-1 mission manager at the German aerospace research establishment. "Instead, NASA now has become involved in running a travel office for visiting dignitaries, and this is counterproductive when you want to perform a serious science mission." German officials said they might raise the issue again when planning was finalized for a follow-on Spacelab D-2 mission targeted for 1988. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 24)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1985 activities, which included nine Space Shuttle flights and launches of three Atlas Centaurs, two Scouts, and an Aerobee vehicle, its last flight. In 1985 NASA introduced the last and lightest-weight Space Shuttle orbiter—Atlantis. McDonnell Douglas inaugurated its upper stage booster, the Payload Assist Module D-2. Fifty two individuals flew aboard Space Shuttles in 1985. Of this group 19 were scientists performing observations, experiments, or investigations; 27 were U.S. military officers, and six were payload specialists from foreign countries (Mexico, Saudi Arabia, France, the Netherlands, and two from West Germany). The 52 individuals' combined time in space was nearly 55 days or over 880 earth orbits, for a combined travel distance of nearly 22 million miles. Six Space Shuttle astronauts spent a total of more than a day in extravehicular activities during the year. Two Spacelab missions aboard the Space Shuttle and an encounter by the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) with Comet Giacobini-Zinner highlighted the year for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	167 ^^LLLLjWTENTlONAai 8LANK On April 19, 1985, a little more than a year after President Reagan directed NASA to develop within a decade a permanently manned space station, NASA awarded competitive contracts to eight industry teams for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements of the station. NASA signed a memorandum of understanding with Canada, the European Space Agency, and Japan for cooperation during the definition and preliminary design phase of the program. NASA's aeronautical research and technology efforts included continuing work on such programs as the NASA/Department of Defense X-29 X-wing research aircraft, the tilt rotor/JVX aircraft, the advanced X-29 aircraft featuring a forward-swept wing, and the mission adaptive wing that could change its curvature. In the area of space technology, Langley Research Center completed development, assembly, and testing of a 15-meter hoop column deployable structure and antenna system. Other advances in space technology included significant modification to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to measure dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for design and testing for the space station space reactor power program, and completion of space construction experiments outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA's advances in space tracking and data systems included transition from ground network station support for low earth-orbiting spacecraft to use of the first Tracking and Data Relay Satellite in geosynchronous orbit. NASA had scheduled TDRS-2 and 3 for launch in January and July 1986, respectively. In February NASA completed consolidation of the Deep Space Network (DSN) and later an upgrade of the network that would enable the DSN to receive significantly more images from Voyager as it encountered Uranus in January 1986. NASA's Office of Commercial Programs funded and opened the first five of a planned series of centers for commercial development of space, which NASA expected would become self-supporting through research collaboration by industry, academia, and government agencies. (NASA Release 85177)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded ASEA Robotics Inc. a $1,143,622 contract to build a robotic development prototype system to be installed in the Robotic Applications Development Laboratory (RADL) and serve as KSC's control center for robotics, Spaceport News reported. KSC currently had two labs for robotics research: Lab A was a test facility for training devices, sensor and end-effector development, and small robotic projects; Lab B functioned as a control center made up of complex work cells and "smart systems" (independent control systems integrated into one coordinated system) for large robotic applications. The objective of the new system was to permit engineers to combine existing and new technology to create advanced independent and semiindependent machines and machines with independent decision-making capabilities or a "computer brain," which could accomplish more on their own without step-by-step instructions from human supervisors. The initial thrust of the new system would be to develop the technology and techniques needed to automatically load and unload hazardous fuels aboard space vehicles and payloads during prelaunch ground operations. Future challenges included application of these refueling techniques to other fuels such as cryogenic propellants. RADL would have an electrically driven articulated robot composed of a six-axes arm and interchangeable end-effectors or "hands," a computer with user-friendly software, and a vision tracking system. The facility would serve as the focal point for combining robotics hardware, algorithms, software, sensors, and control systems. Leon Davis, a development engineer and electrical lead for the Robotic Control Systems, said of the new system, "This is not a manipulator that is teleoperated by a man, but a robot with a computer brain capable of memorizing the contours and panels of its intended subject and carrying out its functions autonomously." Because NASA would be asking KSC to design processing facilities for new-generation launch vehicles such as the second generation Space Shuttle and the heavy lift launch vehicles, KSC would need these state-of-the-art robotics to provide the most efficient and effective processing methods. Hazardous, time critical, and repetitive Space Shuttle and payload operations all had potential uses for robotics. A special feature of the system was a "real time" tracking system using "closed-loop" responsive adaptive control commands, feedback, and error signals. "Adaptive control" meant that the robot altered its path automatically in response to sensory feedback from its environment. The KSC robot's servo-controls and software utilities would allow its arm to operate adaptively to control positions and orientation of all six axes, not only the end-effector as found in standard applications. An electrically driven, servo-controlled robot had several advantages over hydraulic robots, the major one being that smooth motion, speed, and trajectory controls were possible when the robot handled loads up to 200 lb. As Davis said, "We really don't have applications for hydraulic robots. Hydraulic robots can leak, proving a potential hazard to the tile and other sensitive areas of the orbiter." KSC's robotics research would progress in four phases: phase one was the development of the robotic arm in static work cells; phase two proposed advancing the robotic capabilities to operate in dynamic work cells; phase three would include off-line programming using 3-D graphics and simulated work cells; and phase four entertained the possibility of employing artificial intelligence. Possible future capabilities of robots were three-dimensional scanning; higher order processing; artificial intelligence; sonic, laser, and other ranging systems; and "touch" and mobility systems. (Spaceport News, Nov 7/85, 6) Langley Research Center
NASA announced it selected Dr. F. Drew Gaffney, an associate professor of medicine and cardiology and director of echocardiology at the University of Texas Health Science Center, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, and Dr. Robert Phillips, a veterinarian and professor of physiology and nutrition at Colorado State University, to serve as payload specialists for the initial Spacelab Life Sciences (SLS-1) flight. NASA also selected Dr. Millie Hughes-Fulford, an associate professor of biochemistry at the University of California Medical Center, San Francisco, and a medical researcher at the Veterans Administration Medical Center, to serve as a payload specialist for SLS-2. Dr. Hughes-Fulford was the first woman to serve as a prime payload specialist for a Space Shuttle flight. The flights were intended to improve significantly knowledge about living beings in the space environment and were a major step in preparing men and women for life aboard the space station scheduled for launch in the early 1990s. NASA would shortly select for the SLS-2 mission a second payload specialist, who would then train with the three already announced. (NASA Release 85-62)
During a "Science and Engineering" radio program, Boris Belitskiy responded to a New Zealander's question about the possibility of there someday being a larger Soviet space station, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. "A Soviet orbital station of the next generation will be a larger and more comfortable complex with better facilities for research work, pilot production, cosmonaut exercises, recreation, and everyday life generally," Belitskiy said. When asked whether the Soviets were developing a reusable spacecraft like the U.S. Space Shuttle, Belitskiy responded, "For the present, freighters of the Progress type meet the needs of resupplying Salyut orbital stations. Nevertheless, Soviet space scientists do see a future for reusable transport systems and have been conducting tests in this area. The technological problems involved have, on the whole, been solved, but this cannot be said of the economic problems . . . This being so, Soviet space scientists are interested in quite a few other approaches to the problem as well," In response to a question about a manned mission to Mars, Belitskiy said, "Some day, undoubtedly, there will be such a mission but that's still a long way down the road. And a vast project of this kind, bound to be very expensive, would be greatly facilitated by more cooperation between the major space powers." (FBIS, Moscow World Service in English, July 22/85)
The U.S. Commerce Department announced it signed a contract with Earth Observation Satellite Co. (Eosat) to pay $250 million over the next five years for Eosat to construct two new Landsat satellites (Landsat 6 and 7); provide a ground system to operate and process data from the new spacecraft; and operate, process, and market data from Landsats 4, 5, 6, and 7, the Washington Post reported. Eosat, a joint venture of RCA Corp., which would build the new spacecraft, and Hughes Aircraft Co., which would provide satellite instrumentation including the thematic mappers, would operate the orbiting Landsat 4 and 5 for their anticipated lifetime at a cost to the government similar to the government's projected cost. The Commerce Department said the new satellites, Landsat 6 scheduled for launch in 1988 and Landsat 7 scheduled for launch when Landsat 6 neared the end of its approximately five-year lifetime, should provide sharper images and enhance the value of the system for agricultural uses. The U.S. government would launch the new satellites from the Space Shuttle at an estimated cost of $44.9 million and also pay for any Space Shuttle system modifications necessary for the launches. Although the contract called for Eosat to market and operate the four Landsats, it allowed the company to terminate date marketing for Landsat 4 and 5 if cumulative revenue was below 65% of the mutually agreed upon projected revenues for data sales for the two satellites and to terminate operations and data marketing for Landsat 6 and 7 if total cumulative revenue fell below 60% of projected revenue after launch of Landsat 6, Defense Daily reported. Landsats used cameras and other scanners to produce pictures in various wavelengths for many uses, including agriculture, mineral explorations, fishing, forestry, snow cover and surface water surveys, and land use and city planning. NASA developed the Landsat system and in 1983 transferred it to the Commerce Department. {W Post, Oct 1/85, B3; D/D, Oct 1/85, 153)
The Department of Defense (DOD) placed a satellite on the Space Shuttle Discovery [see STS/Military Applications, Jan. 24], which put it in a radically different orbit from many spy satellites, the NY Times reported. According to figures made public by the Air Force, DOD put the satellite in a highly elliptical orbit at a low angle above the equator; the majority of U.S. spy satellites were in roughly circular orbits that passed across polar regions so that satellites would spend as much time as possible over the USSR. The satellite's, whose United Nations designation was 1985-10B, highest altitude was 34,670 km (21,543 miles); its low point was 341 km (212 miles). This elliptical path was inclined 28.4° to the equator, and the satellite took 10 hours to complete one revolution. In addition to its elliptical orbits, the satellite could maneuver from its initial orbit into another, perhaps more usual, orbit. By international treaty, DOD was required to release to the United Nations a technical description of all its satellites' initial orbits. This recording process, which passed through the State Department and included filing the information with the Library of Congress, often took several months after an object was launched. The DOD released the data in early April to the State Department; the NY Times then requested and received the information. (NYT, Apr 26/85, A19)
The U.S. House Science and Technology Committee approved President Reagan's request for a $7.9 billion NASA budget for FY 86, the Washington Post reported, but allocated the funds differently than he had requested. By a 32-to-9 vote, the panel decided to retain a subcommittee's recommendation to shift $45 million to spare parts procurement for the Space Shuttle in order to keep the Space Shuttle assembly line open and thus increase chances for a fifth orbiter. The administration requested $2.1 billion in FY 86 for 14 Space Shuttle flights and delivery of the fourth orbiter, Atlantis; it sought no funds for a fifth orbiter. (W Post, Apr 1/85, A9)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that a December 1985 experiment, EASE or the experimental assembly of structures in EVA (extravehicular activity), aboard Space Shuttle flight 61-C would provide information about humans working in space. In the experiment, two crew members would move six aluminum beams, each 12 feet long and four inches in diameter, into space from the Space Shuttle payload bay and assemble them into a tetrahedron shape and then disassemble them. This experiment would demonstrate human ability to build strong, practical structures in space. During the experiment videotape and still photographs would record crew member movements to link beams by special connectors at the beam tips. This building approach was a technique in the Large Space Structures program called an "erectible" method, as opposed to a "deployable" method that would not be demonstrated until 1986 or 1987 when NASA would orbit a structural-assembly demonstration experiment. MSFC had conducted tests similar to EASE in its neutral buoyancy simulator, a million-gallon water tank that gave a sense of weightlessness to submerged people working in space suits. Researchers would compare assembly and disassembly times recorded in the space test with results found in the neutral buoyancy tank. However, MSFC's Ed Valentine, experiment manager, noted, "We'd like to be able to measure a human's productivity in space scientifically, and we're not really sure if time measurements are all that are needed to guage that, so we'll be examining other possible criteria to use in the future." A Langley Research Center structural assembly experiment would accompany the MSFC experiment. (MSFC Release 85-3) During April: NASA announced it awarded to Howard University's School of Engineering Large Space Structure Institute (LSSI), Washington, D.C., an ongoing grant expected to total $1.9 million to develop theoretical knowledge supporting the design and construction of very large space systems. NASA expected the knowledge to make a significant contribution to the establishment of large space stations and space settlements. The LSSI research project would help demonstrate the practical benefits of U.S. space capabilities, including construction of a solar power satellite that would convert the sun's energy into electricity for transmission back to earth and construction of large platforms that would allow scientists to observe the earth for improved understanding of the weather and the ground water table. The LSSI team would consist of Dr. Taft Broome, chief project investigator and chairman of the Department of Civil Engineering, and other Howard University faculty members; and one faculty member each from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge University, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Graduate students from the latter institutions would also participate. NASA was primarily interested in LSSI doing the concept development and the research and demonstration analysis. Once Broome and his team provided the agency with the needed data, NASA could turn the project over to private industry for implementation. (NASA Activities, Apr 85, 8) Launch Vehicles
The Coca-Cola Co. had developed the first container capable of dispensing carbonated beverages in weightlessness, and NASA officials said Coca-Cola could be aboard Space Shuttle flights as early as July, the Washington Post reported. Coca-Cola President Donald Keough said that including carbonated soft drinks on a Space Shuttle flight reflected NASA's interest in providing home-like comforts for the astronauts. Because liquids did not pour in weightlessness, astronauts had to sip drinks from straws inserted into plastic containers that collapsed as they were emptied. However, gas in carbonated drinks expanded in weightlessness and low atmospheric pressure and therefore could escape from plastic containers. A company spokesman said Coca-Cola had solved the problem with a steel supercan equipped with a drinking spout, a screw to adjust beverage flow, and a safety lock to prevent leaks. (WPost, May 9/85, A8)
NASA launched today at 2:50 p.m. EST the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-C with its five-man military crew to carry out secret military objectives, the NY Times reported. NASA, which had delayed launch due to subfreezing temperatures [see STS/Launch Schedules, Jan. 23], did not announce liftoff time until nine minutes before launch. One and a half hours after launch, Houston Mission Control reported the Space Shuttle had reached its intended orbit, the altitude and position of which were secret. How long the astronauts would remain in orbit was unknown; although most Space Shuttle flights lasted five to eight days, the apparent Discovery mission to launch a single satellite might limit it to three or four days. Discovery carried a 32,000-lb. propulsion, inertial upper stage capable of boosting a large satellite to 22,300 miles above the equator south of the USSR. This was the first test of the rocket system since a predecessor had misfired on a Space Shuttle mission in April 1983. Many newspapers had already published reports, based on information in the aerospace trade press and other unclassified documents, that the secret payload was an electronic spy satellite. Both the U.S. and USSR had engaged in electronic eavesdropping from orbit for several years, and the USSR had obtained many of the plans and engineering information for the earlier U.S. electronic reconnaissance satellite Rhyolite. The Carter administration had cancelled an advanced version of Rhyolite, the Argus, but the Reagan administration had revived the project. Most reports described the Discovery's payload as the most advanced and sensitive form of orbital electronic spying. The Air Force began an investigation to find the officials or contractor employees who had provided information about the secret payload aboard Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Inquiries were not aimed at news organizations, Michael Burch, a Department of Defense (DOD) spokesman, had said. When questioned about a photo of an early-warning satellite published on the cover of Aviation Week, Burch said the picture should not have appeared. However, the Pentagon later acknowledged that the Air Force had given the photo to the magazine after determining it was unclassified. Burch refused to say what action the government would take if it could identify those who leaked information on the Space Shuttle mission. Brig. Gen. Richard Abel had previously warned reporters not to speculate about the Space Shuttle's cargo. After the Washington Post had reported it was an intelligence satellite intended to eavesdrop on the USSR, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the story might have given "aid and comfort to the enemy." Abel later had told a Univ. of Georgia journalism class that little or nothing in the Post story was not available from public sources. Aviation Week's January 21 issue had described the Pentagon's next generation of early-warning surveillance satellites, which would monitor missile and spacecraft launches from Soviet territory and be protected against Soviet laser weapons. {NYT, Jan 25/85, A1; W Post, Jan 25/85, A3)
NASA announced that John Young would command Space Shuttle flight 61-J scheduled for launch August 1986, Vance Brand mission 61-K scheduled for September 1986, and Donald Williams mission 61—I. Other crew for the 61-J mission, during which astronauts would deploy the Hubble Space Telescope, were pilot Charles Bolden Jr. and previously named mission specialists Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce Mc-Candless. S. David Griggs would pilot mission 61—K, and other crew would be mission specialists Robert Steward, Owen Garriott, and European Space Agency astronaut Claude Nicollier. NASA previously assigned payload specialists Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg to the mission. Remaining mission 61-1 crew would be pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists James Bagian, Bonnie Dunbar and Manley "Sonny" Carter. NASA also announced that Norman Thagard would replace John Fabian on mission 61-G scheduled for May 1986 during which crew would deploy the Galileo interplanetary spacecraft. Fabian was leaving NASA; he had not announced his plans. James Buchli would replace Thagard on mission 61-H in June 1986. (NASA Release 85-131)
A sophomore at Purdue University and a senior at San Francisco's Lowell High School designed experiments to be carried on two 1986 Space Shuttle Flights, the Washington Post reported. Kentucky Fried Chicken would sponsor an experiment in which eggs would fly in orbit to determine whether chicken embryos could survive the rigors of weightlessness. The Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory at the University of California would sponsor an experiment to measure the effects of weightlessness on cell division in yeast. Greg Delory, 16, said he got the idea for flying baker's yeast from the first Spacelab mission where bread mold was grown in orbit. "The mold was supposed to produce spores every 22 hours, but in space it lost its circadian rhythm and produced spores all the time," he said. Delory won a competition to design a Space Shuttle experiment while attending the U.S. Space Camp under the auspices of Marshall Space Flight Center. John Vellinger, 20, who won a competition to design a NASA experiment, said, "We hope this will give us some data about the feasibility of raising chickens as a food source in space." (WPost, Aug 15/85, A19)
measure galactic and extragalactic contributions to the diffuse ultraviolet background radiation, and develop and demonstrate an advanced Get Away Special carrier system capable of providing data and power services to Space Shuttle attached sounding rocket class instruments (GSFC);
Astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today completed repair of the Leasat 1 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Steven Dorfman, president of Hughes Communications Corp., satellite owner, referred to the effort as the "most remarkable salvage mission" tried in space. During the second day of the salvage mission [see Satellites, Aug. 31], astronaut John Lounge, using the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm, raised the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay and placed its center of gravity on a straight line with that of the orbiter Discovery. Outside, van Hoften stepped into foot restraints on the end of the arm, and Lounge lifted him to the satellite. Reaching up, van Hoften placed gloved hands on the bar he had earlier attached to the satellite and pushed down as hard as he could to start the satellite spinning. Three more pushes sent the satellite spinning evenly into space over the equator near the west coast of South America where officials planned to operate it as a Navy radio relay. Although Hughes was still concerned that very cold temperatures might have permanently damaged the satellite, it did beam to earth its first signals since deployment on April 13. The signals indicated that temperatures in the satellite's outer shell were normal, suggesting that the inner drum holding the two onboard rocket engines and more than 7,500 lb. of rocket fuel might have survived the varying temperatures of space and be ready to carry the satellite into permanent position 22,300 miles above earth. (IV Post, Sept 2/ 85, A3)
The White House announced that it had sent Congress a new Space Shuttle pricing policy that entailed, starting October 1, 1988, auctioning the Space Shuttle's cargo bay to commercial and foreign customers at a minimum rate of $74 million for a full bay, the Washington Times reported. This meant that owners of three satellites could share a mission and pay NASA a little less than $25 million apiece or about $1 million more than they presently paid for Space Shuttle launches. However, if demand for shuttle space exceeded its availability, the auction system would drive prices upward. Europe's Arianespace SA charged $25 million for a launch. President Reagan, who earlier had suggested that space should be open to private enterprise and that the Space Shuttle might be turned over to industry, directed NASA under the new policy to establish auction procedures "to ensure maximum return to the government and equitable treatment for all potential launch customers." The President also told NASA to review annually Space Shuttle costs and the effectiveness of its pricing policies and report its findings and recommendations to the president's national security adviser and the director of the Office of Management and Budget. The new policy represented a victory for NASA and defeat for the Transportation Department and Secretary Elizabeth Hanford Dole, who had argued for a full-bay price no lower than $129 million in order to encourage private industry to get into the launch vehicle business on its own, the Washington Post reported. Two companies wanted to compete with NASA and Arianespace. General Dynamics signed a letter of intent with NASA to use the Atlas-Centaur rocket, and Transpace Carriers Inc. signed a similar letter to use the Delta rocket to launch satellites. Both companies said they could not compete with a Space Shuttle price of less than $40 million to send up a single satellite. The Transportation Department argued for a higher Space Shuttle launch price to improve private industry's bargaining power. But NASA said a higher charge would send customers to Arianespace, which had booked more than a third of the world's future commercial satellite launch traffic. (W Times, Aug 2/85, 10C; W Post, Aug 7/85, A3)
NASA announced plans for a March 4, 1985, Space Shuttle 51-E launch from KSC, with a landing at KSC on March 8. NASA based its launch decision on flight readiness-review results. The completion of cargo integration and orbiter-systems testing necessitated additional time in the schedule. The current 51—E launch date would not change the planned launch of STS mission 51-D, which was planned for no earlier than March 19, to retrieve the Long-Duration Exposure Facility and to launch the Navy Syncom satellite. (NASA Release 85-27)
In response to numerous comments regarding the appropriateness of Sen. Jake Gam's (R-Utah) flight on the Space Shuttle, Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) wrote in a letter to the Washington Times that Garn had as good a background in aviation as any member of Congress and his was a long, deep, and sincere interest. "Of all the members of this body that I know, he is the least motivated by any desire for publicity. "Why is it wrong for a member of Congress, the body that is responsible for authorizing and funding the whole space program, to engage in flight if for no other reason than to get a better idea of how the whole operation works?" Sen. Goldwater concluded that he would defend the desirability of Sen. Garn's flight, as he would be able "to give the rest of us in Congress who vote the money a better idea of how the whole operation is going." (W Times, Mar 20/85, 7A)
NASA Administrator James Beggs and U.R. Rao, chairman of the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), signed a launch services agreement covering the reimbursable launch of INSAT 1C around mid-1986 from the Space Shuttle, the Marshall Star reported. A multipurpose satellite, INSAT 1C would provide communications and meteorological services to India. In addition, the two agreed that an ISRO scientist/engineer would serve as a payload specialist during that Space Shuttle mission and discussed other possible NASA/ISRO cooperative activities in space applications and space science. (Marshall Star, Jan 23/85, 4)
The information gathered by several Space Shuttle missions underscored the need for improved weather forecasting at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA along with the U.S. Air Force developed a plan to improve the quality of weather data available at KSC as well as the manner in which it was presented to the forecaster, Spaceport News reported. KSC officials recently held a ribbon cutting ceremony at the Range Control Center on Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to inaugurate the new Cape Canaveral Forecast Facility (CCFF), marking completion of a $3 million three-year effort by NASA, the Air Force, and contractor Pan Am World Services. The facility was the first important tool for improving the efficiency of the weather forecaster during launches and landings of the Space Shuttle. The facility housed a system called MIDDS, meteorological interactive data display system, which animated and overlaid data from various forecasting tools in color graphic displays. For example, a forecaster could begin with display of a current satellite picture; over that he could place a color enhanced radar display of shower activity. Next he might add a graphic presentation of indications from wind towers around KSC; and over that he could display locations of lightning potential as well as where lightning was striking cloud-to-ground. Motion added to the entire composite picture would illustrate trends in weather activity over a period of time. The system could overlay maps of upper wind data or barometric pressures collected from weather balloons or sounding rockets. The forecaster could also display figures from the data network of other weather stations around the country or the world. Although the console was at the Cape Canaveral facility, the new rotating antenna was at Patrick Air Force Base to compensate for the blind spot directly above the radar. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration radar located in Dayton Beach supplemented the Cape radar. A forecaster could call up a current graphic display of any official weather radar in the U.S. A lightning location and protection (LLP) system would show cloud-to-ground strikes up to 100 miles away, from which antennas were located ten miles north of the vehicle assembly building and at Melbourne Regional and Orlando International Airports. These antennas supplemented an existing network of 30 area field mills that detected lightning potential. NASA officials hoped within five years to have at the facility a clear air doppler radar, of which there were only six in the country. It would reduce the number of wind towers needed and improve forecasting efficiency. In the meantime, Space Shuttle weather officer Scott Funk said, "We haven't tapped the full potential of the new MIDDS system. Most weather forecasters have never seen anything like this. But there are still a number of potential capabilities the system has which we will add next year." (Spaceport News, Oct 11/ 85, 7)
NASA announced it would test on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, scheduled for mid-July 1985, a Coca Cola Co. technology, developed at its own initiative and expense, to dispense its carbonated beverage in space [see NASA/Technology Transfer, May 9]. Previously it was impossible for astronauts to consume carbonated soft drinks in microgravity because there was no way to dispense the beverages. The test was part of an agreement between NASA and Coca-Cola under which the company would grant NASA a license to use the company's patented technology, a specially designed can, for unrestricted use in dispensing carbonated beverages in space. NASA would also receive the technical information necessary to fabricate its own cans. NASA added that other companies in the carbonated beverage industry were welcome to propose different technology for the same purpose. (NASA Release 85-96)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced a NASA source selection board was evaluating proposals from the industry teams of Boeing Aerospace Co. and Wornick Corp.; General Electric, Northrop, and Integrated Systems Analysts; and Hamilton Standard, ILC, and RCA for a single Flight Equipment Processing contract (FEPC) that would consolidate work being done by 15 firms. NASA planned by the end of October to award an initial three-year contract with a two-year priced option extension. The contract would be cost-plus-award-fee for the first six months; cost-plus-incentive-fee, plus an award fee, for the remainder of the term. Estimated contract value at the end of 15 years was $300 million. The contract would cover processing Space Shuttle flight crew equipment, including operation and maintenance of associated ground systems, primarily at JSC. The winning contractor would be responsible for space suit maintenance and testing before and after flights; failure analysis and repair of spaceship galleys; operation of the space food production facility; preparation and delivery of food for each mission; medications and equipment for medical kits; clothing, personal hygiene and flight kits; tools; radio and TV support; and all film and cameras. The award would be the second large consolidation contract let in 1985 at JSC; on September 12 Rockwell International won the Space Transportation System Operations Contract to consolidate JSC Space Shuttle operations. (JSC Release 85-038)
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched January 25, 1983, worked almost perfectly for 300 days until it depleted its liquid helium coolant and that it had achieved mission objectives, which were to produce an unbiased all-sky survey using a number of broad infrared photometry channels, to study selected galactic and extragalactic sources, and to map extended sources. For infrared astronomy, IRAS represented as great an improvement over ground-based telescopes as the Palomar 200-in. telescope had over Galileo's telescope. Because fewer than 1,000 infrared sources were cataloged before the IRAS launch, the sensitivity of IRAS produced a survey of a large unexplored area in the electromagnetic spectrum. The IRAS All-Sky Survey catalog contained about 250,000 sources, including some 20,000 new galaxies and 16,000 small extended sources. IRAS surveyed more than 96% of the sky, 16% more than was required for mission success. Information in the IRAS databased revolutionized the infrared study of the sky and provided a rich data source to observers in other wavebands. The IRAS program resulted from a cooperative effort among the U.S., The Netherlands, and the United Kingdom in the areas of operations, spacecraft design, infrared technology, and scientific collaboration. During the next four years, scientists would continue to examine and analyze the more than 200 billion data bits in the IRAS database and, by developing specialized processing techniques, possibly increase the sensitivity of the survey. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [postlaunch] Oct 28/85) During October: NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSRC) awarded a 14-month $140,000 contract to Perkin-Elmer Corp. to study concepts and technologies needed fora next generation telescope with ten times the capability of the Hubble Space Telescope. This study, the first step toward preparing to launch a space telescope array in the first decade of the next century, would define a technology development plan for the array and provide NASA with cost and schedule data. Perkin-Elmer would initially examine the probable science such a telescope would perform as well as the concept of an array of telescopes working together as one. Perkin-Elmer said it would develop two telescope concepts based on the best use of the proposed space station and technology advancements needed to implement them. The first would emphasize assembly and optical alignment in orbit using the space station as an assembly base. The second concept would focus on modularization, ground assembly and checkout, and minimal on-orbit assembly. The study would also explore the possibilities of adapting, for visible light purposes, interferometer techniques used by radio astronomers to obtain high-resolution maps of deep space objects. In addition, Perkin-Elmer would define and recommend technologies needed for maximum use of the space station for assembling, testing, and servicing the next generation facility for optical astronomy. Perkin-Elmer built the Hubble Space Telescope scheduled for launch August 1986 on Space Shuttle flight 61-J. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 14)
NASA announced today that an American journalist would fly on a Space Shuttle mission in late 1986 as the second in a series of communicators to be selected as part of the agency's Space Flight Participant Program. The first candidate selected under this program was Christa McAuliffe, a classroom teacher scheduled to fly in January 1986. In today's announcement NASA said it would select the journalist, like the teacher candidate, after a nationwide competition conducted by professionals representing a broad spectrum of individuals in the candidates' field. The competition would be limited to full-time working media representatives (U.S. citizens) with five or more years' experience covering or commenting on the news for U.S.-based audio, video, or print media. Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly and effectively to mass audiences in both broadcast and print media would be the basis for evaluation of applications, although it was not necessary for the candidate to have worked professionally in both. The selection process would first require identification of eight candidates from each of five regions in the U.S.; from the 40 regional nominees, a National Selection Panel would recommend five for final consideration by the NASA Space Flight Participant Evaluation Committee composed of seven senior NASA officials. The five semifinalists would undergo medical examinations and receive briefings on the spaceflight experience at the Johnson Space Center. Based on results of the physicals and subsequent interviews, the evaluation committee would recommend a primary and backup candidate to the NASA Administrator who would approve the final selection. The Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communication in cooperation with the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication and a Journalism Advisory Committee comprised of representatives from 16 professional journalism organizations including the American Newspaper Publishers Association, Radio Television News Directors Association, American Society of Newspaper Editors, National Association of Broadcasters, Society of Professional Journalists/Sigma Delta Chi, and the National Newspaper Association would administer the competition. (NASA Release 85-147)
NASA announced cancellation of the March 7 Space Shuttle Challenger flight due to problems associated with the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B). NASA officials determined that, in addition to repairing the previously announced problem with one cell of the TDRS's 24-cell flight battery, it was necessary to remove the TDRS-B from the Challenger cargo bay in order to repair a timing problem that became apparent during testing of the TDRS-1 then in orbit. Under certain operational conditions, the timing circuits could cause errors in the system switching sequences, interrupting user support. Tests run February 27 and 28 at spacecraft contractor facilities confirmed the problem. Although NASA and its contractors had developed procedures to operate the TDRS-1, these procedures were not acceptable for multiple spacecraft operations, requiring modifications for TDRS-B and subsequent spacecraft. Because the TDRS spacecraft had encryption devices to protect the system from interfering signals, NASA could not provide further technical detail on the problem. NASA expected a delay of several weeks for modifications, at which time it would remanifest TDRS-B. NASA would place the Anik-C (Telesat-I) satellite scheduled for the STS 51—E mission on the Discovery STS 51-D mission and delay retrieval of the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) from the 51-D mission to a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 85-31)
A dispute over application of U.S. laws to foreign companies apparently killed a joint U.S.-W. German project to commercialize remote sensing-equipment data and could affect negotiations over European participation in the planned U.S. space station, Science magazine reported. The joint project, known as SPARX, was to finance regular flights on the Space Shuttle of the modular optoelectronic multispectral scanner, an instrument developed by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB) under contract with the German Aerospace Research Establishment. NASA said proposals received from SPARX were unacceptable, because data would be available solely on a proprietary basis to SPARX's commercial customers, conflicting with NASA's "open skies" policy mandating nondiscriminatory access to all data obtained from U.S.-launched civilian missions. NASA and MBB were continuing discussions on the possibility of a separate venture using the German equipment that would respect licensing conditions applied to U.S. companies under the Land Remote Sensing Commercialization Act. Some members of the European space science community—particularly those with reservations about tying Europe's fortunes too closely to those of NASA's proposed space station—were using the apparent conflict as evidence of their concerns, the Science article said. The scientists noted the extent to which the regulations and other provisions contained in the legislation's licensing requirements—such as those requiring licensees to deposit any data obtained in a single central archive—would apply to foreign companies becoming NASA's commercial customers. The dilemma hinged on the conflict between companies based outside the U.S. resenting being subject to legislation over which they had no formal control and Congress and U.S.-based companies that would complain if they saw foreign companies getting an advantage by not having to meet domestic-licensing requirements. Udo Pollvogt of MBB's Washington office said the issues raised by SPARX "definitely need to be resolved over the next two years" as Europeans considered whether participation in the space station would make them unacceptably liable to U.S.-domestic laws. (Science, Feb 8/85, 617)
Christa McAuliffe, first teacher as well as private citizen to fly onboard the Space Shuttle, and backup Barbara Morgan arrived September 9 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) to begin their training program, the JSC Roundup reported. Reporters, photographers, and TV crews accompanied the two as they arrived at building 100 to receive their identification badges. Mission commander Francis "Dick" Scobee that afternoon welcomed McAuliffe and Morgan at a meeting with the crew of mission 51 -L, scheduled for launch in January 1986. Other 51 —L crew members were pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, and Judith Resnik. JSC personnel the next day measured them for flight suits, helmets, and G-suits. McAuliffe said she would be allowed to select either a jumpsuit or a standard flight suit to take home with her following her flight. After a food tasting and rating session, in which food lab manager Dr. Charles Bourland asked McAuliffe and Morgan to taste about 40 food and drink items and rate them on a scale of 1 to 9, both teachers commented on their surprise in finding space food so flavorful. They would have several more opportunities for taste tests before McAuliffe selected her flight menu. Other first-week activities included orientation briefings by management and training officials and familiarization tours of training facilities and mission control. Asked by a reporter how drastically her life had changed since her selection, McAuliffe said that other than having the opportunity to fly onboard the Space Shuttle and the accompanying publicity she didn't perceive that much difference. She pointed out that as a teacher for a long time she had to gather material and present information to students daily. "As I see it, I'm doing basically the same things, only my audience has changed." (JSC Roundup, Sept. 27/85, 7)
John Townsend, corporate vice president and president of Fairchild Space Co., said in a January 16 speech to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics' (AIAA) National Capital Section that those planning commercial space ventures must monitor the uncertainty of NASA's Space Shuttle manifest and orbiter fleet's long-term availability, Aerospace Daily reported. "The manifest is at risk," he said and cited difficulties NASA had in "remanifesting" resulting from the orbiter Challenger's thermal-protection tile-adhesion problems. NASA had cut back its planned 13 missions to 12 in 1985, and Townsend expressed concern over the potential problems of a 4-orbiter fleet that could be exacerbated by an accident. Townsend also expressed concern over the Space Shuttle pricing policy, noting NASA's recommendation of a 22% price increase in Space Shuttle flights from $71 million (1982 dollars) per flight to $87 million, and concluding that NASA's "expendable launch vehicle people have Ariane to face." (A/ D, Jan 17/85, 90)
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)
19 a.m. today a three-stage, Taurus-Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket that left several colored clouds high over the mid-eastern U.S. coastline. The objective of the experiment was to provide baseline data on expected yields, vapor expansion velocities, and other parameters for the chemical release canisters for the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES), scheduled for launch in July 1987 from the Space Shuttle. The 157-lb. payload ejected balls of greenish-white titanium-boron-barium and barium-cupric-oxide at an altitude of 230 statute miles, one as the rocket ascended and one as the payload descended. The barium clouds rapidly expanded, while ejecting barium ions along the earth's magnetic field to form a visible streak more than 62 miles long. Another red titaniumboronlithium cloud released at 325 miles expanded to a diameter of several hundred kilometers in less than a minute. Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Range Control Center received reports of cloud sightings from as far north as Waterville, Maine, as far south as Wilmington, North Carolina, and as far west as South Bend, Indiana. (NASA Release 85-148; GSFC Release 85-39) Upper Atmospheric Research
NASA announced it awarded a $145.8 million contract to General Electric Co.'s Valley Forge Space Center, Philadelphia for development of the upper atmosphere research satellite (UARS) observatory. Scheduled for October 1989 deployment from the Space Shuttle, the satellite would carry 10 scientific instruments into a 373-mile circular orbit. Valley Forge Center would design the observatory system, design and fabricate an instrument module compatible with the NASA standard multimission modular spacecraft (MMS), integrate the instrument module with the MMS and flight instruments, test the observatory system, integrate the observatory into the Space Shuttle, and support postlaunch flight operations. The UARS, with its remote sensing instruments providing essentially global coverage, would for the first time generate data for understanding the composition and dynamics of the upper atmosphere, important to solving many questions about the earth's weather and climate. For example, the observatory would provide previously unavailable data on the nature of natural and human effects on earth's ozone layer. GSFC would provide UARS project management for NASA's office of space science and applications. (NASA Release 85-32)
NASA announced that an eight-member review team at Goddard Space Flight Center concluded that the failure of the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) to deploy from its canister during the April 1985 Space Shuttle 51-B mission was due to the failure of two switches designed to activate bolt cutters on the canister. On June 7 the team would issue a final report along with recommendations for a solution to the problem. The Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) along with GLOMR would be the first satellites successfully deployed from canisters aboard the Space Shuttle. The door of the GLOMR canister opened, indicating normal battery operation, but the bolt cutters would not activate. After a second deployment attempt, NASA decided to return GLOMR to earth for evaluation. (NASA Release 8585)
Already far ahead of their work schedule, astronauts aboard Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 began preparing tools they would use in an attempt to revive the U.S. Navy Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Mission planners had hoped the satellite repairs could be made during an August 30 spacewalk, but they added another spacewalk for August 31 because ground tests showed that the Space Shuttle crippled robot arm could not work fast enough to complete the repair job in one day. "It appears we are faced with a two-EVA (extravehicular activity) plan," flight director Bill Reeves said. He blamed a failed circuit that prevented Discovery's robot arm from operating in an automatic mode. Reeves noted that ground tests showed that the robot arm, when operated manually, would need about 75% more time to maneuver the Syncom 3 satellite and that it would take two 6-and-a-half hour spacewalks to complete the repair. Mission specialists Dr. James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher spent about four hours August 28 checking out electronic gear they would use to repair the satellite. Mission specialist John Lounge would work the robot arm from inside the cockpit, while van Hoften and Fisher worked outside on the satellite. The robot arm would play a crucial role, holding van Hoften in place while he worked on the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay. Lounge would also use the robot arm to help van Hoften turn the satellite so Fisher, standing in foot restraints inside the bay, could remove a panel and disengage a timing lever, then plug two electrical cables into the panel and, in effect, jump start the satellite. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A3)
Under the agreement, NASA would provide ITA with two Space Shuttle flights to obtain data and validate the ISEM design. NASA had scheduled for late 1987 the first ISEM test that would carry a payload for the Bioprocessing and Pharmaceutical Center of the Philadelphia University City Science Center. ITA would design the ISEM to be compatible with the proposed space station with the idea that initial users of the module would progress to larger and more sophisticated payloads to fly in the future aboard the station. (NASA Release 85-94)
NASA announced that the Department of Defense (DOD) had agreed that Space Shuttle mission 51-C, scheduled for launch January 23, 1985, from KSC, would carry the Australian aggregation of red blood cells [see Jan. 14] and shuttle storable fluid management demonstration (SFMD) experiments. NASA had scheduled both for previous missions, but withdrawn them due to orbiter-weight and center-of-gravity considerations. The SFMD, a joint NASA-Martin Marietta Aerospace/U.S. Air Force experiment, would test how weightless fluids behaved in transit from one tank to another to demonstrate the transfer of fluids planned for servicing and maintaining spacecraft in orbit. Space Shuttle crew would manually operate the experiment, consisting of 13-in.-diameter clear acrylic supply and receiving tanks, with a series of valves in which pressurized air would force fluid to and from transparent tanks, a video tape recorder and 35mm still camera photographing the operation and an accelerometer measuring any motion caused by the orbiter that affected the experiment. (NASA Release 85-10)
NASA announced the astronaut crews for two upcoming Department of Defense (DOD) Space Shuttle missions, including the 1st from Vandenberg AFB. Robert Crippen (Capt., USN) would command mission 62-A, scheduled for launch no earlier than Jan. 29, 1986, from Vandenberg. Other crew members named were Guy Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), pilot; and mission specialists Dale Gardner (Commander, USN), Jerry Ross (Maj., USAF), and R. Michael Mullane (Lt. Col., USAF). Crippen had flown with John Young on the orbiter Columbia's maiden flight in April 1981 and was commander of STS-7, 41-C, and 41-G. Dale Gardner had served as a mission specialist on STS-8 and 51-A; Mullane on 41-D. Karol Bobko (Col., USAF) would command mission 51-J, scheduled for launch September 1985 from KSC. Ronald Grabe (Lt. Col., USAF) would serve as pilot; David Hilmers (Maj., USMC) and Robert Stewart (Col., USA) as mission specialists. Bobko had served as pilot on STS-6 and would command 51-E scheduled for launch in March; Stewart had flown as mission specialist on 41-B and had been the 2nd person to fly the manned maneuvering unit on that flight. (NASA Release 85-25)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced today that the Space Shuttle Atlantis would take off October 3 on its maiden voyage to carry a secret payload into orbit, the Washington Post reported. On board Atlantis, the fourth and final Space Shuttle in NASA's fleet, would be commander Karol Bobko, pilot Ronald Grabe, mission specialists David Hilmers and Robert Stewart, and payload specialist Air Force Maj. William Pailes. Pailes, who has a master's degree in computer science and is an accomplished pilot, would be on board to tend the classified cargo. (WPost, Sept 6/ 85, A12)
The U.S. Senate passed by voice vote H.R. 1714, the NASA Authorization Bill for FY 86, NASA's Legislative Activities Report noted. As passed, the bill embraced the concept of a budget freeze at the FY 85 level of $7,510 billion; however, it also provided for three specific augmentations that totalled $142 million, accounting for a FY 86 growth of 1.9%. Among the authorizations for research and development were $200,000,000 for the space station, $477,200,000 for space transportation capability development, and $608,400,000 for physics and astronomy. Spaceflight, control, and data communications authorizations included $941,500,000 for Space Shuttle production and operational capability; $1,700,100,000 for space transportation operations; and $745,300,000 for space and ground network, communications, and data systems. Among the authorizations for space transportation facilities were $14,000,000 for construction of an orbiter modification and refurbishment facility at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), $3,600,000 for construction of a thermal protection system facility at KSC, and $6,500,000 for modification of enhanced life support systems testing at Marshall Space Flight Center. (NASA Legislative Activities Report, June 27/85, 1)
The Syncom II communications satellite lost one of its 13 channels, described as an important wide-band channel, and efforts were underway to reactivate it, Defense Daily reported. The U.S. Navy leased the satellite from Hughes Communications Inc., which was under contract to provide four such Leasats to the Navy. NASA in September 1984 launched Syncom I and II from the Space Shuttle and launched in April from the Space Shuttle Syncom III, which failed to fire in orbit. The Space Shuttle crew in July repaired Syncom III, with a reboost attempt scheduled for October. NASA launched in July from the Space Shuttle Syncom IV, but its communications failed in orbit. (D/D, Oct 3/85, 174)
After spending 18 months at the factory in Palmsdale, California, Columbia, the flagship of the Space Shuttle fleet, returned for operational duty to Kennedy Space Center (KSC), the JSC Roundup reported. Columbia had undergone hundreds of modifications to reconfigure the ship from a developmental flight vehicle to a fully operational orbiter. Columbia flew the first five Space Shuttle missions, and NASA modified the spacecraft at KSC for the October 1983 STS-9 Spacelab 1 flight. Following its return to KSC and removal of the Spacelab 1 payload, NASA in late January 1984 ferried Columbia to California atop the 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft. Rockwell International performed five major modifications to the orbiter during its stay at the orbiter production plant. Structural modifications to the wings and midfuselage included strengthening of lower wing surfaces and installation of heavier straps across the orbiter's belly. Rockwell added a heads-up display to the forward flight deck to allow the Space Shuttle commander and pilot to view critical flight information on a see-through panel while they looked through the forward cockpit windows. Production workers removed the commander and pilot ejection seats, which were installed on Columbia for the initial development Space Shuttle flights, and replaced them with standard seats. Overhead blowout panels were also removed. Rockwell modified two orbital maneuvering system pods to make them compatible with the other orbiters in the fleet and replaced the thermal protection tiles on the pods with the advanced reusable surface insulation blankets. Production personnel also installed supplemental instrumentation to gather developmental engineering data. In addition, workers removed and replaced approximately 5000 high-temperature tiles from the orbiter's underside, because engineering analysis indicated several areas where greater heat protection was needed. About half of the wing leading edge panel assemblies was removed and modified to strengthen the supporting structure of the reinforced carbon-carbon panels, an infrared imaging device was installed on the vertical stabilizer to provide a temperature profile of the upper wing surfaces during reentry, and instrumentation was added to the nose cap to provide improved entry air data. During the trip from California to KSC atop the 747 shuttle transport, rain damaged more than 1,000 of its head shield tiles, the Washington Post reported. NASA said that between 200 and 300 of the tiles required replacement. Damaged areas were around the windows and on the forward facing tiles. According to NASA policy, Space Shuttle transports were forbidden to fly through visible rain. However, the shower did not appear on ground radar or on the 747's onboard radar system. NASA had scheduled Columbia to fly next in December on mission 61-C. (JSC Roundup, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 19/85, A17)
The successful landing test on October 30 of a new nose-wheel steering system on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A meant that the orbiter Columbia would resume Space Shuttle landings on the concrete runway at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) when it returned following mission 61-C, the Washington Post reported. All Space Shuttle landings since April had been at Edwards Air Force Base, where the long desert runways allowed pilots to roll to a stop without excessive brake use. At KSC crosswinds tended to push the orbiter toward the edges of the narrow runway after the spacecraft touched down, which pilots countered by making "preferential" use of brake assemblies on the landing gear under the Space Shuttle's wings. By braking on one side or the other, pilots kept the orbiter on the runway. But a landing in April shredded three of the orbiter's tires and burned out a brake assembly. NASA built the new nosewheel steering mechanism into the orbiter so the pilot could steer the spacecraft without using his brakes. Challenger Commander Henry Hartsfield said after the Challenger landing that he was "very pleased" with the assembly, but recommended one more test on the concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. (W Post, Nov 22/85, A21)
Planetary scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory outlined plans for two future $400 million missions, one of which NASA would select for funding, the Washington Post reported. One mission entailed a spacecraft that in September 1991 would fly by the asteroid Hedwig and rendezvous in 1995 with Comet Wild 2. The other called for a spacecraft in 1995 to pass by the asteroid Freia and rendezvous in 1996 with Comet Tempel 2. JPL scientists preferred the Hedwig and Wild 2 mission, in part because Wild 2 was a newer and brighter comet than Tempel 2. Plans for that mission called for a March 1991 spacecraft launch from the Space Shuttle with an ultimate encounter January 8, 1995, with Wild 2, when the comet was at the far end of its orbit 465 million miles from earth. Scientists would program the spacecraft to match the comet's speed as it turned in toward the sun, which would then draw the comet and spacecraft toward it at the same speed for the next 850 days while the spacecraft's instruments measured the comet. (W Post, Sept 31/85, A23)
NASA announced it had delayed for at least a week the February 20 Space Shuttle flight that would carry Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), because of thermal tiles problems and a backlog of paperwork, the Washington Post reported. A chemical reaction in the thermal tiles' adhesive on the orbiter Challenger's underside had caused about 4,000 of the more than 30,000 tiles to loosen during return to earth on the orbiter's last flight. Although NASA had replaced all but 47 of the faulty tiles, it had not certified the repair work. (W Post, Feb 6/85, A12)
After 16 Space Shuttle flights, NASA believed it had solved the spacecraft's commode problems, as reports of the last two missions indicated the improved waste-disposal system performed perfectly, the Washington Post reported. A $12 million-GE design had transformed the commode from a multipronged, motor-drive blender, which had fogged the Space Shuttle's air with particles of noxious dust or frozen liquid, to a device using a blast of air from a fan to carry waste into the toilet bowl; by pressing a lever, the user closed the commode top and opened a valve in the side of the Space Shuttle, where the waste was frozen and dried by the cold and vacuum of space. A tube collected urine and directed it to a holding tank for later overboard disposal. (W Post, Feb 11/85, A5)
Researchers in the Workload and Ergonomics Branch of the Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory were working to adapt machines to pilots rather than the traditional other way around, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "The success or failure of a modern Air Force aircraft and mission depends on whether the pilot has the ability to handle the unpredictable situations typical in a wartime environment," said Maris Vikmanis, supervisory industrial engineer for the lab. He explained that laboratory researchers studied how pilots performed in different environments, including combat, to provide information to aircraft designers so that future aircraft would be better adapted to pilots. But he pointed out there was more to it than simply assessing new aircrafts' cockpit designs. "Not only do we have to observe how the pilot performs in the aircraft cockpit, we also have to tap into the pilot himself," Vikmanis explained. "We must know how much effort the pilot is expending, his mental capability, and his workload limitation." In analyzing cockpit design, researchers checked into how well a pilot could see and reach cockpit controls and displays. Only in existence as an aerospace research field since 1979, workload research measured both the pilot's performance and his internal state of wellbeing. By combining experiments in the laboratory and in flight, lab researchers measured human performance/workload using three different methods. First, researchers used a computer-based performance test to measure a pilot's physical and mental action. By having the pilot perform up to 11 different tasks, researchers could characterize various aspects of human behavior. Second, pilots answered, after flying a simulator or an actual aircraft, subjective questions about their experience. A third method measured human performance/workload from a physiological viewpoint by collecting and analyzing variable responses of the human brain, heart, muscles, and visual system. Lab scientists and engineers used the test data to prepare a workload scale, which focused on problems the pilot, aircrew, and the aircraft itself might encounter in the future. NASA was applying similar methodology to the Space Shuttle and its crew, particularly to examine the effects on astronauts of microgravity as an element of stress. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 7)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
Americans on board were commander Henry Hartsfield, Jr.; Air Force Lt. Col. Steven Nagel, pilot; and mission specialists Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, a biomedical engineer, Marine Corps Col. James Buchli, and Air Force Col. Guion Bluford, Jr., who had a doctorate in aerospace engineering. The two West Germans in the crew were Dr. Ernst Messerschmid and Mr. Reinhard Furrer, both physicists. The eighth crew member, Dr. Wubbo Ockels, a physicist from the Netherlands, represented the European Space Agency (ESA), which provided several scientific instruments in the Spacelab. The Europeans had prime responsibility for conducting the experiments; Bluford and Dunbar would assist them. Spacelab D-1, designed, built, and checked out in Europe, was flown to KSC for installation in Challenger's cargo bay. The V\fest German space agency's center in Oberphaffenhofen, near Munich, controlled scientific operations during the flight; ground control for flying the Space Shuttle was in Houston, as usual. Spacelab D-1 carried 76 experiments on racks that lined its walls. German researchers designed most of the experiments, which were for German and other foreign universities, research institutes, and industrial enterprises as well as ESA and NASA; other experiments were from France, Spain, Italy, Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, and the U.S. All experiments were intended to take advantage of the weightlessness of space to study various processes that were normally affected by gravity. The Washington Post reported that West German officials said Spacelab was a major step toward what they hoped would be a larger laboratory module attached to the permanently manned space station that NASA envisioned for the 1990s. Most experiments were in materials processing. Along two sides of the Spacelab, the experiments were in racks containing small furnaces for heating metals and making alloys that were lighter and stronger than anything produced in full gravity of earth. Other materials processing experiments would study the flow of liquids in weightlessness; yet others would grow very pure and large crystals that could lead to improvements in electronic semiconductors. In a variety of life sciences experiments, the crew would study the growth of plants (corn and lentils) under microgravity conditions. Other studies were on how embryos of frogs and insects developed in weightlessness. Crew would use tadpoles for tests on how weightlessness might affect the development of vestibular, or balance, organs in vertebrates. ESA's vestibular sled ran down a pair of rails in Spacelab's center aisle. Experimenters would accelerate and tilt crew members riding in the chairlike device to test how the human balance system in the inner ear responded to weightlessness and a moderate gravity force, because it was thought the inner ear, which relied on gravity to function normally, might be the source of astronauts' motion sickness. Crew would use instruments in the cargo bay outside the Spacelab for navigation tests, such as synchronization of atomic clocks in space with those on the ground, checking for any discrepancies caused by weightlessness, and precise distance measurements by radio signals between the Space Shuttle and the ground. To accommodate the crew of eight, NASA installed an extra sleep station, bringing the total to four. Crew would conduct laboratory work in shifts around the clock. Despite early concern over the condition of the Space Shuttle's steering jets, mission control gave the Challenger the go-ahead for orbital operations. Later the mission control flight director said a valve malfunction prevented the flow of fuel through one line to Challenger's steering jets, but NASA considered an alternate line sufficient for regular operation to maneuver Challenger. Flight controllers also reported erratic temperature readings on one of the three fuel cells that generated electricity, but with crew supervision the affected unit was operating at full strength. (NASA Release 85-145; NASA MOR M-989-61-A [prelaunch] Oct 28/85; NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13; W Post, Oct 31/85, A30)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B today launched satellites for Mexico and Australia, the Washington Post reported. The crew launched Mexico's Morelos B in the morning, just hours after liftoff. Morelos B was a Hughes 376 satellite, a standard design used by many foreign national and private companies, Kennedy Space Center's Spaceport News said. It would provide telephone, TV, and wire services to Mexico through a total of 22 transponders. A PAM-D payload assist module then boosted the satellite to geosynchronous orbit 22,300 miles above earth. The satellite would drift, unused, until it reached it final stationary position in 1989. Mexican officials chose to store Morelos B in orbit because launch cost for the satellite could increase to four times the amount that Mexico paid to NASA for today's deployment. Payload specialist Rudolfo Neri Vela, the first Mexican astronaut, was onboard to observe satellite deployment. In June 1985 crew in the orbiter Discovery deployed the first Morelos satellite. At 8:20 p.m. the Australian satellite AUSSAT 2 spun out of the Atlantis's cargo bay. "We got a good deploy," said mission specialist Sherwood Spring, who supervised the satellite's spring ejection. "It looked like it might have gone a second early," he added. AUSSAT2, also a Hughes 376 satellite, was the second of three operations satellites for the government-owned Australian National Satellite System. It had eleven 12-watt transponders and four 30-watt transponders to provide domestic communications to Australia's 15-million population. Australia would also use the satellite to improve maritime and air traffic control communications, relay digital data for business purposes, provide standard telephone communications, and direct satellite to home TV broadcasts. A PAM-D would also boost the satellite to geosynchronous orbit. In August 1985 the Discovery crew deployed the first AUSSAT. Mission commander Brewster Shaw had tested all systems aboard Atlantis and reported that one of four videotape recorders was not working. Mission control gave him permission to take apart an electronic cabinet to look for a wiring flaw, but Shaw said he could not see anything that was obviously wrong. Later, following directions from the ground, Shaw cycled a circuit breaker and reported, "Bingo. That seems to get power to VTR1." (IV Post, Nov 28/85, A28; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
A prime time TV series for the first time would offer a comprehensive look at the history of manned U.S. and USSR space flight, the Ames Research Center's Astrogram reported. SPACEFLIGHT, a series of four one-hour programs sponsored by the Public Broadcasting System and the Du Pont Co., would chronicle man's achievements in space from the rocket plane that first broke the sound barrier to the touchdown of the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The series' executive producer, Blaine Baggett, said his staff interviewed some 40 key participants in space activities—astronauts, people on the ground, scientists, and historians. In addition, the Soviet science attache in Washington provided about 10 hours of film footage. Among those interviewed for the series were Chuck Yaeger, first man to break the sound barrier; Scott Crossfield, first to travel twice the speed of sound and to pilot the X-15; Werner von Braun, who worked on the U.S. rocket program; Alan Shepard and John Glenn, first American in space and first American to orbit the globe, respectively; and Sally Ride, first American woman in space. From the point of view of the USSR, the series sought answers to such questions as who the chief designer was of the Soviet space program and why the Soviets were first in the early days of space activities. SPACEFLIGHT also examined future space plans such as space colonies, space stations, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 11/ 85,4) PRECEDING PAGE SLAJ^K ftQT FILMED PAfilA.{0 INTENTlOHAtlT BUN*
NASA announced that students in classrooms throughout the continental U.S. would have an opportunity to observe various aspects of Space Shuttle mission 51—L and to listen, look, and learn from NASA's Teacher in Space, Christa McAuliffe, during her flight on Challenger. A few students would also be able to question McAuliffe about the mission. TV viewers with satellite dishes would be able to access the live lessons directly from the RCA satellite Satcom F-2R, Transponder 13. The Public Broadcasting Service, as a result of an agreement with NASA, would carry the live lessons via the satellite Westar IV, Transponder 12. PBS would offer the programs to member stations after requesting that they preempt regular instructional TV or classroom programming to carry the lessons live. McAuliffe would teach two lessons on the sixth day of the flight [see Space Transportation System/Civilian in Space Program, Oct. 2]; the first at approximately 11:00 a.m. EST, the second at about 1:00 p.m. EST. Classrooms with access to a satellite dish or cable network that carried NASA-Select would also be able to participate in a "Mission Watch," which covered aspects of the entire Space Shuttle flight from the day before launch through the conclusion of the mission. Barbara Morgan, backup for McAuliffe, would moderate the Mission Watch broadcast. (NASA Release 85-156)
NASA and the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) announced the first sales of a product manufactured in space—tiny polystyrene spheres to serve as NBS standard reference material. The spheres could improve microscopic measurements made throughout the economy in electronics, medicine, and other high-technology areas. A chemical process developed for NASA by Lehigh University produced billions of the 10 micrometers (1/2500th of an inch) in diameter spheres during several space Shuttle flights. Earthbound processes could not yield sufficiently uniform materials in usable quantities; when produced in a low-gravity environment, the spheres grew uniformly in size and shape. NBS had packaged the spheres into approximately 600 Standard Reference Material (SRM) units priced at $384 per unit. Each unit was a 5-milliliter vial that contained about 30 million spheres in a 0.4% concentration by weight; the remainder was water. NASA and NBS shared sales proceeds equally. (NASA Release 85-106)
The Johnson Space Center's (JSC) Space News Roundup conducted an interview with Christa McAuliffe, selected by NASA to be the teacher in space, and her backup, Barbara Morgan. When asked to give her impressions of JSC, McAuliffe said, "Big. Wry big . . . But that's one of the messages we want to get across. There are, what, 100 astronauts in the program, but thousands of employees here . . . And we've gotten so much information. When I'm 62, I'll finally read the last piece of paper that I bring back from here." The Roundup reporter questioned the two teachers about the national attention they had received, the effect it had on them, and the possibility of moving into different careers after the flight. McAuliffe commented, "Oh, but you're talking to a teacher. I didn't choose my career so I could get monetary rewards. My God, I never would have gone into teaching ... A year of this is going to be fun and I'm enjoying what I'm doing. I see it as an extraordinary year out of my life . . . We don't see this as a stepping stone to something else. When I go into a radio or TV station, I am looking at everything that is happening and I can't wait to tell my kids what happens in a TV studio, because I have never been in one before." Morgan then said that one of the funny things that had happened since beginning their training was that, "all of a sudden we are being asked questions as if we are the experts on the Space Shuttle." McAuliffe agreed, noting that she received a phone call from a reporter asking her what she believed was the cause of a problem the previous summer with the orbiter Challenger. In answer to the question, "What message will you take to people after this experience?" McAuliffe said, "That space is for everybody. It's not just for a few people in science or math, or for a select group of astronauts. That's our new frontier out there, and it's everybody's business to know about space." (JSC Roundup, Dec 6/85, 3)
I. V. Franklin, manager of future projects at British Aerospace Dynamics Group's Space and Communications Division, said at a recent international space meeting in Italy that British Aerospace had completed preliminary definition of a 50- by 60-foot-long, 24,250-lb. unmanned platform that Europe could develop as part of its Columbus space station program, Aviation Week reported. The platform would use a long beam as a common backbone that would contain docking ports for standardized plugin payload and resources modules. A single Space Shuttle flight would carry the basic platform into orbit, and the company envisioned that astronauts could assemble it in six hours of extravehicular activity. Franklin said the company would submit the platform proposal to the European Space Agency as one of the work packages in Europe's Columbus program. "The space platform is of particular interest to Europe, following President Reagan's invitation for international participation in the space station program," Franklin continued, "because it represents an element with relatively few direct interfaces to the rest of the program. Although it is not a 'core' component, it would be an important component of the space station complex and [a component] in which there would be substantial European user interest. The platform provides a point for reducing space operation costs at a price that Europe could afford." In addition to evaluating the platform in low earth orbit in conjunction with the U.S. manned Space Station, British Aerospace also considered the platform in a polar, sun synchronous orbit. The polar-orbiting platform offered possibilities for earth observation and earth resources missions. U.S. officials had encouraged European development of the polar platform to supplement low earth orbit activities performed on board the manned Space Station and its associated free-flying elements. "The polar platform does not need to work with a manned space station— and indeed, it cannot until a station facility is available in polar orbit," Franklin said. "The platform can be man-tended by a polar orbiting shuttle, although the shuttle's altitude is well below that of the platform." This problem could be overcome by using the platform's on-board propulsion to deorbit and dock with the Space Shuttle for payload replacement, repair, and maintenance and then return to the operational altitude. Franklin concluded that the concept of a polar space platform was justified by the level of user interest in both Europe and the U.S. and by the relatively favorable economics when compared with other systems. "The polar platform does not require use of a manned space station, and it therefore is not paced by development of the space station," he noted. (AvWk, Apr 8/85, 60)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. personnel fitted the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) wide-field/planetary camera (WFPC) into the Hubble Space Telescope, the JPL Universe reported. They then removed and returned it to JPL for modifications and testing. "Everything went fine," Dave Rodgers, JPL's WFPC project manager, said. "There were no problems with any of our equipment." The WFPC consisted of two complete camera systems with different focal lengths. There were four cameras in each system, all sharing the same housing and electronics. The wide-field camera would obtain a wide perspective of a region in the sky, while the planetary camera would make high-resolution studies of individual objects. "It's called a planetary camera, but you can use it for any object that you want to study in detail," Rodgers explained. Besides planets in earth's solar system, the planetary camera would study galaxies and star-like objects such as quasars. Astronomers could also use the camera system to search for clues suggesting the presence of other planets orbiting nearby stars. Because the space telescope would be above the earth's obscuring atmosphere, it would be able to detect objects 100 times dimmer than those visible from earth with about 10 times greater resolution. The orbiting observatory was a major part of NASA's astronomy effort through the end of the century. Space Shuttle crew would service and replace in orbit the space telescope instruments, keeping the telescope operating for at least 15 years. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1)
Astronauts aboard the Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F spent an extra day in space gazing at the sun after the instrument pointing system was back in order, the Washington Post reported. The sudden recovery on August 4, as a result of a lucky radio command transmitted on a whim after a jolting rocket firing, of a fourth solar telescope called a solar optical universal polarimeter added to the science data. Most of the August 5 sun observations used that telescope after NASA had considered it a failure. The telescope initially recorded images of sunspots, dark splotches that erupted through the visible surface of the sun when underlying magnetic fields became convoluted, the Washington Times reported. The astronauts turned the telescope on the sunspot again on August 5, and the TV image was so clear scientists on the ground reported that they could see changes in its penumbra, a surrounding halo-like feature made up of jets of gas streaming out from the dark central area. (W Post, Aug 6/85, A5; W Times, Aug 6/ 85, 2A)
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
NASA officials said damage sustained by Discovery during mission 51-D [see Apr. 19] could endanger its next mission and the upcoming week's flight of Challenger, the Washington Times reported. "We may have to do a fair amount of tile work on this one," Space Shuttle chief Jesse Moore said. "Fifty tiles has been our standard up until this last one." However, NASA engineers were more concerned about a hole on a control flap, called an eleven, on the ship's left wing. Such damage had not occurred previously. The chief Space Shuttle mechanic said the hole "most likely" developed after a heat-shield tile, jarred loose during Discovery's liftoff, allowed temperatures of more than 1,200° F to penetrate the wing flap during reentry. Also, NASA said it would not approve the Challenger mission or Discovery's next flight, scheduled for June 12, until technicians completed their examination of damage and determined why the brakes locked. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
In an administrative realignment reflecting the maturation of the Space Shuttle program, NASA announced the appointment of Arnold Aldrich, a 26-year NASA veteran and head of the Space Shuttle projects office at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), to manager of the National Space Transportation System (NSTS). He would fill the vacancy left when Glynn Lunney retired in April. The Level II NSTS organization at JSC would assimilate the projects office, consolidating all program elements under Aldrich. With this combined responsibility, Aldrich would take charge of integration of all Space Shuttle program elements including flight software, orbiter, external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, main engines, payloads, payload carriers, and Space Shuttle facilities. His responsibilities would also include directing the planning for NSTS operations and for management of orbiter and government furnished equipment projects. NASA named Richard Kohrs, who was acting program manager, and Lt. Col. Thomas Redmond, U.S. Air Force, deputy managers. In a related move, Thomas Utsman, head of Space Shuttle management and operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), would become deputy director of KSC, with NASA dividing shuttle management and operations into two primary organizations: Shuttle engineering and Shuttle operations. The engineering directorate, headed by Horace Lamberth, would expand to include skills necessary for sustaining engineering of the orbiter. The operations directorate, headed by Robert Sieck, would retain all functions necessary to manage day-to-day Space Shuttle processing and its logistical support. NASA would transfer later in the year from Johnson Space Center to KSC launch support services and orbiter thermal protection system manufacturing contracts, functions closely associated with KSC responsibilities for Space Shuttle maintenance and launch preparation. At the beginning of 1986, KSC would take over logistics responsibility for spare parts refurbishment and procurement and would assume sustaining engineering responsibility for orbiter subsystems. (NASA Release 85-112)
Peoples Republic of China President Li Xiannian today made a three-hour visit to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the JPL Universe reported. JPL Director Dr. Lew Allen welcomed him, then said, "We are aware of the ongoing discussions between our governments regarding future space cooperation . . . We look forward to cooperative scientific investigations." Xiannian then viewed JPL's newly revised multi-media presentation, "Welcome to Outer Space," which had been translated into Chinese. After the show, Allen presented the president with a color photograph of Saturn and its moons; Dr. Taylor Wang—the first Chinese-American in space—gave him a photographic collage showing Wang in space during his May Space Shuttle flight and his drop dynamics module equipment. Xiannian completed his visit with a tour of the Spacecraft Assembly Facility where he heard about the Galileo mission and saw a model of the spacecraft as well as actual pieces of its hardware. (JPL Universe, July 85, 1)
The NY Times reported that NASA officials said the next Space Shuttle mission would not occur until mid-April as a result of the time needed to repair two one-foot-sq. punctures in one of the cargo bay doors of the orbiter Discovery. NASA officials said Discovery would definitely fly the mission, although they had considered substituting Challenger. Rockwell Internatl. was fabricating the replacement material for the punctures and would fly the material to Cape Canaveral that day or the next. Although NASA could not set a launch date until it had completed repairs, unidentified sources said that, if all went well, launch would be about April 19.	(NYT, March 13/85, A14)
NASA launched today from KSC Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-G with a crew of seven, including Saudi Prince Sultan Salman A1-Saud and Patrick Baudry from France, for the 18th Space Shuttle flight, the Washington Post reported. Earlier NASA had announced that mission 51-G would carry the automated directional solidification furnace (ADSF), Spartan 1, and the French echocardiograph (FEE) and posture (FPE) experiments. The objective of the ADSF was to provide a technology demonstration of the capability of the equipment to perform directional solidification of a magnetic composite material and to study the role of gravity-driven phenomena in such processing. The apparatus used for the directional solidification experiments was a specially designed furnace that melted a sample contained in a quartz tube one cm in diameter and 35 cm long. A furnace module (a heater with an integral quench block) moved along the four tubes in the experiment so that the manganese-bismuth alloy samples melted and solidified at a controlled rate. Electric resistance provided the heat; the quench block was liquid cooled. In that first flight, all four samples were the same alloy with only the solidification rate changed to allow a better understanding of that aspect of the process. Spartan 1 was the first of a continuing series of low-cost free flyers designed to extend sounding rocket experiment capabilities. The Spartan 1 objective was to map the X-ray emissions from the Perseus Cluster, the nuclear region of the Milky Way galaxy, and the Scorpius X-2 (SCO-X-2). NASA had flown the Spartan 1 instrument several times on sounding rockets; the resulting information led to the need to obtain greater viewing time of the selected targets, thus permitting more detailed studies with greater resolutions. The crew would deploy the Spartan 1 from the Space Shuttle and retrieve it using the Canadian-built remote manipulator system. After deployment, the Spartan 1 would perform scientific observations for up to 40 hours via an onboard microcomputer controller that commanded all pointing sequences and satellite control. There was no command or telemetry link; when observing sequences were complete, the satellite "safed" all systems and placed itself in a stable attitude for retrieval. The objectives of the FEE and FPE, a part of a cooperative program with France, was to obtain on-orbit data regarding the response of the cardiovascular and sensorimotor systems to weightlessness. French payload specialist Patrick Baudry would perform the experiments with participation from other crew members including the Arabsat payload specialist. The USSR's July 1982 Salyut mission had also flown the FEE system. By 4:30 p.m. June 17, Discovery's crew had successfully deployed a Mexican satellite, Morelos-1, the first of two identical satellites, which headed for a position 22,300 miles above the equator west of the Galapagos Islands. It would beam TV programs to the most remote regions of Mexico. (NASA Flight Operation Report M-980-51-G [prelaunch] June 5/85, NASA MOR E-420-51-G-16 [prelaunch] June 7/85, MOR E-420-51-G-17 [prelaunch] June 5/85, MOR E-420-51-G-18 [prelaunch] June 13/85, MOR-989-51-G [postflight] July 3/85; W Post, June 18/85, A3) During June: NASA announced that the Space Shuttle mission 51-G would carry three communications satellites, a deployable/retrievable Spartan 1 spacecraft, and six Get Away Special canisters. The orbiter Discovery would fly several mid-deck experiments including one for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) organization and a materials processing furnace. The Mexican spacecraft, Morelos-A, was a version of the Hughes HS 376 satellite, a number of which had already been deployed from the Space Shuttle. Morelos-A was the first of two domestic communications satellites that would provide advanced telecommunications to the more remote parts of Mexico. Arabsat-A, owned by the Arab Satellite Communications Organization and built by Aerospatiale, would provide telecommunications links between the member nations. A U.S. domestic communications satellite owned by American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), Telestar 3-D would provide telecommunications services to the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. All three spacecraft would first spring-eject from the orbiter's cargo bay, then on each a small attached payload assist module would ignite about 45 minutes after deployment to propel the satellites to transfer orbits out as far as 22,300	miles above earth. A second small rocket motor would then fire on each spacecraft to circularize the orbits, placing the spacecraft in geosynchronous orbits. Three of the six Get Away Special canisters contained West German payloads for study of materials processing in space and behavior of liquid propellants. A fourth canister contained a U.S. Air Force/U.S. Naval Research Laboratory investigation of the ultraviolet radiation environment in space. A fifth canister had a package of nine student experiments in biological and physical sciences. A Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) investigation of a developmental heat transfer system was in the sixth canister. A capillary pumped loop (CPL) experiment, it was the first flight of a CPL two-phase thermal control system. The advanced development and flight experiments section of the thermal engineering branch at GSFC developed the CPL (NASA Release 85-83)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
NASA announced it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB, originally scheduled for October 15, 1985, until no earlier than January 29, 1986. NASA and Air Force officials had conducted in December 1984 an extensive review of Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch-facility readiness, the Department of Defense (DOD) payload, and impact of the orbiter Challenger tile problems on the Space Shuttle program schedule. They had decided to delay launch to maintain the current Space Shuttle manifest and to insure adequate margin in development of the DOD payload for the initial Vandenberg launch. NASA and the Air Force agreed that the orbiter Discovery would be delivered to Vandenberg in early September 1985 instead of May; NASA would use Discovery for two flights from KSC in mid-1985 to accommodate the impact of tile problems on the schedule and would deliver other Space Shuttle flight hardware (filament-wound cases and external tank) as soon as possible to Vandenberg to provide maximum schedule flexibility for the earliest launch. The Air Force had corrected problems with pipe welds and cleanliness at the Vandenberg launch site and was conducting ground systems tests with the orbiter Enterprise in preparation for initial checkout. NASA had delivered an external tank and solid-fuel rocket booster skirt ahead of schedule. NASA was completing the remainder of the 1985 Space Shuttle manifest with commercial and DOD payloads and would release a manifest covering August 1985 through 1989 in the near future. In reporting the delay, the Washington Post noted that Vandenberg was the only base from which Space Shuttles could fly into north-south orbits crossing the poles, an orbit ideal for surveillance and other earth-watching spacecraft because they could fly over the entire globe once every 18 days. (NASA Release 85-4; W Post, Jan 9/85, A9)
NASA and the National Science Teachers Association announced continuation for the sixth year of the Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program, which provided an opportunity for secondary school students (grades 9-12) to write proposals for space science experiments that would develop their awareness of space and stimulate interest in science and technology. During the next year's competition, the association would select up to five students from each of eight geographic regions who, along with their teachers, would receive all-expense-paid trips to a Space Shuttle symposium at a NASA center. Later, one semifinalist selected from each region would attend a national Space Shuttle symposium at Kennedy Space Center, during which the association would award scholarships to the three students submitting the most outstanding proposals. (NASA Release 85-70)
NASA had completed a series of tests to validate parachute systems to be used with advanced lightweight, solid-fuel rocket boosters that would replace the boosters then in use on the Space Shuttle, Ames Research Center (ARC) announced. The new boosters would be first used during a Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB no earlier than January 29, 1986. For the tests, researchers used a vehicle a third the size of a solid-fuel booster with one main parachute and, to simulate a splashdown, drop tested it from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility's (DFRC) B-52 over the China Lake Naval Weapons Center at Ridgecrest. Most drops were made at an altitude of about 40,000 feet with an airspeed of about 230 knots. ARC and DFRC conducted the drop tests in cooperation with Marshall Space Flight Center, which was responsible for the parachute system. (ARC Release 85-1)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power said the USSR was continuing in 1984 deployment of new nuclear and conventional military weapons systems, including test firings of fifth-generation ICBMs, launchings of new classes of submarines, and installing new strategic bombers, the Washington Times reported. The book detailed several significant developments by the Soviet military, the article said, including continued test firings of the SS-24 and SS-25 intercontinental ballistic missiles, launch of two units of new Delta IV-class of strategic ballistic missile submarines to be fitted with the SS-NX-23 submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) then being flight tested, and completion of sea trials of a third 25,000-ton Typhoon-class strategic ballistic missile submarine to join the two Typhoon units already operational and fitted with 20 SS-N-20 SLBMs. The book also said the Soviets had developed a heavy-lift launch vehicle capable of putting 150-ton payloads into orbit as part of an "extremely high priority" military-related space program. The Soviet version of the U.S. Space Shuttle and manned Space Station would benefit from this heavy booster. Major emphasis in their space program was on long-duration manned missions for military research. The USSR continued research on ground- and space-based, antisatellite high-energy lasers. "The Soviets currently have the world's only deployed antisatellite weapons system that can attack satellites in near-earth orbit," the book said. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	385 L„lfllENTIQNAll.y 8LANK The Soviets also continued upgrading detection and tracking systems for ballistic missile defense and development of new early-warning and air-surveillance radars. Their work on a new, large phased-array radar at Krasnoyarsk violated the ABM treaty, the book stated, and "in addition, the Soviets are actively engaged in extensive research on advanced defenses against ballistic missiles." {W Times, Apr 1/85, 1A)
Astronauts Maj. Jerry Ross of the Air Force and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring of the Army today stepped outside the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B for the second construction exercise in the weightlessness of space [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Nov. 30], the NY Times reported. To TV viewers on earth, the two appeared to manipulate with ease the heavy structures they were building, although both were sweating and breathing heavily after the first 20 minutes of work. Two hours into the spacewalk, they reported that though their hands, feet, and backs were moist with sweat, they were working comfortably. The purpose of today's spacewalk was the same as previously, to test the efficiency of techniques to build a 45-foot-high aluminum tower. However, the astronauts changed the way they worked and had the assistance of astronaut Dr. Mary Cleave, who was operating the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm. She moved the men from place to place as their work required. Later in the exercise, the Washington Post reported, Ross and Spring took turns stringing cable along the four-story metal frame they had constructed, just as future crews might lay cable for a space station. They also removed parts of the tower and replaced them with other parts, simulating a space repair. NASA officials commented after the first spacewalk on November 30 that the work had proved more taxing than expected, perhaps because the astronauts' gloves, unlike the rest of their spacesuits, were not air-conditioned and could not carry away excess heat. Most of the work had entailed repeated squeezing and twisting with the hands. Ross and Spring said after the exercise that they would not want to repeat it before having a day of rest. They indicated that the activity had left their hands so numb and fatigued that they had trouble fastening the airlock of the Space Shuttle as they reentered it. NASA officials did note they were favorably surprised by the astronauts' rapid improvement in performance as they learned from successive repetitions of the exercise. (NYT, Dec 2/85, B6; W Post, Dec 2/85, A3)
Neil Hutchinson, Johnson Space Center's (JSC) space station program manager, at a U.S. House Science and Technology space science and application subcommittee authorization hearing, said that ferrying and assembling a space station would require seven Space Shuttle flights over a period of nine months to a year, Aerospace Daily reported, and assembly would rely on automation and robotics, not Space Shuttle crew extravehicular activities. Assembly would begin with a beam of solar panels and a 90-ft. truss structure. Space Shuttle orbiters would dock with the space station structure at different points to assemble the facility, using the orbiter's remote manipulator system (RMS) arm and a remote arm operated on the space station. The 3rd and 4th Space Shuttle flights would take up habitation modules; the 5th flight would ferry two more sets of solar panels and a 3rd module, possibly for logistics. Hutchinson said current planning called for permanent manning of the station after the 5th flight; the 6th flight would carry the 1 st of two planned laboratories with the baseline configuration producing 75 kw of power, which would be completed after the 7th flight. Phil Culbertson, NASA associate administrator, said a new program plan envisioned a 21-month definition and preliminary design effort beginning in April and extending through January 1987, which reflected the lower than anticipated funding level of $230 million for space station activities in the NASA's FY 86 budget. Of the $230 million, $15 million was for utilization, $82 million for advanced development, $52 million for program manage-ment/integration, $7 million for operational readiness, and $74 million for system-definition contracts. Defense Daily noted that Culbertson said NASA would have to "stretch" to meet the $8-billion price of the space station and that it would ask its contractors to "stretch with us." (A/D, Feb 20/85, 1; D/D, Feb 20/85, 227)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B landed at 1:33 p.m. Pacific time today on the concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base before 6,700 spectators, the NY Times reported. NASA selected the concrete runway because a week of rain had left scattered puddles on the usually dry lake bed runways. 'Atlantis looks beautiful," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said after the landing. Apart from "a few dings" around the ship's nose and landing gear, he added, there appeared to be "no unusual damage." It was the second mission for the Atlantis, the newest in NASA's fleet of four orbiters. The crew described all aspects of the flight as highly successful. (NYT, Dec 4/85, B6)
There were five Americans aboard the Space Shuttle, but commander Daniel Brandenstein decided Nagel took the 100th honor because three Americans sat in front of him on Discovery's flight deck. "Shannon Lucid was the first runner-up," Brandenstein said. "She got to space three inches ahead of Steven Nagel." To mark the occasion, which was televised back to earth, Brandenstein presented Nagel with a cake that had "100th" written on it. "I'm not sure if that's true," Nagel said. "Although I sat three inches behind Shannon, my nose is about three and a half inches longer than hers is." (W Times, June 20/85, 3A)
U.S. Air Force Maj. Gen. Donald Kutyna said today that the Defense Department had decided to proceed with a $500 million program to design a hypersonic plane capable of flying around the globe in less than two hours and of flying in the highest reaches of the atmosphere and to provide a low-cost method for launching satellites and other equipment critical to President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, the NY Times reported. Speaking at a Colorado Springs symposium on space technology, Kutyna said construction of the plane itself could cost $2 to $3 billion. "It is something we are very serious about, and we think the technology is now within reach," said Kutyna, who coordinated the Air Force's research and development of space systems. "We have been examining the principles for some time, and now we are ready to head into the next phase." However, in Washington an aide to George Keyworth II, the President's science advisor, said, "Funding for the project's next phase is not assured." He noted Congress would have to approve the program. "This is all a little premature," the aide noted. "We have not yet presented the plan to President Reagan." But on November 20 Keyworth and top officials on the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and NASA presented details of the plan to members of Congress interested in aerospace issues. Unlike the Space Shuttle, which was launched vertically with rocket boosters, the aerospace plane would take off like an ordinary airplane, but would not have jet engines with heavy compressors, making the aerospace plane a light-weight vehicle. "Once you reach about Mach 3," or three times the speed of sound, Kutyna said, "the air streaming through the engines begins to compress itself. Some studies indicated that the plane could attain speeds of Mach 20, although there were experts who said half that speed would be more reasonable. If successful, the project could solve a key problem for the military: drastically reducing the cost of placing satellites and defensive space weapons in orbit. (NYT, Nov 22/85)
A new study issued by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) said competition from other nations and several private companies in launching spacecraft put the U.S. under pressure to protect its economic and technological leadership in space, the NY Times reported. This protection could be accomplished by reassessing the Space Shuttle's pricing policy, promoting greater private investment in space-related goods and services, and forging a long-term space policy to assure a competitive edge, report recommended. The European Space Agency, a consortium of 11 western European governments, broke the U.S. monopoly in launch services for the West with its Ariane rocket program. Arianespace, a corporation owned by the French government and European banks and aerospace companies, was aggressively pursuing customers for Ariane's services and had won several contracts that would otherwise have gone to U.S. conventional rockets or the Space Shuttle. France was planning later in the year to use the Ariane to inaugurate the world's first commercial remote-sensing satellite service, competing with U.S. Landsats that surveyed the world's geologic, water, and agricultural resources. China announced the previous month a new commercial space program using its own satellites, launching rockets, and ground stations. The Chinese had rockets capable of boosting satellites into the high orbit needed for communications satellites. Japan, emphasizing the export potential of space technology, was developing its own rocket launching capability and was planning to launch the next year the first of a series of ocean and land remote-sensing satellites. India also had joined the nations launching satellites, and Brazil was building a rocket base with the intention of becoming the first South American launching power. Although the USSR was apparently tempted to enter the commercial market, western space experts questioned whether the Russians would ever be a major force in commercial space operations. They said the USSR might be reluctant to allow outside scientists and businessmen access to their facilities and other governments would probably not allow advanced communications satellites to be exported to the Soviet Union. In its report, the OTA said that other nations developed their own space launching capabilities out of a desire to be technologically independent, to gain any economic benefits that derived from space technology, and to be regarded as "space powers." Consequently, the report concluded that the U.S.'s "competitive strategy based on price or superior technology alone will not prevent foreign entry into the launch service business." At stake, besides prestige, was a share of what by the end of the century could be a $50 billion annual business, according to estimates by some economists in the aerospace field. The report recommended that the U.S. government investigate new trade and regulatory policies to reduce the risks and uncertainties that hindered private investment in space technology. The study concluded that NASA by itself was "not well-equipped either to promote or to regulate growth in the commercial exploitation of space." The report suggested the regulation of "space industries" should be integrated with the regulation of their counterparts on earth. (NYT, July 26/85, A1)
A controversy between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA [see Space Transportation System/Reve-nues, Feb. 25] appeared over when NOAA agreed to launch meteorological satellites (Metsats) into orbit in return for which NASA would give NOAA a discount for carrying the satellites into orbit aboard the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. A deal between NOAA and the Air Force that would have saved NOAA $90 million in launch costs never went through, in large part because NASA and NOAA began working behind the scenes to bury the hatchet, the Post said. The previous week NASA Administrator James Beggs sent Anthony Calio, NOAA administrator, a letter outlining a deal governing three Metsat launches starting in 1989. NASA agreed to share with NOAA the $80 million cost of modifying the Metsat for a Space Shuttle launch, to put a Metsat on a Space Shuttle within three months after NOAA asked for it, and to shave $6.5 million off the $105 million in feed NASA ordinarily would charge NOAA for the three launches. "We gave them a good price," Beggs said. "They're on the shuttle at what essentially is our cost for launching them." (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21)
NASA Administrator James Beggs confirmed this week that NASA cancelled a mission to send an unmanned spacecraft to comet Wild 2, citing budgetary constraints, the Washington Post reported. "However, the comet rendezvous proposal is a very promising candidate for a new start" in FY 88, Beggs said. NASA had expected the mission from FY 87 to 1992 to cost $400 million, which was within the budgetary limits NASA established in 1981 for new planetary missions. The NASA budget the Reagan Administration was drafting eliminated the mission. Delaying a decision on a comet rendezvous by even one year meant the spacecraft could not fly to Wild 2, the favorite candidate of space scientists because it was a bright, fresh comet. Discovered in 1978, the comet would make its third and fourth appearances in 1990 and 1996. In order to rendezvous with the comet when it passed near the earth, NASA in 1986 would have to begin work on the mission to have the spacecraft ready by 1991 for launch from the Space Shuttle. The announcement followed NASA decisions in 1980 and 1981 not to attempt a mission to fly by Halley's Comet. "Once again, the United States is passing up an opportunity to initiate the exploration of the comets, which contain the most unblemished record of the origins of our solar system," the Postquoted Dr. Laurel Wilkening, dean of the graduate school at the University of Arizona and vice chairman of President Reagan's Commission on Space. "The decision is a major setback for the U.S. planetary exploration program," he concluded. Space scientists were also upset because NASA's science advisory groups recommended that a comet rendezvous be the next new misson in planetary exploration [see Astronomy, Oct. 8], Scientists pushed for a mission to Wild 2 because the spacecraft could travel with the comet for 850 days, observing it before its long dust tail formed and obscured the comet's nucleus or damaged the spacecraft. It would have been NASA's most ambitious mission to explore the solar system. The next comet that NASA could approach would be Tempel 2, which would pass by earth in 1998. Such a mission, also costing $400 million, required a NASA decision by the middle of 1986. (W Post, Oct 17/85, A21)
Discovery and its five-man crew on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 landed at 9:16 EDT today at Edwards Air Force Base after a seven-day mission [see Aug. 27], the Washington Post reported. During the mission, the crew deployed AUSSAT-1 for the Australian government, ASC-1 for the American Satellite Corp., and Leasat 4 for Hughes Communications (reports indicated Leasat 4 had lost its UHF communications link). In addition, the crew successfully retrieved and repaired the Leasat 3 originally deployed on STS 51-D. Later Hughes issued a statement saying "Leasat 3 is under full control by Hughes' ground command, and telemetry data continued to confirm the good health of the satellite. The liquid propulsion systems are intact and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures appear to be rising gradually toward acceptable levels," the JSC Roundup reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said after the mission that "1 would have to characterize this mission as near to perfect as you can get. It was a perfect mission from the outset, one that shows America's space program at work." Moore added that he hoped there would be only two more Space Shuttle landings in California before pilots could resume landing in Florida. NASA switched to Edwards Air Force Base landings after brakes failed and a tire blew out in an April landing on Kennedy Space Center's concrete runway. (IV Post, Sept 4/85, A7; JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 1)
Many of the experiments carried in Spacelab D-1 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger on Mission 61-A [see Space Transportation System/ Missions, Oct. 30] achieved more than 100% of mission goals, due in part to the continuous cooperation between experiment teams who coped with hardware problems and changing conditions on board the space laboratory, Aviation Week reported. Peter Sahm, Spacelab D-1 mission scientist, said this coordination allowed a rescheduling of experiment activity during the final mission days, maximizing the overall scientific return in spite of delays caused by hardware problems. In one of the repairs, Spacelab D-1 crew members used a saw to cut off a plastic cap on a valve that fed liquid into the fluid physics module's experiment zones. "The valve had an incorrect setting, which perhaps was made before launch," said Berndt Feuerbacher of West Germany's Deutsche Fors-chungs und Versuchsanstalt fur Luft und Raumfahrt's (DFVLR) Institute for Space Simulation. The DFVLR executed and controlled the mission on behalf of West Germany's BMFT ministry of research and technology. "They tried to reset the valve with a wrench, but they couldn't put the wrench to the nut because there was a plastic cap over it. So they asked for, and received authorization, to cut away the plastic cap, then were able to use the wrench." Feuerbacher said other repair/troubleshooting work by the Spacelab D-1 crew members included West German payload specialist Dr. Ernst Mes-serschmid using a vacuum cleaner to collect debris from a heating facility in the Werkstofflabor material science double rack and writing a software patch on the Werkstofflabor to work around a malfunctioning vacuum sensor that incorrectly indicated a lack of vacuum. NASA mission specialist Dr. Bonnie Dunbar also used the vacuum to clean up metallic dust particles from a sample that broke in the Spacelab D-1 Medea's gradient furnace with quenching device. These corrective actions demonstrated the need for trained crew members in complex spaceflight operations and for positive control from the ground, Wolfgang Finke, head of space program activities at the West German BMFT ministry of research and technology, indicated. "I think it also underscored the good working relationship between the German Space Operations Center here and NASA in the U.S. to overcome problems as they occurred," Finke said. (AvWk, Nov 18/85, 55 and 65)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center awarded a $32,346,000 follow-on contract to General Dynamics's Convair Division (GD/C) to erect, test, and launch (with accompanying launch facility modifications) Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles and to perform support testing and launching of Centaur upper stages from the Space Shuttle in 1986; GD/C would work at Kennedy Space Center. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, beginning January 1, 1985 and running through December 1986, was a continuation of work GD/C had performed under earlier contracts. The Centaur should increase the Space Shuttle's capability to carry heavier payloads from low-earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release 85-5) During March: In a report of 1984 accomplishments, Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) commander, USAF Col. Philip Conran, said that AEDC conducted more than 200 separate test and evaluation programs during FY 84 and demonstrated the importance of the center's full-spectrum test support to development and operational aerospace programs. In that year, propulsion systems testing dominated test and evaluation efforts, turbine engine testing being the busiest in the history of the center. Much of that had resulted from the new start for the F109 next-generation trainer engine and the fly-off competition between the F110 and F100 engines for the USAF's F-16 Fighting Falcon and the subsequent product verification of the F110. In rocket motor testing, AEDC conducted three altitude test firings of the inertial upper stage (IUS) in an effort that helped Space Division and Boeing Aerospace Co. successfully understand and fix the April 1983 upper stage inflight anomaly. After failure of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 commercial satellites to reach desired orbits, AEDC supported the conversion of defense and commercial satellite perigee and apogee booster motors from carbon-carbon to carbon phenolic rocket nozzles. AEDC considered completion of construction of the aeropropulsion systems test facility (ASTF) its outstanding achievement for 1984 and was proceeding with activation and acceptance testing to prepare the ASTF for operations in September 1985. In the flight dynamics area, AEDC completed in a specially modified vacuum chamber the initial ground testing phase of the antisatellite pathfinder sensor that required the use of a spin mount rig, which had been three years in development, and an optical alignment system that provided accuracies on an order of magnitude better than any other available system. AEDC also developed and successfully demonstrated a new test technique of spinning a nose cone to evaluate reentry erosion. One of the most productive programs at AEDC in 1984 was for the C-17 advanced cargo aircraft. AEDC provided more data in less time than usual and saved the sponsors about $1 million in wind-tunnel test time. The in-house technology program, which supported testing and evaluation missions, delivered needed test techniques for testing of advanced reentry-vehicle materials, engine icing, and rocket motors. For example, AEDC applied a flash X-ray technique and worked with the University of Tennessee Space Institute to enhance the image of three test firings of the inertial upper stage, resulting in successful completion of the anomaly investigation. (AEDC Test Highlights, Spring/85, 2)
Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah) today joined five astronauts and a French pilot for the final two-hour practice aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger, which they would fly in two weeks, the Washington Post reported. They had run through launch procedures and checked all spacecraft systems to avoid any surprises at liftoff, ending with a simulated liftoff at 4 p.m. Garn, who would fly on Challenger as a congressional observer, was chairman of a subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding. The other non-NASA spaceman was French Air Force Lt. Col. Patrick Baudry, who would serve as a payload specialist. (WPost, Feb 18/85, A14)
NASA announced a launch date of no earlier than April 12, 1985, for the 51-D Space Shuttle mission, with two windows for launch on that date: from 8:04 a.m. to 8:18 a.m. EST and from 8:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. EST. The orbiter Discovery would land April 17 at approximately 8:14 a.m. EST at KSC. During the mission, crew would deploy the Canadian Telesat (Anik C1) and the Hughes Syncom IV (LEASAT) and operate the McDonnell Douglas continuous flow electrophoresis system. (NASA Release 85—43) During March: NASA announced it had scheduled for no earlier than March 3 from KSC the launch of Space Shuttle mission 51 -E, which was the 15th Space Shuttle mission and the orbiter Challenger's 7th flight. The Challenger was scheduled to land on March 7 at the 15,000-foot Space Shuttle landing facility at KSC. NASA previously announced the flight crew [see Feb. 7]. Challenger would carry the heaviest cargo taken into space by a Space Shuttle; total weight of the payload bay and cabin payloads would be nearly 53,400	lb., almost 15,000 lb. heavier than the previous record set on Space Shuttle mission 51-A. After liftoff and insertion into orbit, the crew would prepare to deploy the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B)/inertial upper stage (IUS). Following release, the crew would maneuver Challenger to a safe distance and observe the IUS perigee kick motor firing, placing the TDRS in geosynchronous transfer orbit. Following IUS first-stage burn of about 2 minutes 26 seconds, which would then drop off, the TDRS/IUS second stage stack would coast for six hours on the way to geosynchronous orbit altitude of 22,300 miles. Once there, the IUS second stage would fire for 1 minute 49 seconds to stabilize the TDRS in geosynchronous orbit and the IUS would drop off. The IUS was an advanced solid-propellant, two-stage booster designed to carry heavyweight payloads into orbits higher than the Space Shuttle could reach. NASA first used the IUS on the STS-6 mission for launch of TDRS-A. Changes to the IUS since then corrected problems that developed during the STS-6 mission. The IUS first stage developed about 46,500 lb. of thrust, the second stage about 18,500 lb. On the second day, the crew would use the Challenger's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) engines to raise their orbit to above 180 miles for deployment during the 22nd orbit of the 7,347-lb. Telesat-1 (Anik C-1) and its payload assist module (PAM). (NASA Release 85-24)
In his "National Security Launch Strategy" directive, President Reagan told NASA and the U.S. Air Force to begin a study leading to joint development of a bigger and more powerful space shuttle that could begin flying missions just before the year 2000, the Washington Post reported. In a major policy change, the Reagan Administration indicated that the Air Force should share with NASA the cost of designing and acquiring the second-generation space shuttle; NASA had borne the $10 billion cost of developing the current Space Shuttle, although the Air Force used it one third of the time. The directive also covered an agreement by the Air Force to use NASA's Space Shuttle at least eight times a year for the 10 years after 1988 and approved an Air Force decision to buy an improved version of its Titan rocket to supplement the Space Shuttle for military launches starting in 1988 and ending in 1993 [see Feb. 27]. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger said in the directive that the Air Force had decided to buy 10 Titan 34D7 single-use rockets for $2.09 billion between then and September 1993 from Martin Marietta Corp. The directive did not resolve the dispute between NASA and the Air Force over Air Force plans to sell at bargain rates obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch three weather satellites for NOAA [see Feb 25]. NASA was disappointed in the Air Force decision to buy the Titans, as it had tried to persuade the Air Force to buy an upgraded version of the solid-fuel rocket booster that helped put the Space Shuttle into orbit. Present rocket power limited Space Shuttle cargo weight, flying height, and its crossrange (limiting landings to Kennedy Space Center, Edwards AFB, and the White Sands Missile Range). The permanently manned space station planned for 1993 would require loads up to 75,000 lb. carried into polar orbit and at least 100,000-lb. loads into near-equatorial orbit at altitudes of at least 500 miles. (W Post, Mar 3/85, A12)
NASA announced that it had selected Rockwell Shuttle Operations Co. for negotiations leading to award of the $685 million four-year space transportation system operations contract (STSOC) at Johnson Space Center (JSC). Follow-on awards could result in a total contract period of 15 years at a value of about $5.5 billion. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract that included incentive fee on sound cost management and an award fee on the basis of performance. Other team members included Bendix Field Engineering Corp., System Development Corp., Omniplan Corp., RMS Technologies, Inc., and System Management American Corp. Under the contract, Rockwell would have responsibility for six major STSOC functions: project management; maintenance and operations; sustaining engineering; flight preparation requirements and analysis; flight preparation production; and direct mission operations, testing, and support. Work would be done for such facilities as the mission control center, shuttle mission simulator, shuttle avionics integration laboratory, software production facility, central computing facility, and the mockup and integration laboratory. The selection represented NASA's consolidation into one contract of work previously performed by 16 firms under 22 contracts. Other firms submitting proposals were Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Space Information Systems Division, Grumman Space Operations Corp., and Lockheed Space Flight Co. (NASA Release 85-128)
NASA announced that Sultan Salman Abdelazize Al-Saud, an Arabsat payload specialist scheduled to fly on the 51-G 7-day Space Shuttle mission in June, would conduct 70mm photography over Saudi Arabia, 35mm photography of a fluids experiment, and would participate in the French posture experiment. Al-Saud's flight was part of a reimbursable agreement with the Arab Satellite Communications Organization covering the launch of the Arabsat 1B communications satellite. Al-Saud would use the 70mm camera to take pictures on daylight orbital passes over Saudi Arabia and the 35mm camera to document such phenomena as surface tension effects on mixed fluids in the absence of gravity. His other activities would include photography of the new moon in a lunar crescent observation and assisting the French payload specialist as a test subject in the French experiment. At a May 28 news conference at Johnson Space Center, Al-Saud said his flight was bound to improve diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the Islamic world, the Washington Post reported. "You will have 800 million Moslems and 155 million Arabs glued to their TV sets watching an American spaceship carrying an Arab into space," he commented. NASA selected Al-Saud, nephew of Saudi's King Fahd, from hundreds of Saudi applicants. He had logged more than 1,000 hours in jet aircraft. Other crew for the mission were Daniel Brandenstein, commander; John Creighton, pilot; Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel, mission specialists; and Patrick Baudry, French payload specialist. Backup payload specialist for Arabsat was Abdulmohsen Hamad Al-Bassam. (NASA Release 85-69; WPbst, May 29/85, A12)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) director Dick Smith and Lockheed Space Operations Co. president Doug Sargent today hosted a dedication ceremony for KSC's launch pad B after six years of modification at a cost of $150 million, the Spaceport News reported. NASA would use pad B, the second of the two complex 39 launch pads to undergo modification from the Apollo configuration, to support Space Shuttle and Shuttle Centaur upper stage launches. First launch from the modified pad would be Space Shuttle mission 51-L, scheduled for January 22, 1986. NASA first used pad B in May 1969 for the Apollo 10, third manned Saturn V/Apollo launch. Its last use was for the launch of the Apollo/Soyuz mission in July 1975. Pad modifications included a new Centaur rolling beam, permanent orbiter weather protection system, TV camera floodlights and a TV camera system, boxcars, upgrading of the payload changeout room, a cost-saving lighting system, variable speed motors for loading liquid oxygen, and hydrogen flare stacks. Although there were currently minor differences between pads A and B, the work underway at pad A would eventually make the two functionally identical. (Spaceport News, Dec 20/85, 1; Kennedy Space Center Release 242-85) Launch Schedules
Astronauts aboard the orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F released today a six-and-a-half-foot-long drum-shaped satellite, the Plasma Diagnostics Package, from the orbiter's payload bay, shot it with a looping beam from an electron gun, and then retrieved it with the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm, the NY Times reported. One purpose of the demonstration was to study the electrical effects the Space Shuttle had as it moved through the electrically charged gases of the ionosphere, effects which occasionally caused the Space Shuttle to emit a soft golden glow. Researchers considered solving that riddle important to the success of future mission, which would carry sensitive instruments that the aura might disturb. Another goal was to achieve a better understanding of the aurora, known in the northern hemisphere as the northern lights, which was a disturbance in the atmosphere that created bright lights in the night sky over polar regions. The astronauts reported seeing flashes of light as the beam followed natural magnetic lines to the satellite, the Washington Post reported; the newspaper said scientists on the ground called the demonstration "a fabulous success." (NYT, Aug 2/85, D14; W Post, Aug 2/85, A4)
NASA announced it had selected Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Western Development Laboratories, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) that would include three spacecraft (GOES-1, J, and K) and a two spacecraft option (GOES-L and M). The contract had a proposed cost of $221 million and would provide for a series of GOES satellite systems, each with a five-year design life, that would contribute to continuation of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) GOES program in the 1990 to 2000 era. NASA had scheduled a late 1989 launch for the first GOES satellite in this new series. The contract statement of work covered the satellite bus; imaging, sounding, and space-environment monitor instruments; and flight-support equipment and services to accomplish deployment of the spacecraft into geosynchronous orbit from the Space Shuttle. The contract also included operations ground equipment and support to ensure compatibility of the spacecraft systems with established ground systems operated by NOAA. NASA assigned Goddard Space Flight Center responsibility for project management. (NASA Release 85-80)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Materials Science Laboratory would make its first spaceflight on Space Shuttle 61-C, scheduled for launch on December 18, the Marshall Sfarreported. Using a mission peculiar equipment support structure (MPESS) in the payload bay, the Materials Science Laboratory-2 (MSL-2) would provide accommodations for three experiments in materials processing—the MSFC-managed Electromagnetic Levitator (EML) and Automated Directional Solidification Furnace (ADSF) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory-Managed Three-Axis Acoustic Levitator (3AAL). The electromagnetic levitator experiment would allow scientists to study the effects of materials flow during solidification of a melted material in the microgravity environment. Six samples would be suspended in the electromagnetic field of a coil and melted by induction heating from the coil's electromagnetic field. The ADSF consisted of four furnace, or sample, units. The experiment would investigate the melting and solidification process of four different materials for later comparison to samples of the same materials processed on earth. In the 3AAL experiment, 12 liquid sampies would be suspended in sound pressure waves and rotated and oscillated in a low-gravity nitrogen atmosphere. Investigators would study the degree of sphericity attainable and small bubble migration similar to that having to do with the refining of glass. The standard switch panel in the orbiter aft flight deck would provide activation, deactivation, and status monitoring capability. (Marshall Star, Dec 18/85, 2) During December. NASA scheduled for launch on December 18 the Space Shuttle Columbia, making its first journey into space in two years, on mission 61-C, the 24th flight of the U.S. Space Transportation System. Robert Gibson would command the flight, his second trip into space. Charles Bolden, on his first spaceflight, would pilot; mission specialists would be Franklin Chang-Diaz, a physicist born in Costa Rica and the first American of Hispanic origin to fly in space, and Steven Hawley and George Nelson, both making their second spaceflight; and payload specialists would be Robert Cenker of RCA and U.S. Rep. Bill Nelson of Florida, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications and the second congressional observer to fly in space. During the mission, the crew would deploy RCA's Satcom KU-2 communications satellite, the second in a series of three, with its payload assist module D-2 (PAM D-2) upper stage. The crew on mission 61-C in November deployed Satcom KU-1. Also onboard Columbia in the payload bay would be the Materials Science Lab-2 (MSL-2) [see Space Transportation System/Scientific Research, Dec. 18], the first Hitchhiker (HHG-1) payload, the RCA Infrared-Imaging Experiment (IR—IE), and 12 Get Away Special (GAS) experiments in specialized canisters mounted to a GAS beam attached to the payload bay. Hitchhiker G-1, a more sophisticated version of the GAS concept, consisted of a baseplate on which small payloads were mounted directly or enclosed in canisters. The carrier for the first time provided small payloads with access to the orbiter's 1400-watt power supply and to ground communications. Hitchhiker G-1 experiments would study experimental capillary pumped loop heat transport systems (sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center-GSFC), provide film images of the environment around the Space Shuttle (Air Force Geophysics Laboratory), and study the effect of the Space Shuttle environment on coated mirrors (Perkin-Elmer Corp.). The GAS Bridge was a beam supporting 12 GAS canisters that were mounted across the orbiter's cargo bay. The beam consolidated the canisters into a single easy-to-load and unlead unit. Experiments in the GAS canisters would:
In its recently published "1986 Long-Range Program Plan," NASA outlined plans for an evolutionary, permanently manned space station in low-earth orbit; operation by the year 2000 of man-tended platforms in equatorial, polar, and geosynchronous orbit; and routine manned missions on the moon and later Mars by the early 21st century, Defense Daily reported. The annually updated plan, summarizing the status of NASA planning as of the end of February 1985, also detailed some 120 ongoing and planned NASA space projects and missions for approximately the next ten years, with some out to the year 2000. The plan did not discuss budget figures, but for the near-term assumed budgets with the 1% growth promised annually by President Reagan (which had since disappeared in the deficit battle in Congress). The report did not project a need for more than four Space Shuttle orbiters but did not rule out such a need, while calling for development by 1990 of an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). Beyond 1990, objectives of the NASA spaceflight program included developing an orbital transfer vehicle complementary to the Space Shuttle for transportation of payloads, to, between, and beyond earth orbits; defining, designing, and providing a second-generation space transportation system including unmanned cargo vehicles and second-generation orbiters; developing and operating on a routine basis, beginning in the mid-1990s, geosynchronous orbit space platforms that were unmanned, permanent, and multifunctional; developing and putting into routine operation by the year 2000 geosynchronous orbit facilities that were permanent, multifunction, and able to be periodically manned; developing technology and techniques to construct, deploy, or assemble such facilities in space and to test and service them in orbit; and encouraging and supporting NASA and industry development of technology to improve concepts for space boosters that significantly reduced launch costs. The NASA report noted that "achievements in the early 21st century in science, exploration, earth applications, and commercial uses would depend on two trends: first, the increasing capabilities of space systems with regard to accessibility, payloads, stay times, and variety and sophistication of operations; and second, the increasing capability of instruments with regard to detection, resolution, pointing accuracy, and data collection and management made possible by improvement of their power supplies and cooling mechanisms." In the 21st century, the NASA report said, "automated or human-tended instruments located on the lunar surface will begin complementary observations" with instruments in low-earth orbit and geosynchronous orbit. For manned transportation from the space station, "a cyrogenic version of the orbital transfer vehicle evolutionary family, currently in early stages of preliminary design, is expected to provide by the year 2000 reusability for manned and sortie flights to at least geosynchronous orbit ... It also should be able to provide the basis for transportation for longer flights to establish a lunar base and for planetary missions such as a Mars sample return . . . Routine access to the lunar surface will make possible the first intensive, systematic study of another major celestial body," the report noted. "Extensive sample collection and scientific traverses conducted by humans and long-term instrument networks installed and managed by humans will help determine the details of the moon's structure, composition, and history. They also will make accessible the record of solar and cosmic ray particle fluxes preserved in the lunar soil . . . Similar scientific activities can be carried out on Mars, either by large automated spacecraft or by a manned mission . . ." (D/D, Oct 22/85, 268)
The Washington Post reported that W. Germany had agreed to contribute $900 million over the next decade to participate in an American-led program to build an $8 billion permanently manned space station for initial operations in 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America. The W. Germans would negotiate detailed contracts over the next two years to ensure a fair return on their investment and access to space-based technology, as U.S. restrictions on technology transfer (ostensibly to prevent USSR acquisition of sensitive information, the W Post said) had increasingly irked European allies. W. German and Italian companies planned a special laboratory module that would plug into the U.S.-built spacecraft's main structure for experiments in zero gravity and vacuum conditions. A W. German ministerial report had said cooperation embodied in the space station program "should be welcomed in W. Germany not just for technical and economic reasons, but for political ones, as a transatlantic connecting link." However, the venture had evoked controversy, as some European scientists contended that robots could conduct the work planned for the space station, and others alleged that a $750 million European investment in 1973 to underwrite Spacelab had attained few research benefits. Heinz Riesenhuber, W. German minister for research and technology, said that Bonn would also contribute nearly $500 million to develop a more powerful and versatile Ariane rocket to achieve some European independence in space travel by the 1990s, although he admitted a major W. German investment in the French space shuttle project "Hermes" was impossible. (W Post, Jan 17/85, A1)
Tile work on the orbiter Challenger had remained the "pacing item" in meeting NASA's next scheduled Space Shuttle mission, 51-E, set for no earlier than February 20, Aerospace Daily reported. Randy Stone, 51-E lead flight director, said at a press briefing that NASA would make an assessment at KSC and that he didn't know "what the slip will be or if there is one." Stone had indicated work on the orbiter originating from adhesion problems with thermal protection tiles was progressing well; however, workers still needed to attach over 300 tiles before NASA could move the orbiter to the Vehicle Assembly Building for mating with the external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters. If all went well, NASA would launch Challenger February 20 from KSC and land it there at about 9:21 am EST February 24. (A/D, Jan 30/85, 1)
Langley Research Center announced that the Space Shuttle Columbia would carry three experiments on mission 61-C developed at the center to measure the spacecraft's aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics. Columbia, the first Space Shuttle orbiter to go into space, was making its first flight in two years after it was pulled from flight service in December 1983 for extensive overhaul, including modification to accommodate the LaRC experiments, which were the Shuttle Entry Air Data System (SEADS), Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing (SILTS) experiment, and Shuttle Upper Atmosphere Mass Spectrometer (SUMS). SEADS would measure the distribution of air pressure around the orbiters nosecap during entry to provide precise determination of the arbiter's attitude relative to the oncoming airstream and the density of the atmosphere through which it had flown. Lack of this air data had hindered engineers from determining aerodynamic flight characteristics of the orbiters. The SUMS experiment complemented the SEADS experiment by gathering atmospheric density information at altitudes above 90 km (56 statute miles). SUMS would sample the gas at Columbia's surface through a small hole located just aft of the nosecap and forward of the nosewheel, with its instrument identifying and measuring the quantities of the various gas species present. Data analysis after the mission would allow determination of atmospheric density. The SILTS experiment would obtain high-spatial-resolution infrared images of the upper (leeside) surfaces of the orbiter^ port wing and fuselage during entry through the atmosphere. These infrared images would provide detailed "maps" of the surface temperatures of leeside thermal protection materials, indicating the amount of aerodynamic heating on the leeside surfaces in flight. (LaRC Release 85-99)
NASA announced that a mishap investigation board had completed its report on a March 8 accident in which the Space Shuttle Discovery's payload bay door was damaged and a technician was injured during prelaunch preparations for mission 51-D at KSC [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Launch Schedules, March 8]. In its executive summary, the board reported that "the immediate cause of the mishap was the failure of a master link in one of the two redundant hoist systems that raise and lower the payload bay access platform." The report then noted, "The mishap can be characterized as the culmination of a series of events and conditions that pushed the mechanical components to and beyond their limits." In the accident, a payload bay access platform used to provide access to the orbiter's cargo bay fell from its stowed position on a rolling bridge crane. Tracing the events and conditions that led to the accident, the board noted that "Operators of the payload bay access platforms customarily stowed the platforms by raising them until the telescoping tubes contacted the (single) upper-limit switch that stopped its upward travel. "On March 4, a Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) technician reported a broken upper-limit switch that had caused the telescoping structure to impact the supporting structure. In crane and hoist parlance, this is called 'two-blocking.' The inboard master link failed at this time, and cable overwrap was noted on that portion of the winch. The entire up-down portion of this system was tagged out with a 'Do Not Operate' tag, since only one half of the redundant hoist system remained intact. This tag was placed on the operating controls along with two other similarly appearing tags, both several months old, describing limitations on the operation of the platforms.'' The board's summary then noted the platforms were operated at least twice and stowed at least once between March 4 and the March 8 accident. "During the stowing operation(s), given the fact of a broken upper-limit switch and the standard operating procedure, it is an inescapable conclusion that additional two-blocking occurred. This imparted extremely high loads to the master link in the remaining wire rope assembly, fracturing it almost to the point of sufficient separation for the assembly to fall. When the bridge assembly was moved on the morning of March 8, the resulting jolt was enough to complete the break, and the platform assembly fell." The board recommended that there be a revision of operating procedures and operator training to ensure the upper-limit switches not be used as operational stops, of tagout/lockout procedures to prevent unauthorized use of equipment that had been identified as unsafe, and of the platform preventive maintenance procedures to meet all KSC and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards; a modification of the design of the payload bay access platform to include the addition of an operational stop and 'load sensing device in the wire rope system; and a redesign of the telescoping tubes to facilitate the required inspection of critical linkages. The board estimated damage to Discovery and access platform at $200,000 and noted that the accident delayed rollover to the vehicle assembly building from March 8 until March 23. (NASA Release 85-95) Technology Transfers
Hans Mark, former NASA deputy administrator, Ames Research Center director, and Secretary of the Air Force, on April 9, during part of an MIT dinner lecture series, disparaged government attempts to commercialize space, the Space Commerce Bulletin reported. "Now that I'm out of government, I can say that I found nothing funnier than bureaucrats wringing their hands in town around here about how to commercialize something where most of them, myself included, don't have the slightest idea on how to make investments, how to judge markets, how to do all those things that are important for commercialization," Mark said. He characterized commercial space efforts as being politically popular but backed with little substance, with much of his criticism directed at private sector remote sensing and expendable launch vehicle operations. He said he didn't believe either technology would be a commercial success in the U.S., and he predicted private Space Shuttle operation would never work. Mark considered true commercial space activity to be technology transfer programs and government-industry relations as set up in the 1950s to build hardware for government programs. He added, however, that government couldn't take credit for technology transfer as being space commercialization because that was not what "intellectuals think commercialization means and we need to do other things. So we need to hire 50 people in NASA headquarters to do commercialization." Regarding the impact of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) on commercial space, Mark said, "There's no doubt in my mind that important commercial ventures will follow from SDI simply because of the nature of the contractor systems that we use. We will build high-intensity lasers and the first commercial application of those lasers will surely be in welding or in something like that . . . That's what I like to call the commercialization of space," Mark concluded. (Space Commerce Bulletin, Apr 26/85, 1)
NASA had scratched four squirrel monkeys scheduled to be carried into orbit by the Space Shuttle Challenger in April because NASA found they had a form of herpes that could be transmitted to the astronaut crew, the Washington Post reported. The monkeys' herpes, called Herpes Samirii, was not the virus transmitted sexually by humans, but was unique to New World primates whose natural habitat was the rain forests of South America. Researchers suspected the virus of causing cancer in lower mammals such as rats and therefore classified it as potentially cancerous in humans. NASA replaced the monkeys with those from colonies bred to be virus-free. Four monkeys recruited from the National Institutes of Health and one from Harvard University had been in training since January for their flight on the second mission of Spacelab, scheduled for April 29 at the earliest. Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian, NASA's chief of space medicine, said they were looking for a sixth monkey even though only three might be flown. "One of the monkeys in training is too small and will have to be replaced, and it will be nice to have a backup when the time comes for them to go into orbit," he said. In space the monkeys' cages would have their own oxygen and food and water supplies in the Spacelab portion of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, which was shut off from Challenger's cabin by an airlock. The upcoming flight was a shakedown cruise for the monkeys to ascertain that their cages functioned properly and to make sure the monkeys wouldn't get frightened or injured during launch or return to earth. (Washington Post, Mar 27/85, A20)
The Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) office said today that the Space Shuttle Discovery would participate in June in the first SDI experiment in orbit, carrying a mirror intended to intercept and reflect a laser beam fired from earth, the Washington Post reported. In some missile defense systems, a large orbiting mirror would receive a powerful beam from a ground-based laser and reflect it to destroy an enemy missile, but in the space shuttle experiment, the laser beam would be too weak to harm the spacecraft. A small mirror would reflect the beam back to the ground so engineers could verify their ability to keep the laser pointed at the orbiting mirror. The laser would travel from an Air Force Base on Maui, Hawaii, and bounce back by a special 8-in.-diameter "retroreflector" that astronauts would place in one of the Space Shuttle's middeck side windows while the spacecraft was over the Pacific. An SDI spokesman said the laser had successfully tracked during earlier tests an airplane carrying the mirror at an altitude of 30,000 feet. The Space Shuttle flew in orbit at 100 miles and more. The test, called the high precision tracking experiment, was the first in a series that the SDI office had booked aboard the Space Shuttle. Beginning in 1987,	the Pentagon would fly two major SDI experiments each year. (IV Post, May 24/85, A8) During May: Brigadier General Robert Rankine, Jr,, U.S. Air Force, writing in Aerospace about the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), said that, "In the long term, we have confidence that SDI will be a crucial means by which both the U.S. and the Soviet Union can safely agree to very deep reductions and eventually even the elimination of ballistic missiles and the nuclear weapons they carry. This does not represent a shift from the basic deterrent strategy of the U.S., but represents a new means for enhancing deterrence. ". . . A ballistic missile defense capability has the potential of increasing deterrence and adding to stability, by increasing substantially the uncertainties in the success of nuclear attack by an enemy, thoroughly confounding his targeting strategy, thus significantly reducing or eliminating the utility of preemptive attack. The system need not be perfect to accomplish this objective, but most meet three important criteria: —effective against the systems and countermeasures that exist or could be deployed, —sufficiently survivable that it would not encourage an attack on the system itself . . . —effective at lower cost than any proliferation or countermeasure attempts to overcome it. ". . . Some of the opponents of the Strategic Defense Initiative," Rankine said, "have argued that the research and technology program currently under way is inconsistent with the ABM treaty and conflicts with arms control in general. Quite to the contrary, the initiative it totally consistent with current U.S. ABM treaty obligations. The initiative contemplates only research and experimentation on a broad range of defense technologies to provide the basis for a decision in the future whether or not to develop systems which would provide an effective ballistic missile defense capability." Rankine then described the technical scope of SDI and said the program was broken into five major program elements: surveillance, acquisition, tracking and kill, assessment; directed energy weapons; kinetic energy weapons; systems analysis and battle management; and an assortment of other high-priority technologies that did not warrant separate program elements. Rankine concluded that the goal for SDI had not changed since the President's March 1983 speech proposing the system, when he "challenged all of us in the scientific community to create a means for rendering ballistic missiles impotent and obsolete." (Aerospace, Spring 85, 2)
An accident at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) today damaged the Space Shuttle orbiter Discovery and injured a technician, forcing delay in the orbiter's next flight originally scheduled for March 29, the Washington Post reported. The accident occurred about 8 a.m. when the bucket of a "cherry picker" crane hovering over Discovery fell, hitting a Lockheed technician who was on a work platform and then striking Discovery, which was horizontal on the floor of the orbital processing facility. The 2,500-lb. bucket broke the technician's leg and injured his shoulder, then fell onto the closed left-hand cargo bay door, which was so thin and made of such light-weight material that it could not be opened on earth without elaborate supports to keep it in a fixed position. The bucket made two holes about three feet apart in the heat protection tiles insulating the door and damaged the door's structure. A NASA spokesman said an investigating board would determine the cause of the accident, extent of the damage, and impact on the flight schedule. Officials speculated that NASA would have to replace the 2,400-lb. door, which would require shipment of a new door from the manufacturer and as many as three or four days of work to complete installation. (W Post, Mar 9/ 85, A2)
NASA scheduled the Space Shuttle Challenger to take today four high-tech cans each of Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola, the world's two largest-selling soft drinks, into orbit for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Stocking Challenger with both Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola resulted from a compromise reached after weeks of highly sensitive negotiations. NASA had not previously flown carbonated drinks in space because no containers were available to control and dispense carbonated liquids in zero gravity. It took the companies more than two years to develop and test the cans. Pepsi-Cola said its can cost its supplier, Enviro-Spray, $14 million to develop. Pepsi-Cola filled its can with eight ounces of cola and a plastic pouch that expanded when chemicals were mixed inside it to create carbon dioxide gas, which then inflated the pouch and forced the beverage out. Coca-Cola's can was lined with a laminated plastic bag filled with cola that overlaid a second plastic bag containing carbon dioxide under 50 lb. of pressure. The carbon dioxide forced the cola out of the can. A drawback to both cans was that they must be drunk unchilled. NASA retained the legal right to use whichever container worked best, the Washington Times reported, and to fill it with the drink of its choice. (WPost, July 12/85, A3; W Times, July 8/85, 3A)
NASA expected the Space Shuttle's nose wheel steering capability, previously used only on an experimental basis, would achieve operational status by the fall, the Space News Roundup reported. NASA had attributed brake damage to the orbiter Discovery following the STS 51-D mission in part to crosswinds at KSC, which required the orbiter's commander to use the main gear braking system for differential steering. Nose wheel steering would allow Space Shuttle commanders to use the brake system for stopping orbiters rather than for braking and steering combined. A nose wheel steering capability was in the Space Shuttle design, but used only on an experimental basis. NASA had spent the last year upgrading the system to operational status. In addition, NASA instrumented the Challenger to provide better landing condition data and planned to add instrumentation to the landing gear system of the Discovery. In the 17 Space Shuttle missions to date, NASA had used 68 individual brake systems with 27 receiving no damage, 27 receiving slight damage, and 14 receiving significant damage in which either one or more stators or rotors overheated or suffered other problems. Until the nose wheel steering capability became operational, NASA intended to choose on a flight by flight basis between Kennedy Space Center and Edwards Air Force Base as the primary end of mission landing site. (JSC Space News Roundup, June 14/85, 2)
NASA announced award of a $2,374,800 fixed-price contract to Stearns Catalytic Corp. to modify a test stand at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), Hancock County, Mississippi, to give NSTL a third test position to static-fire individually Space Shuttle main engines. The structural, mechanical, and electrical modifications would begin no later than March 1985 for completion in a year. Space Shuttle main-engine testing had begun at NSTL in June 1975, using test stands A-1 and A-2 for single-engine testing of flight and nonflight engines. Later NASA used the B-2 test position to certify the main propulsion system in a series of three-engine cluster firings. The additional test position would support projected increases in main-engine test requirements, including increased turbopump production rates. NASA would initially use the new B-2 position to test new and overhauled engine turbopumps using a testbed engine. NASA had originally used the B-2 test stand in the 1960s to flight-certify the Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle's first stage. (NASA Release 85-19)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, testifying today before the U.S. House HUD and independent agencies appropriations subcommittee on NASA's FY 86 budget request, said that orbiter processing constraints at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) made it difficult for NASA to consider adding Space Shuttle flights to get the year's planned commercial launches back on schedule, Aerospace Daily reported. When asked by Chairman Edward Boland (D-Mass.) if reports were true that NASA was considering launching three commercial satellites on Deltas rather than the Space Shuttle to get the Space Shuttle's manifest back on schedule, Beggs responded that it was an option the agency "had to look at" but one that probably would not be exercised. He said NASA talked to several Space Shuttle customers about flying payloads on Deltas and some were interested. Another option NASA considered was adding another Space Shuttle flight to the manifest, but orbiter processing constraints posed problems. "We just can't push the orbiters through the processing facility quickly enough," he said, although NASA still "may be able to squeeze another launch" into the year's manifest. He pointed out the hardware for another flight was available and NASA proposed building a third orbiter processing facility high bay and Space Shuttle tile facility at KSC with FY 86 funds. (A/D, Apr 3/85, 1)
The orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F landed at 12:46 p.m. PDT today on Edwards Air Force Base's Mojave Desert lake-bed runway, the Washington Post reported. During the flight, Challenger circled the earth 127 times, a distance of a little over three million miles. Technicians stood by at the runway to remove immediately the heat sensors from Challenger's main engines to check a NASA theory that the sensors caused the premature shutdown of the center rocket engine during the July 29 launch. NASA was confident enough that the sensors would be found at fault that it had equipped Discovery's engines with redesigned sensors before moving it August 5 to the launch pad. During the mission, Challenger became an orbiting astronomical observatory with more than $72 million of telescopes and other instruments to study the sun, stars, and distant galaxies. The NY Times reported that Dr. Burton Edelson, NASA associate administrator, said, "We met more than 80 percent of all science objectives of this mission. We're absolutely delighted." Dr. Eugene Urban, chief mission scientist, added, "Everyone has collected tantalizing new data. It's going to take a long time before this data is analyzed and really fully appreciated. We've made some interesting new observations, and some have been very spectacular." Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, commented that the orbiter appeared to be in good shape after the landing, the eighth for the Challenger. "It was a beautiful landing," he said. "The tiles looked very good. The brakes look excellent. The orbiters continue to be magnificent flying machines." (W Post, Aug 7/85, A3; NYT, Aug 7/85, A1)
NASA announced it reached agreement with the Department of Defense (DOD) on a pricing and reimbursement policy for DOD use of the Space Transportation System during the period FY 89 through FY 91. The agreement established an average price of $60 million (in 1982 dollars) for each DOD launch, an average which was based on the estimated cost to fly and an exchange of launch and range support services between DOD and NASA. The price reflected a fixed-base component of $30 million for each planned flight and an incremental component of $30 million for each actual flight. The annual fixed-based component total—$270 million a year, based on DOD projections of nine equivalent flights—would be paid regardless of the number of actual flights, while the $30 million incremental component would be paid for each actual flight. By combining a fixed annual charge with a low variable cost per flight, the agreement insured that NASA would be able to cover its funding needs and DOD would continue to rely on the Space Shuttle as DOD's primary space launch vehicle. (NASA Release 85-169) Scientific Research
NASA announced it had scheduled the 51-E Space Shuttle mission from KSC for no earlier than March 3, 1985, with landing on March 7, 1985, at KSC. The 7th flight of the orbiter Challenger would include deployment of the 2nd Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and Telesat Canada's Anik Cl communications satellite and the French echocardiograph and postural experiments. Mission 51-E crew would be Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and payload specialists Patrick Baudry and Sen. E. J. "Jake" Garn (R-Utah). Thermal protection system refurbishment [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Launch Schedules, Feb. 6] had necessitated the delay from February 20. NASA had yet to accomplish step measurements, gap filler installation, and tile-bond and quality verifications. NASA said the current 51-E launch date did not affect the planned March 19 launch date of the Space Shuttle 51-D mission. (NASA Release 85-20)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) requested proposals for a 12-month study of an advanced high-thrust, high-performance liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engine that could be used for the advanced launch vehicles being examined in NASA/Air Force Space Transportation Architecture Studies (STAS), which included heavy lift launch vehicles, Defense Daily reported. NASA considered the advanced LOX/hydrogen cryogenic engine and a new LOX/hydrocarbon engine to be key elements to advanced transportation systems. MSFC said it planned to award up to three parallel firm-fixed-price contracts for the study of the Space Transportation Main Engine (STME). During the study, the contractors would prepare parametric trade-off data for engine requirements and configurations that might be employed in future launch vehicles. NASA would compare these engine configurations to the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME) for application to new launch vehicles. The contractors would identify candidate engine configurations, compare their features, and then recommend engine configurations that would best satisfy the requirements of future launch vehicles. The three principal contenders for the STME study were Rockwell's Rocket-dyne Div., prime contractor for the SSME; and Aerojet Technologies and United Technologies's Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, who conducted component improvement studies for the SSME. (D/D, Nov 21/85, 105) Military Applications
NASA and the Defense Department (DOD) with White House concurrence abandoned any consideration of transferring the management of Space Shuttle operations to a commercial venture or quasi-public corporation for the foreseeable future, Aviation Week reported. The decision would thwart plans of commercial ventures that had sought the combined Space Shuttle management/marketing role. The Shuttle Operations Strategic Planning Group, a team made up of officials from NASA, DOD, the White House, and private enterprise, said ". . . the suggestion that the space shuttle should or could be transferred, sold or leased to private enterprise for its operation, marketing and future development is simply not a viable alternative for the foreseeable future." Although some commercial space officials called the group's study a "whitewash," others believed the decision could introduce more Space Shuttle launch and cost stability, a critical issue with a large segment of commercial space ventures that needed Space Shuttle transportation no matter who was managing it. DOD Space Shuttle military space-flight requirements, including the potential for Strategic Defense Initiative Space Shuttle activity, were key elements in the decision not to take management of the program away from NASA. As a result of the decision, NASA would have to create a new management structure in order to get the Space Shuttle out of existing development-oriented management. "As the shuttle evolves and the flight rate increases," the strategic planning group said, "organizational realignments within NASA will become necessary to ensure that NASA's R&D and shuttle operations do not detract from one another but are mutually supportive." (AvWk, Apr 29/ 85, 42)
NASA announced that live classroom lessons and scientific demonstrations, which would be broadcast live around the country, would be filmed for use in educational products which were just some of the activities planned by Christa McAuliffe, the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Project, for Space Shuttle mission 51—L. The first live lesson, entitled "The Ultimate Field Trip," would allow students to compare daily life on the Space Shuttle with that on earth. McAuliffe would take viewers on a tour of the orbiter, explaining crew members' roles, showing the location of computers and controls, and explaining experiments being conducted on the mission. She would also demonstrate how daily life in space was different from that on earth in the preparation of food, movement, exercise, personal hygiene, sleep, and the use of leisure time. The second lesson, called "Where We've Been, Where We're Going," would help the audience understand why people use and explore space by demonstrating the advantages of manufacturing in the microgravity environment, explaining technological advances that evolved from the space program, and projecting the future of humans in space. Also during the flight, McAuliffe would participate in activities that would be filmed and later used in educational products. Possible activities included demonstrating earth magnetism by photographing and observing the lines of magnetic force in three dimensions in a microgravity environment; demonstrating Newton's first, second, and third laws in a microgravity environment; discussing why products might or might not effervesce in a microgravity environment; encouraging creative works from students that reflected their interpretation of the space program/experience; explaining the use of simple machines/tools and the similarities and differences between their uses in space and on earth; showing the effect of microgravity on plant growth, growth of plants without soil (hydroponics), and capillary action; and demonstrating chromatographic separation of pigments in a microgravity environment. In addition, McAuliffe would assist mission specialists conducting three Shuttle Student Involvement Project experiments that would fly onboard the Space Shuttle. The experiments dealt with using a semipermeable membrane to direct crystal growth, studying chicken embryo development in space, and the effect of weightlessness on grain formation and strength in metals. (NASA Release 85-139)
Presidential Science Advisor Dr. George Keyworth said to the U.S. House aviation subcommittee today that the U.S. was in the forefront of an unprecedented revolution in aeronautical technology, Defense Daily reported, and he called for an immediate start by the country on a streamlined, focused, and coordinated program by both government and industry to develop the necessary technology to field—before the end of the century-hypersonic transatmospheric passenger transport and space launch vehicles/military space planes. The latter could provide a two orders of magnitude reduction in the cost of transporting a pound of payload into orbit. Keyworth said he believed it was possible to develop the technology for the follow-ons to current commercial jetliners and the Space Shuttle under one R&D program. Although he was not certain if one vehicle could fill both roles, he predicted that the vehicles would be "very similar." Keyworth did not give specifics about funding requirements or a timetable but said that the government should in the course of the coming fall's discussions of the FY 87 budget focus on the opportunities available in the hypersonic area. Alluding to the British view that they could build the HOTOL (Horizontal Take-Off and Landing) transatmospheric vehicle by 1997, Key-worth said it was possible for the U.S. to exceed that goal. He noted that the Reagan Administration over the next few months would work with the aerospace industry to develop a program focusing on well-defined goals and added that he hoped NASA and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency would appropriately budget funds to make the program stand out. Keyworth said he was not talking about tomorrow's technology in the hypersonic area but technology that "is here" waiting to be assembled. At the same hearing, Rep. Tom Lewis (R-Fla.) said the British claimed that the HOTOL would be able to put payloads in orbit at one-half to one-fifth the cost of the Space Shuttle, and that they would capture 75% of the commercial launch market by the year 2000. Deputy Assistant Commerce Secretary Crawford Brubaker added that Britain had closed to the outside world all information about the engines being developed for HOTOL, so "they think they have made a breakthrough" on those engines. It was reported that a combination of Rolls-Royce conceived, airbreathing engines using atmospheric oxygen and liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engines would power HOTOL. (D/D, July 25/85, 129)
A fire of unknown cause today destroyed one of the four buildings used to mix rocket solid fuels for the Space Shuttle at Morton Thiokol's rocket motor assembly plant outside Brigham City, Utah, the Washington Post reported. No one was injured in the fire that leveled a 400-sq.-ft. building operated largely by robots at a remote part of the Thiokol plant. Because three of the four fuel mixing plants at Thiokol were needed at all times to maintain solid-fuel rocket motor production schedules, NASA said it was concerned enough to send an accident review board team from Marshall Space flight Center to investigate. (IV Post, June 5/85, A5)
In a commentary in the Washington Times in response to a U.S. Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) study that had asserted NASA's plans for a permanent space station were not scientifically, economically, or militarily justified, Robert Melton, assistant professor at Pennsylvania State University, wrote that the study missed the point of NASA's current efforts to define better what should go into the station before proceeding with actual design and construction. He wrote that NASA had entered Phase B, the definition study of the project, in which contractors would provide NASA with thorough analyses of exactly what missions would be carried out in what time schedule and with descriptions of necessary equipment and technology together with a breakdown of costs. Such a detailed study was necessary to avoid premature overemphasis on design and to avert technical problems as the program progressed. Melton argued that the permanent space station was a logical next step after the Space Shuttle program and could serve as both a laboratory and base of operations for scientific, commercial, and security purposes. The space station could also serve as a permanent base for repairing and routinely servicing satellites, as a depot for permanently, space-based orbital transfer vehicles capable of delivering and retrieving high-orbit payloads, and as a base for building other large structures that would remain in orbit. Melton noted that the benefits of a permanent space station would make the $8 billion expenditure spread over several years seem a fairly small amount, especially when compared to other items in the federal budget. However, Melton acknowledged that the OTA study proved NASA had to do a better job of defining its space station goals and of impressing upon the public the importance of the project. (W Times, Mar 13/85, 2D)
NASA announced a new Space Shuttle manifest for 41 Space Shuttle missions through December 14, 1987 that included nine flights for the remainder of 1985, 15 flights in 1986, and 17 flights in 1987. Highlights for 1985 included the first Atlantis flight in late September for a Department of Defense mission; a Spacelab 3 flight in late April, Spacelab 2 with extensive European Space Agency participation in July, and another Spacelab flight in October dedicated to W. German scientific investigations. Also during 1985 NASA would deploy communications satellites for Hughes, AT&T, RCA, Mexico, Australia, Canada, and the Arabsat consortium. In 1986 the first launch of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base would occur. The first liquid-hydrogen-powered Shuttle Centaur upper stage would be used to deploy Ulysses (formerly the International Solar Polar Mission), and the Galileo mission to Jupiter (also using the Shuttle Centaur) and the Hubble Space Telescope flight would be launched. NASA said launch dates of missions to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and to retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF-1) were under review. Also, NASA assigned Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce McCandless as mission specialists for the Hubble Space Telescope flight on mission 61-J in August 1986. (NASA Release 8550)
$341,496,165. Under the contract, the company would provide system integration, selected flight hardware, software, ground support equipment, and mission integration support for manifested Spacelab missions. Spacelab, developed by NASA under an international agreement with the European Space Agency, when carried in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter converted it into an orbiting scientific research center. MSFC was responsible for monitoring Spacelab design and development activities and for management of U.S. development of selected Spacelab components. (MSFC Release 85-53)
Effective today Lockheed Corp. reassigned six officers of its Lockheed Space Operations Co. at Kennedy Space Center after a six-month corporate investigation of the management practices and work procedures used to process the Space Shuttle for launch, Aviation Week reported. E. Douglas Sargent replaced A.R. Schroter as president of Lockheed Space Operations Co. and became program manager of the Space Shuttle processing contract, David Owen replaced W. John Denson as deputy program manager and became executive vice president of the space operations company, and David Dickenson replaced Ronald Petersen as vice president and director of Kennedy Space Center operations. Although the replaced Lockheed managers had previously received unfavorable management evaluations, the management realignment came as NASA completed a report on its investigation of a March 8 incident in which a work platform fell in the Orbiter Processing Facility, damaging the orbiter Discovery and injuring a workman [see Space Transportation System, Launch Schedules, Mar. 8]. The report would assign a large part of the responsibility for the accident to Lockheed safety and quality control procedures. However, a NASA official said the platform incident did not precipitate the realignment. He said a Lockheed Corp. investigating team, which had analyzed Lockheed's performance at KSC since the previous October, had made detailed recommendations on how to streamline and improve performance. Also, after receiving a grade of excellent in the award fee evaluation during the transition period when Lockheed took over Space Shuttle processing work previously done by 15 separate contractors, NASA gave Lockheed a low score in the next evaluation period of April 1 to September 30, 1984. Lockheed's basic space processing contract with NASA ran through September 30, 1986, and there was a priced option period for three more years. The two priced contracts were worth $2.5 billion; three additional unpriced three-year options could bring the contract life to 15 years and value to more than $6 billion. NASA said it had no plans to recompete the Space Shuttle processing contract. (AvWk, May 13/85, 14)
In assessing the status of the Syncom IV-3 (Leasat 3) satellite that was drifting in low-earth orbit after its apogee kick motor failed to push it into proper orbit [see Apr. 18], aerospace engineers said astronauts might be able to salvage the satellite, the Washington Times reported. Payload specialists originally believed it would be too dangerous to return the satellite to earth on the Space Shuttle because of the nearly six tons of highly volatile rocket fuel it carried. Jerome Hammack, a spacecraft safety operations expert, said deactivating the satellite's electronic systems would significantly reduce the chance of stray sparks igniting the fuel, most of which would turn to gas upon descent. To ensure that there was no power going to any of the electrical circuits, a spacewalking astronaut would have to cut power circuits running to the satellite's batteries and solar power cells. However, NASA would mount a rescue attempt only if Hughes Communications Inc., Leasat 3's manufacturer, and Hughes' insurance underwriters agreed to a salvage contract. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
NASA Administrator James Beggs stirred up a controversy when he reportedly told a Washington gathering of the American Stock Exchange that the Soviets had "turned us down, flat, with no explanation" on the proposal of a joint space mission, the Washington Times reported. Later NASA spokesman Miles Waggoner said the Soviets had not rejected the idea, but a joint manned space mission was not likely to happen within the next few years. President Reagan had offered the Soviets a chance to participate in a cooperative space venture about a year previously. The Soviets responded that they believed it was not the time to fly that kind of mission. "To us, that means the item is still open," Waggoner said. "This time, though, Mr. Beggs decided to look at it from the other perspective." Other NASA officials, indicating the agency hadn't received any new word from the Soviets about the proposal, speculated Beggs might have said what he did to provoke a reaction from them. Originally, NASA planners envisioned a joint practice rescue mission in which a U.S. astronaut would use a jet backpack called a manned maneuvering unit (MMU) to fly from a Space Shuttle to a Soviet Salyut space station. The astronaut might also use the MMU to push a cosmonaut back to the Space Shuttle for a brief time. (W Times, June 12/85, 4A)
NASA announced that, based on a review of engine data following the July 29 Space Shuttle mission 51-F launch, Marshall Space Flight Center and Kennedy Space Center engineers believed that failed sensors—not an engine failure—were the probable cause of the main engine No. 1 shut down [see Space Transportation System/Missions, July 29]. The data suggested the high-pressure fuel turbopump on that engine performed normally, because there were no indications the pump was running hot. If the pump were running hot, Johnson Space Center flight engineers, who monitored engine performance during ascent, would have expected to see changes in the position of an oxidizer valve indicating an increased flow to supply the pump with more power. Data showed the valve position did not change. A second data indication of normal pump performance was present in the engine discharge pressures, which were monitored by ground controllers and the main engine controller. Based on these indications, NASA engineers reviewing the cause of the engine shutdown tentatively concluded that the main engine controller was receiving faulty data from failed sensors. Resistance measurements taken by the engine controller provided an indicator of pump temperatures, because the resistance increased as the temperature increased. The controller logic was able to distinguish, within certain limits, a valid reading from one that indicated the sensor wire, a very thin wire, was broken or had otherwise failed. The controller recognized the bad reading from the Channel B sensor; the reading from Channel A, however, drifted, indicating a temperature rise above the redline limit. Because of the failure mode in the second sensor, which gave readings above the redline limit but below those that would cause the controller to disregard them as unreasonable and thus indicative of a sensor failure, the engine controller believed there was a possible pump problem and shut down the engine. A temperature sensor on main engine No. 3 also failed. Because there was a history of these temperature sensors failing on previous Space Shuttle flights, NASA decided to develop a new sensor for use on future Space Shuttle flights beginning with mission 51-1. Until such time as NASA confirmed this explanation by an examination of the engine and its various systems, NASA would not launch another mission. Flowever, the agency did not anticipate that this would result in a delay in the next mission. The call "abort to orbit" used to describe the action ordered for the July 29 Space Shuttle flight was the preferred type of Space Shuttle launch "abort" in that it gave the crew, the orbiter, and the ground controllers time to review options and to ascertain that the crew and orbiter were in good condition. In nearly all cases, the abort-to-orbit contingency would allow completion of most of a particular mission's flight requirements. Once NASA determined that an orbiter was in a safe orbit (minimum would be about 105 nautical miles circular), then the crew and ground flight controllers could begin to assess the impact on planned mission activities. In the case of mission 51-F, the orbit achieved was 106 by 146 nautical miles, 40 miles short of the planned designations; the orbiter was at a velocity of 25,760 feet-per-second, which was 110 feet-per-second less than planned. NASA determined all abort modes based on the weight of the orbiter, the inclination of the desired orbit, and other characteristics. Each mode had a specific applicable time and duration during the ascent phase, and crew and ground controllers practiced these contingency situations regularly. (NASA Release 85-114)
NASA announced that, during mission 51 —L scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986, it would release from the Space Shuttle a free-flying payload called Spartan-Halley to observe Halley's Comet. Scientists believed that comet exploration was a search for the beginnings of earth, because comets were the most unaltered samples of the early solar system. Spartan-Halley was the only NASA satellite dedicated solely to observing Comet Halley. During these observations, January 24 through 31, the comet would be in its most active period as it headed towards its closest approach to the sun on February 9. The objective of the Spartan-Halley mission was to measure from earth orbit the ultraviolet spectrum of Comet Halley using twin spectrographs designed and built by the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics. Spartan-Halley's cameras and instruments would analyze the active comet, looking for hydrogen and oxygen atoms and carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur molecules. If the spacecraft detected these elements, it might indicate more complex compounds could be present in the ice and dust that made up the comet's nucleus. Goddard Space Flight Center developed Spartan-Halley, a modified Spartan-2 spacecraft, to be a research carrier. The spacecraft consisted of the spectrographic instrumentation, attitude control cameras (which also provided science photography), a microprocessor, associated electronics, a sunlight baffling system, and a service module. The January mission would be the first for the Spartan-2 type carrier, a completely reusable spacecraft to be reflown later on several other missions. Following completion of the January mission, the Space Shuttle's robot arm would retrieve Spartan-Halley and store it in the cargo bay. (NASA Release 85-161)
NASA announced that in a two-and-one-half-year effort costing $15 million it had lengthened and improved its Aircraft Landing Dynamics Facility at Langley Research Center. The track, used to test aircraft wheels, tires, and landing gear, used a high-pressure water jet system to propel the test carriage along the rail/track system where researchers conducted experiments under simulated runway conditions. Track testing options included choosing between concrete or asphalt runway surfaces and among a full range of weather-related surface conditions, including dry, damp, or flooded runways or slush- or ice-covered surfaces. Even before the expansion, NASA believed the track to be the only facility in the world capable of testing full-size aircraft landing gear systems under closely controlled conditions simulating takeoffs and landings. Lengthening the track to more than one-half mile increased the facility's maximum test speed from 120 to 250 mph and made possible, for the first time, simulated landing tests of all modern aircraft and the Space Shuttle. Other facility improvements included a higher capacity water jet system and a newly designed high-speed test carriage. The improved catapult system produced a 1.7-million-lb. thrust on the carriage, resulting in a 17—g (gravity force) acceleration that pushed the carriage in only 400 feet from zero to 250 mph in two seconds, and the new carriage had a 20-by-40-foot test bay to accommodate larger test articles. NASA used ten thousand gallons of water in maximum speed run. Initial research at the modified facility would study the cornering forces and spin-up characteristics of the Space Shuttle main gear tire, which spun up from zero to landing speeds almost instantly at touchdown. NASA would mount a tire-wheel-brake assembly on the carriage for tests of tire wear and applied loads and would run these first tests on the facility's existing smooth concrete surface. Later runs would require the touchdown area of the track altered to simulate the roughness and grooving of the Space Shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center. NASA would then paint smooth the relatively rough runway to determine the best KSC runway characteristics to lessen Space Shuttle tire wear. Later tests would include a variety of aircraft landing hardware tests, averaging about 75 to 100 runs each. NASA estimated the facility could accomplish 300 runs a year with as many as six a day during the height of a test program. One test program, for example, would compare the performance of radial tires, not commonly used on aircraft, to that of conventional bias ply tires. NASA would run these tests in conjunction with a Federal Aviation Adminis-tration/NASA program to gather information on runway surface traction. NASA had scheduled over the next several years test programs that included track tests to develop a data based for the National Tire Modeling Program, an analytical computer model to aid in design of new tires, and a tire failure study. (NASA Release 85-109) Lewis Research Center
NASA Administrator James Beggs told Congress that the new version of the Centaur rocket designed for Space Shuttle-launched planetary missions would cost about $110 million more ($90 million for NASA; $20 million for the Air Force) than expected [see NASA/Budget, Feb. 28], the Washington Post reported. Wider and shorter than the old-model Centaur to fit in the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, the new rocket would launch in 1986 two spacecraft toward Jupiter. An even shorter version starting in 1987 would launch from the Space Shuttle two classified missions for the Air Force. Beggs told the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications that "We underestimated the job of integrating the Centaur into the shuttle and General Dynamics underestimated the cost of changing the configuration of the rocket." The new estimates raised Centaur program costs from $755 million to $865 million. (W Post, May 24/85, A16)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that Warren North, JSC specialist in astronaut selection and training, retired February 1 after 38 years with NASA. North had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA's predecessor agency) in 1947 as a test-pilot engineer at LeRC. In 1959 North had transferred to NASA Headquarters, where he participated in early planning for Project Mercury, including selection and training of the seven original Mercury astronauts; in 1962 North assumed leadership of the JSC division responsible for training astronauts for Gemini rendezvous and docking development flights and for the Apollo lunar landing program. North was currently special assistant to the JSC flight-operations director for planning Space Shuttle crew training and flight-simulation equipment and techniques. North received a bachelor's degree from Purdue University and master's degrees from Case Institute of Technology and Princeton University. (JSC Release 85-7)
The U.S. House Appropriations Committee deleted $7.2 million in FY 86 funds requested by the Air Force to initiate a $350 million program to refurbish Titan II ICBMs for use as space boosters, Defense Daily reported. The committee warned that the Titan II launchers could "only have a further impact on the Shuttle and result in a less efficient use of Shuttle facilities" and pointed out that the Air Force had "not been able to demonstrate why the expensive Titan II refurbishment program is critical to the defense of the nation." The Committee also noted that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration dropped its plans to launch some payloads on the Titan II in favor of launching them on the Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Revenues Feb. 25 and Oct. 18], "bringing into question whether Titan II is cost-effective on a per launch basis," the committee said. It also cited classified reasons for its action. (D/D, Oct 29/85, 305)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press briefing, noted that the fourth Space Shuttle orbiter, Atlantis, would join the fleet in the spring to fly its first mission in 1985 and that, despite being well into the Space Shuttle's operational phase, NASA would continue to improve performance, procure space parts, and enhance reliability. In support of Presidential efforts to cut government spending, NASA would slow space station definition and development efforts, cancel the advanced composite structures program in aeronautics, and not initiate any new projects in the space science and applications program. (NASA release Feb. 4/ 85, NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/85)
NASA was still evaluating data submitted by four companies in response to its request for responses on the possibility of opening a second source for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motors (SRM), Aerospace Daily reported. Those responding were Hercules, Aerojet Strategic Propulsion, United Technologies' Chemical Systems Division, and Atlantic Research Corp. NASA also had a proposal from Morton Thiokol, the current sole-source producer, and would not make a final decision until later in the month. In April Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, told the House appropriations HUD and independent agencies subcommittee that he expected to "have a review of the assessment sometime in the early part of May" and that in the interim NASA would proceed with the next buy of SRMs from Morton Thiokol. Agency officials expected it would take about four years to qualify a second source and "get them up to speed." NASA Administrator James Beggs would make the final decision on whether to open a second source for SRMs. A NASA official said he thought there was "a good possibility" that Beggs would have the needed information to make "a decision by the end of this month." {A/D, June 6/85, 1)
Peoples Republic of China astronautics minister Li Xue said China would put their Long March 2 and 3 rockets on the international market to provide satellite launching services for local and foreign clients, FBIS Beijing XINHUA Hong Kong Service in Chinese reported. The decision resulted from the October 21 launch by a Long March 2 rocket of an earth surveying satellite and an April 8, 1984 launch by a Long March 3 rocket of China's first experimental telecommunications satellite. Li Xue said the recent Long March 2 launch was its seventh consecutive success, indicating the two-stage liquid-propellant rocket could reliably put a satellite of about two tons into a near-earth orbit from the Jiuquan launching center, in addition the Long March 3 launch from the Xichang launching center of a satellite into geosynchronous orbit showed China had mastered the technology for placing a satellite in that orbit. He added that in addition to launch services from the two centers, China could provide satellite orbital control and support from the Xian control center, which had an ocean-based survey vessel component. And he pointed out that China could provide preferential prices for foreign customers, would train technicians, and had the capability, through the Chinese People's Insurance Co., to underwrite satellites that were launched. In conclusion, he said that, after the Long March 2 and 3 rockets were on the international market, they would promote international technical and economic cooperation in the astronautics field and contribute to the maintenance of world peace. (FBIS, XINHUA Kong Hong Service in Chinese, Oct 26/85) January 1Ch Four years after cancellation of the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), the U.S. Navy had begun to develop a simple, low-cost system to monitor ocean conditions routinely from space, Aerospace Daily reported. Budgeted at about a third the estimated cost of NOSS, the Navy Remote Ocean Sensing System (NROSS) would have nearly the same capability as NOSS by 1989, lacking particularly the synthetic aperture radar, and would use many of the ocean observation capabilities NASA's Seasat program demonstrated in 1979. The Pentagon had avoided $591.5 million in FY 1981-88 costs by cancelling NOSS (NASA and NOAA contributions would have made the total over $1 billion). NROSS would use a single-satellite system with no backup; the Navy would resolve later the issue of replenishment satellites. NROSS would also use existing or already planned data-processing equipment at the Navy's Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center and the USAF's Defense Meteorological Satellite Program command and control facilities. The Navy expected to spend about $200 million from FY 85 development through a launch in 1989, with a NASA contribution of $115 million ($35 million for the satellite program and $80 million in research). The Office of Management and Budget had vetoed use of NOAA's NOAA-D spacecraft as the NROSS bus, so NROSS would use a Block 5D-2 DMSP spacecraft. The Navy had planned an Atlas E launch, but was considering a refurbished Titan II ICBM. Planners rejected a Space Shuttle launch as too expensive.
NASA announced that Loren Shriver, pilot of Space Shuttle mission 51-C, would command mission 61-1 scheduled for launch from KSC no earlier than July 15, 1986. The pilot would be Bryan O'Connor, also scheduled to fly as pilot on mission 61-B in November 1985. Mission specialists would be William Fisher, also scheduled as a mission specialist on 51-1 in August 1985; Mark Lee, making his initial flight; and Sally Ride, who flew June 1983 on STS-7 as the first U.S. woman in space and then again October 1984 on 41-G. (JSC Release 85-027)
When the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-F landed today, it successfully concluded the third mission of the European-developed space laboratory, Spacelab 2, which NASA used for the first time in its pallet-only configuration, NASA reported. All Spacelab subsystems but one provided excellent data, and NASA verified for the first time two new Spacelab systems, the "Igloo" and the instrument pointing system. NASA would fly many of the Spacelab 2 instruments on future missions, so the 51-F mission provided opportunities not only for scientific data collection but also for engineering checkouts of the new equipment. Since instruments are brought home, engineers could evaluate and refurbish them to improve their performance or modify them to meet different scientific objectives in response to results from prior flights. Through Spacelab 2's four ultraviolet and visible light instruments, researchers observed a sun that, although it was in a fairly quiet phase of its activity cycle, displayed sunspots, filaments, granules, spicules, and prominences. These solar features changed over periods as brief as five to ten minutes and from orbit to orbit, day to day. The solar ultraviolet universal polarimeter (SOUP) started its program late in the mission after an unexplained shutdown and startup. Thereafter, the instrument performed almost perfectly, observing the strength, structure, and evolution of magnetic fields in the solar atmosphere. Scientists were confident that despite abbreviated operations SOUP data would be the best and longest run of solar granulation data ever collected. Although loss of altitude and propellant during initial Space Shuttle ascent jeopardized part of the plasma depletion experiment, planners managed to schedule four of the eight anticipated burns, two over Millstone Hill, Massachusetts, and one each over Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and Hobart, Australia. Preliminary data indicated that the burns did produce "holes" or troughs of depleted plasma that persisted in the ionosphere for more than an hour. The crew observed resultant airglow after the nighttime burns, and there were reports of visual observations from the ground. The Hobart site reported the reception of low-frequency cosmic radio emissions through the window the burn temporarily opened. In the properties of superfluid helium in zero-gravity experiment, the cryostat performed up to expectation, maintaining a temperature low enough to keep the helium in the superfluid state. Temperature was readily controlled, and the cryostat recovered well from temperature increases. These findings were important to the use of superfluid helium as a cryogen on future missions. During the gravity influenced lignification in plants experiment, pine seedlings, oats, and bean sprouts grew in self-contained growth chambers. The crew daily monitored chamber temperatures and photographed the chambers early and late in the mission. The oat and bean seeds germinated in orbit, and sprouts grew to a height of five to six inches as expected. The pine seedlings also showed normal growth. Researchers would analyze the plant tissues to determine whether there was any difference in the production rate of lignin between plants grown in space and in a control group grown in a ground laboratory. (NASA Prelim Spacelab Mission Science Report, Aug 6/ 85; ESA release Aug 7/85)
NASA announced it had presented at a ceremony at NASA Headquarters its 1984 inventor of the year award to Dale Kornfeld, Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), and John Vanderhoff, Mohammed El-Asser, and For-tunato Micale, all of Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, for their "process for preparation of large-particle size monodisperse latexes." The monodisperse latex reactor processor, an experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle, had produced microspheres in zero gravity in sizes ranging from 5 to 30 micrometers. The maximum size particles produced on earth, with the required standards of quality and uniformity, were about 2 to 3 micrometers. Researchers used microspheres in calibrating sensitive scientific instruments such as microscopes, filters, and particle counters. Medical uses included identification of cancer and glaucoma and the study of the transport of materials inside living organisms. Industrial applications included the production of finely ground products such as paint pigments, inks, toners, explosives, and other powder materials. NASA took an important step toward making the microspheres commercially available when it presented 15 grams of 10-micrometer particles to the Commerce Department's National Bureau of Standards for certification as "standard reference material." (NASA Release 85-44)
NASA today invited Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who chaired the U.S. House science and technology subcommittee on space science and applications, to be a congressional passenger on an unspecified flight of the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Nelson, who represented the district in which the Kennedy Space Center launch site was located, later held a news conference at his office in Melbourne, Florida, to announce acceptance of the invitation. The first congressional Space Shuttle passenger on an April 1985 flight was Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the committee that oversaw NASA spending. Although Nelson, unlike Garn, had no flying experience, he was an outspoken supporter of the space program. (W Post, Sept 6/85, A8)
NASA announced it was discussing with representatives of the Chilean Government possible arrangements for landing support for the Space Shuttle in the event of an emergency during launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The discussions were consistent with arrangements made with other countries since 1981 supporting launches from Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning provided for emergency landing options for all phases of the flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. Since the first launch of the Space Shuttle from KSC, NASA had plans for each mission for trans-Atlantic landing sites (TAL) and contingency landing sites (CLS) in addition to the primary landing sites. This was consistent with relevant international agreements relating to the rescue and recovery of astronauts in distress and return of the space vehicle. Space Shuttle launches, scheduled to begin from Vandenberg in early 1986, required one or more trans-Pacific landing (TPL) and CLS sites in the Pacific Basin. NASA had determined that Mataveri Airfield on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) could serve as a Space Shuttle TPL/CLS in the event of an emergency. A Chilean contractor was working on preliminary designs for minor improvements at the airfield, which would be necessary in the event an agreement was reached. Improvements would be in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island. Any actual improvements were contingent on final agreement with the Government of Chile. (NASA Release 85-74)
Hughes Communications Inc. said today it would negotiate an approximately $180 commitment with NASA for launch by the Space Shuttle of six communications satellites, including two for a new Japanese network, after receiving proposals from NASA and from Arianespace for its expendable Ariane launch vehicle, Aerospace Daily reported. Hughes indicated selection of the Space Shuttle was based solely on cost and was not related to the recent Ariane 3 failure [see European Space Agency, Sept. 12]. Space Shuttle flights scheduled for December 1987 and May 1988 would launch HS-393 Ku-band satellites that Hughes was building for the Japan Communications Satellite Co. (JCSat). Hughes reserved between 1988 and 1990 four slots for placement of HS-393s over the U.S. Hughes Communications owned 30% of JCSat, a joint venture licensed the previous June by Japan's Ministry of Post and Telecommunications to construct and operate a two-satellite system to serve Japan. The Japanese trading companies C. Itoh and Co. Ltd. and Mitsui and Co. Ltd. owned 40% and 30%, respectively, of the joint venture. (A/D, Sept 18/85, 1)
Space Shuttle mission 51-F was aborted today at three seconds before liftoff when the orbiter Challenger's onboard computer automatically shut down the main engines, Spaceport News reported. Seconds after main engine start, main engine No. 2 lost redundancy to operate the chamber coolant valve. NASA's ground rule restricted launching without an operating backup system in that area of the main propulsion system. Although the valve did assume its proper position after a command from a backup system, the loss of redundancy resulted in a major component failure flag being sent to the orbiter's computers. Challenger Commander Gordon Fullerton later thanked the Kennedy Space Center team on behalf of the crew, saying the team acted quickly and professionally and that at no time did the crew feel apprehensive. In answering a Washington Post reporter's question later, Fullerton said, "We all have mixed emotions here, but we're thankful the system worked the way it should. It was the longest three seconds I've ever experienced." Launch operations manager Thomas Utsman said that crews would strip parts of the malfunctioning engine and that engineers had identified four different parts that could have failed when they should have been pumping fuel from the hydrogen tank into the engine chamber. When the liquid-fuel engines ignited, valves that fed fuel into the chambers were fully open so engines could attain speed instantly. Just before liftoff, the valves were partially closed to cool engines slightly and prevent too much fuel from entering the chamber. The valve on main engine No. 2 failed to close partially, signaling the computer to shut down the system. The first Space Shuttle abort occurred June 26, 1984, when an onboard computer shut down two of Discovery's three engines four seconds before liftoff. That abort triggered an investigation that led to a complete overhaul of Discovery's main engines. NASA had to move Discovery back to the Vehicle Assembly Building where its cargo was removed and placed aboard another orbiter that flew into space two months later. "We don't think the engine valve itself failed the way a valve failed the [other] time we had a launch abort," Space Shuttle program manager Robert Lindstrom said. "I really believe there's a fair likelihood we'll get off again in another week." The delay did have an impact on the mission's objectives. The infrared telescope in Challenger's cargo bay could be operated successfully only in a completely dark sky. Had the flight left on schedule, the sky would have been dark for most of the following seven days until a new moon. NASA had scheduled the next Space Shuttle launch using the orbiter Discovery for August 24. It was not immediately clear how the Challenger's abort would affect that mission. (Spaceport News, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 13/85, A3)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced its researchers completed at KSC a series of three intensive tests that verified the compatibility of Spacelab 2 experiments in space. Known collectively as the "mission sequence test," the tests determined for the first time that actual experiment flight hardware for the mission operated in tandem with the Spacelab flight systems. MSFC's Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester said they learned they “could operate this complex system with high efficiency within acceptable Spacelab resource allocations." MSFC had responsibility for managing the first three Spacelab missions in a series of Spacelab flights that extended over several years. The first mission flew in 1983; the next would fly later in April. "This third and last test was a simulated six-hour slice of the actual on-orbit timeline," Lester said. "It simulated the commanding of experiments as if they were being done both from the payload operations control center (at Johnson Space Center) and from the flight deck of the orbiter." The period chosen was one that would put maximum stress on the computer, "a worst-case scenario," Lester explained. "Without a situation like that, we wouldn't have gotten the confidence we have now that we're ready to go." The 13 Spacelab 2 experiments, covering seven scientific disciplines, would rest on three pallets and a special support structure. Unlike the other two Spacelab missions managed by MSFC, there was no habitable laboratory. Spacelab 2 crew would operate the experiments from the aft deck of the orbiter interior. (MSFC Release 85-19) During April: NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-B/Spacelab 3, an ESA<Jeveloped Spacelab carrying 15 experiments [see Spacelab, Apr. 17], was scheduled for launch April 29 from KSC. The mission's main objective was to provide a high-quality microgravity environment for materials processing and fluid experiments. For the second time in U.S. space history, crew members would perform scientific investigations continuously. Two scientists who developed Spacelab 3 experiments, payload specialists Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg, a materials scientist from EG&C Energy Management Corp., and Dr. Taylor Wang, a fluid physicist from JPL, would conduct onboard research during the mission. Mission specialist Dr. Don Lind, a high-energy astrophysicist, and Drs. Norman Thagard and William Thornton (both medical doctors making their second Space Shuttle flight) would also do scientific research. The payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center would manage all Spacelab 3 operations. Members of the Marshall Space Flight Center mission management team and the investigator teams that developed Spacelab 3 experiments would monitor, direct, and control experiment operations from the ground control center. The mission control center in the same building as POCC would control the orbiter and basic Spacelab systems. (NASA Release 85-60)
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) would launch in 1986 Ulysses, previously known as the International Solar Polar Mission, to explore behind and around the sun beginning in July 1987, the JPL Universe reported. JPL managed the U.S. mission phases and was responsible for part of the magnetometer experiment. The Space Shuttle would take Ulysses into orbit; a modified Centaur upper stage rocket would send it on a trajectory toward Jupiter, where it would gain energy from Jupiter's gravity field to pull it out of the ecliptic plane (the plane of the earth's orbit) and back over the sun. Researchers would incorporate into the spacecraft bus instruments shipped to the European Space Research Technology Center near Amsterdam, Holland; after extensive testing scheduled for completion in August, an international board would review the spacecraft's readiness. After a mission operations review, ESA would ship Ulysses to KSC for flight tests and preparations. At a June meeting in Switzerland, a team of scientists would decide whether Ulysses would approach the sun over its north or south pole, yPL Universe, Jan 25/85, 1)
Engineers with Hughes Communications Inc., owner of the Syncom 3 communications satellite, sent at 11:53 a.m. today from the company's Guam ground station a radio command to fire the marooned satellite's rocket booster, causing the satellite's ICBM-type rocket motor to fire for 64 seconds as planned, the Washington Times reported. The undertaking capped the most ambitious space salvage effort ever attempted, the Times said, a two-day effort in August by two astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery (see Satellites Apr 22 and Aug 31). The engineers fired the rocket without knowing whether it would blow up or work properly after months exposed to freezing temperatures. "We really nailed it," said Albert Wheelon, president of the Hughes space communications group. "We'll have it in synchronous orbit round about the first of November and then we still have 30 days of checking out the radio equipment and all the systems." Insurance underwriters stood to recoup 85% of the insured cost of the satellite, a boost for an industry that had lost more than $600 million in the past 20 months because of seven satellite failures including Syncom 3. (W Times, Oct 28/85, 3A)
The National Space Institute (NSI) announced establishment of "Space Outreach '85," a program to acquire original ideas from the public as to potential uses of space for social and economic benefit. The program was intended to broaden what appeared to be a too narrow debate on a new and clarified set of long-term civilian space goals. Rules for the program were that ideas could not exceed 750 words; submissions could not include projects already under review by the federal government; and proposals must be creative, innovative, and feasible. The NSI would present all ideas received during the program to Congress, NASA, and, in particular, the newly created National Commission on Space [see Mar. 30]. Judges for the program, which had the support of the Sophron Foundation of McLean, Virginia, were Walter Boyne, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum; Evert Clark, technology editor, Business Week, former astronaut Michael Collins; and Robert Cowen, science writer for the The Christian Science Monitor. The NSI would present awards for the outstanding entries, with the writer of the most innovative suggestion receiving an all-expense-paid trip to see a Space Shuttle launch. (NSI Release, May 13/85) August 9; World amateur radio operators participated in the shuttle amateur radio experiment (SAREX) on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, the Lewis News reported. SAREX allowed people connected with amateur radio to talk with Challenger's crew and watch TV transmissions from the flight deck. The SAREX test, conducted during off-duty hours in cooperation with onboard mission specialists/ham operators Tony England and John-David Bartoe and mission commander Gordon Fullerton, allowed world amateur radio operators access to the Space Shuttle's voice and video transmissions to earth on amateur 2-m band. A video buffer circuit designed, built, and tested by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ham operators was key to SAREX's success. The SAREX system worked in two primary modes, one mode at a time. The first allowed voice communications back and forth between radio operators on the ground and spacecraft crew. The second primary mode was amateur TV. Using a set-up similar to the ham radio system, amateur TV operators and the Space Shuttle crew sent images to one another—the first such use of two-way video in space. Users transmitted color TV pictures in a slow-scan-mode—one picture every 8 to 36 seconds. SAREX, closely connected to the Young Astronaut Program, was a joint effort of the American Relay League and NASA. A ham radio experiment with mission specialist Owen Garriot conducted in 1983 on STS-9 was generally credited as the genesis for the current SAREX. (Lewis News, Aug 9/85, 1)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) selected Boeing Aerospace Operations, General Electric Co., Grumman Technical Service Inc., Hughes Aircraft Co., Messerschmidt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno (the West German firm that produced Spacelab), and McDonnell Douglas Technical Services to serve as prime assessment teams to observe payload processing activities, the Spaceport News reported. KSC made the selection in connection with the initiation of a competitive procurement for a single payload ground operations contract (PCOC) during the Space Transportation System's operational period. NASA expected to request proposals from the companies near the end of 1985 or the beginning of 1986 and would award a contract during fall 1986. This contract along with those for shuttle processing and base operations were the last major contracts to streamline operations as the Space Transportation System matured. The PCOC contract would consolidate operations, minimize interfaces, and focus clear responsibility on a single payload contractor at KSC. Under the new arrangement, NASA would consolidate work then performed by four KSC contractors into a single contractor with prime responsibility for processing of payloads at KSC, primarily for the Space Shuttle. Other contract duties would include sustaining engineering, communications, instrumentation, and telemetry operations, and miscellaneous support. (Spaceport News, Sept 13/85, 1)
Robert Cooper, director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), said in testimony delivered in late March before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee research and development subcommittee that a space plane capable of flying to anywhere on the earth within half an hour to intercept enemy bombers or perform space spy missions might be possible within the next 10 years, the Washington Times reported. The U.S. Space Shuttle, which had limited ability to maneuver in space, was put in orbit only after a lengthy and complicated rocket launch. So the U.S. Air Force wanted a "transatmospheric vehicle" that would be able to quickly reach and return from space like an ordinary aircraft. Cooper said a recent breakthrough in so-called ramjet technology might make possible an aircraft capable of taking off from a runway and reaching speeds of Mach 25 (times the speed of sound), the velocity necessary to escape earth's gravity. Cooper noted the plane would weigh about 100,000 lb., take off from and land on a 10,000-foot runway, and probably use hydrogen as a fuel. Only a small amount of rocket power would be required to "deorbit" the plane, he said. DARPA proposed to build two full-scale model ramjet engines for testing on the ground. "There are a number of very interesting technical problems here . . . none of them insurmountable. They're all within our grasp," Cooper said. Cooper explained that the ramjet combustion providing the extra boost took place only when the air flowing through the jet engine chamber was at supersonic speeds. Ordinarily, to get air flowing at this speed through the entire length of the chamber, the aircraft itself had to be moving at Mach 6. However, "a way has been found/' he said, "to use a subsidiary scheme for driving the air through the engine up to supersonic speeds, even though the vehicle on which the engine is attached is sitting on the runway." By slightly varying the geometry of the engine, it might be possible to fly the aircraft from takeoff to Mach 6, and "with slight variations" fly from Mach 6 to 14 and then to Mach 25, Cooper said. The Air Force and Navy were interested in the engine, development of which marked a resurgence in hypersonic speed research that had been "put on a back burner" in the late 1960s, Cooper commented. (W Times, Apr 2/ 85, 3A)
NASA confirmed successful launch on January 24 from KSC of the Space Shuttle with a Department of Defense inertial upper stage deployed and an aggregation of red blood cells experiment for the University of Sydney completed. Spacecraft orbital parameters were classified. The mission had lasted three days, one hour, and 33 minutes, with landing at KSC. Unusually cold weather, causing icing on the external tank, had delayed launch for one day. (NASA FOR M-989-51-C [post flight] Mar 5/85)
A C-5A aircraft carrying the German Spacelab D-1, the first payload in the history of U.S. manned spaceflight to be controlled from another country, landed May 1 at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) Space Shuttle runway, Spaceport News reported. The Federal German Aerospace Research Establishment's (DFVLR) German Space Operations Center in Oberpfaf-fenhofen near Munich would have responsibility for the 80 Spacelab D-1 (D for Deutschland) experiments. During the welcoming ceremony, (KSC) Director Dick Smith said, "We are looking forward to giving your payload 'tender loving care' and seeing it launched aboard the shuttle and getting it safely returned to you after the mission." Germany's Parliamentary State Secretary Albert Probst responded, "We are pleased to take part in this event and consider the joint ventures between the Federal Republic of Germany, Europe, and the U.S. in manned space flight to be a good example of international cooperation." Spacelab D-1, scheduled to fly on the seven-day Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia mission 61-A no earlier than October 16, consisted of a long Spacelab module containing the space sled and a unique support structure. Half of the D-1 experiments were from Germany, the remainder from the U.S. and European countries. Investigations included the vestibular sled, a device driven by an electromotor and traction rope, positioned in the center aisle of the Spacelab module, in which astronauts would serve as test subjects to collect information on human reactions to the equilibrium sensing system; the Biorack for botanical and medical/physiological experiments; the navigation experiment (NAVEX) to test systems performance of clock synchronization and one-way distance measurement; the materials experiment assembly (MEA) that would use Marshall Space Flight Center furnaces and alloy, fluid physics, and crystal growth investigations. The DFVLR, the result of a merger of three organizations and employing about 3,500 people in five research centers, would also participate in the European Retrieval Carrier (EURECA), a free-flying apparatus of experiments, and project "Columbus," internationally manned space station modules. (Spaceport News, May 10/85, 5)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
NASA announced that through a cooperative effort with Satellite Communications for Learning Worldwide (SCOLA), it would televise live via satellite to hundreds of high schools, colleges, and universities across the U.S. all the science events on the Space Shuttle Discovery following its launch no earlier than April 12 from KSC. Two days prior to launch, NASA scientists and engineers would conduct a permission videoconference with the schools to acquaint students and teachers with the planned mission and science experiments. Students from selected schools would ask questions of the NASA briefers. NASA's educational affairs office was providing Discovery mission and educational materials to the participating schools. SCOLA, an association of schools, colleges, and universities based at Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska, was one of the largest voluntary associations of institutional satellite antenna owners in the U.S. (NASA Release 85-51)
NASA announced that Frederick Hauck would command Space Shuttle flight 61 —F scheduled for no earlier than May 15, 1986, to deploy the Ulysses (International Solar Polar) spacecraft and David Walker would command the Galileo mission 61-G scheduled for no earlier than May 21, 1986. The Galileo spacecraft would explore the environment of Jupiter and its moons. Hauck first flew as pilot on Space Shuttle flight 7 in June 1983 and was commander in November 1984 of mission 51-A, for which Walker was pilot. Other 61-F crew members would be Roy Bridges, pilot, and mission specialists David Hilmers and J. Mike Lounge. Other mission 61-G crew members would be pilot Ronald Grabe and mission specialists John Fabian and James van Hoften. The Ulysses mission would be the first to use the liquid-fueled Centaur upper stage; the Galileo mission would also use the Centaur upper stage. (NASA Release 85-82)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) were pursuing a 10-year program scheduled for completion in 1991 to improve Space Shuttle engine performance, reduce operational costs, and develop advanced engine technology for future space travel. Although the Space Shuttle propulsion system had performed well for a number of space missions, it incorporated state-of-the-art technology at the time of its development some 15 years before, so NASA believed the engine's operational life and performance levels could be improved. According to Stanley Marsik, LeRC's Space Shuttle main engine technology program manager, "The current engine represents the first generation of reusable engines. In a way, the first reusable space engine can be compared with the Model-T automobile. Now that we have experienced numerous flights with this engine, we have learned how to improve its life and performance. We now are working towards advancing the technologies necessary to support those improvements." In the age of reusable Space Shuttle engines, demands would increase for higher performance with lighter weight components, resulting in higher operating pressures and temperatures and increased mechanical vibrations and fuel flow turbulence. The system also severely taxed engine components such as turbine blades, bearings, seals, fuel ducting, and combustion chambers. Engineers were studying new high-temperature, high-strength metal alloys and other advanced materials such as new protective coatings and combustion processes. Researchers using advanced computer modeling techniques studied loads on turbine blades and fuel flow, and examined the use of hydrostatic ball bearings where a film of gas would separate the bearing from metal surfaces, resulting in no metal-to-metal contact. Engineers were developing new methods of measuring wear and deterioration, so parts would be replaced only when necessary, and studying ways to monitor engine health by means of a series of computer-connected diagnostic sensors on the engine to signal deviations from normal performance and to facilitate more economical on-the-ground maintenance. The two centers had formed ten disciplinary groups to work with some 130 different technology elements of engine design. Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Internatl., engine manufacturer, and other NASA contractors and several universities were supporting the program. (NASA Release 85-122)
Members of the U.S. House Science and Technology space science and applications subcommittee questioned Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, office of space flight, on the agency's decision not to request funding for a 5th orbiter in its FY 86 budget, Aerospace Daily reported. Moore restated the agency's position that a four-orbiter fleet was adequate to meet traffic demand for the next five years or so, pointing out a recent decline in commercial and military traffic. NASA had requested $2.1 billion for 14 FY 86 Space Shuttle flights; Moore said NASA planned 17 missions in FY 87, 19 in FY 88, and projected 24 per year after that. Subcommittee chairman Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who had indicated strong support for a fifth orbiter, questioned Moore on the likelihood of increased launch traffic demand, potential schedule impacts of an accident, and the possibility of stretching out orbiter fabrication over a seven-to-eight-year period. Moore responded that NASA's program included adequate funding for structural spares procurement and maintenance of a viable base for initiating orbiter production over the next several years, pointing out that any funds for orbiter construction over a seven-to-eight-year period would be an add-on to NASA's runout budget and could be in competition with other items. He had also remarked on increasingly pessimistic market projections, even considering upcoming yearly launches of 18 to 20 communications satellites. Earlier, NASA Administrator James Beggs, in response to questions on NASA's exploring possibilities of private-sector purchase of a 5th orbiter, had said that no Space Shuttle privitization proposals submitted to NASA would result in a cost savings to the government. (A/D, Feb 22/85, 1)
For the first time since the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz project, liquid-hydrogen rocket fuel flowed through the lines at Kennedy Space Center's launch pad 39-B, the Spaceport News reported. Nearing its January 1, 1986, deadline for completion of pad B renovations and improvements, NASA was entering final work stages including functional testing for such installations as the new 100-foot-tall flare stacks that would replace the old burn pond for disposal of vented gaseous hydrogen. NASA planned first use of pad B for the 51 —L Space Shuttle mission scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986. One of the flare stacks, 26 inches in diameter, would vent off and burn gaseous hydrogen from the Space Shuttle's external tank and the orbiter fuel cells service system; the other, 18 inches in diameter, would handle hydrogen from the Centaur upper stage, the facility storage tank, and the mobile launcher platform. Also new to the complex were two rooms on the rotating service structure, one of which was designed for storage of equipment used in the payload changeout room in order to avoid the necessity for temporary removal of the equipment from the site for each launch. The other was a new clean room/ suit changing room. Another major new item was the rolling beam that would supply liquid hydrogen to the Centaur upper stage. Plans called for use of the Centaur upper stage during the Galileo and Ulysses missions scheduled for May 1986. Work began on pad B renovations about seven years previously; total cost would be approximately $150 million. (Spaceport News, June 21/85, 4) July 2b: Chilean foreign Minister Jaime del Valle announced that Chilean and U.S. delegations reached agreement on extending the Easter Island airfield for Space Shuttle emergency landings, FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish reported. Del Valle said Chile received favorable answers from the U.S. government to two major questions raised by Chile and that he would recommend the Chilean president approve the project. Earlier Del Vhlle had said that a possible agreement with NASA on the extension of Mataveri Airport would not imply the surrendering of Chilean sovereignty over the airfield nor would it constitute the establishment of a foreign military base on Chilean territory. Del Valle was quoted as saying, "On the eve of the beginning of formal negotiations, I want to reaffirm to the country that the agreement proposed by the United States refers exclusively to the emergency landings of space shuttles of the type that are currently in operation. It is appropriate to note that the possible emergency landings at Easter Island include only those isolated flights originating in California and those taking off from Cape Canaveral, which take a different orbit." Del Valle concluded the earlier statement by saying the "cultural, archeological, and ecological structure of the island will be preserved." (FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish, July 2/85, July 26/85)
Some high school student semifinalists in the Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program, sponsored by NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, would meet at Lewis Research Center (LeRC) March 25 and 26 to present before a panel of LeRC scientists and engineers their proposals for candidate experiments to fly aboard future Space Shuttle missions, the center announced. LeRC personnel would evaluate and suggest improvements to the experiments. The program was a nationwide competition to stimulate the study of science and technology by engaging students in projects to develop actual payload experiments for upcoming Space Shuttle flights. The 37 students from Ohio, Michigan, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, and Wisconsin would hear a presentation by NASA astronaut Robert Springer (Lt. Col. USMC), slated to fly aboard Space Shuttle mission 51-H scheduled for launch in late 1985, and a discussion by Brian Vlcek, a previous year's finalist from Parma, Ohio, on his winning experiment entitled "inducing a geotropic-type reaction in radish roots with chemical stimuli." The meeting would close with a tour of LeRC where the students would see such facilities as the 500-foot deep, zero-gravity facility and a propulsion systems laboratory where researchers tested full-scale aircraft engines under actual flight conditions. Initially students from 10 geographical regions around the country had proposed over 2,000 biology, chemistry, and astronomy experiments. Interdisciplinary teams of teachers, scientists, and engineers had evaluated the proposals to select each region's semifinalists. As of the Space Shuttle 51-C mission in January 1985, NASA had flown 10 student experiments in space. (LeRC Release 85-17)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced it awarded Honeywell Inc., Avionics Division, a $14,900,000 contract for fabrication and delivery of three flight inertial measurement groups (IMG) for the Shuttle/Centaur guidance and navigation system, which maintained a fixed reference orientation for and measured acceleration of the Centaur. Work under the sole-source firm-fixed-price contract would begin in May 1985 at the contractor's plant in Clearwater, Florida. NASA was modifying the Centaur, which had launched domestic and military communications satellites and sent spacecraft to investigate planetary systems, to fit into the Space Shuttle. NASA would first use the Shuttle Centaur combination to launch the Galileo and then the Ulysses missions. (LeRC Release 85-40)
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
As five military officers on the Space Shuttle Atlantis orbited earth on the secret 51 —J mission, a debate was growing in the U.S. over how much secrecy was necessary in the civilian-run space program and what the military's role in it should be, the NY Times reported. Proponents of an expanded role for the Defense Department (DOD) said the U.S. needed to counter a growing Soviet threat in space. They pointed out that the USSR launched four to five times as many spacecraft a year as the U.S., with the majority of missions devoted to military objectives, and that Soviet military officers had logged years in space, while the U.S. military had logged days. Critics of an expanded DOD role said the U.S. already had an advantage in military space technology. They said U.S. systems worked better and lasted longer, pointing out the USSR was still trying to perfect a vehicle similar to the Space Shuttle. The critics also argued that the U.S. military's assertions about the Soviet Union were often veiled excuses to try to edge civilians out of the astronaut corps and to classify the most mundane Space Shuttle payloads. This goal of secrecy, they said, was not heightened security but was intended to protect DOD's plans and programs from public scrutiny. The debate was likely to become more vocal, the Times said, as the military expanded its manned space activity when secret military missions would account for 25 to 30% of all Space Shuttle flights in the next decade. Carl Sagan, professor of astronomy and space sciences at Cornell University, said there was a "fundamental tension" between open scientific inquiry and "the necessarily closed world of military activities ... As military programs expand," he said, "there's a huge deflection of resources, financial and intellectual, from peaceful uses into the production of weapons." Daniel Graham, a retired Army lieutenant general who formerly headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, disagreed, saying the military had been at the forefront of U.S. space exploration since its earliest days. "The myth since the Eisenhower Administration is that there's a distinction between military and civilian matters in space," he said. "That's a pretense that a lot of people in NASA would like to believe, that all their activities are sweetness and light," he insisted. However, even military proponents saw emerging tensions in the manned space program, the Times reported. William Gregory, editor of Aviation Week & Technology said in an editorial, "The original legislation creating [NASA] specified a civilian space program, separate from the military . . . That line is being crossed now not so much as a formal policy change as out of simple economic necessity. The shuttle needs the military as a customer to spread the system's overhead costs." Some critics feared that NASA's charter for free and open dissemination of scientific information was eroding as the military's role grew. Scientists ineffectually protested last year when NASA announced that its Defense Department Affairs Division would review and possibly censor images from a large camera and radar carried on a civilian Space Shuttle mission. "There's a real question of how the decision was made to move the space agency from being open to substantially closed," the Times quoted Morton Halperin, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What's at stake is the public's right to participate in the process of making government policy." (NY Times, Oct 6/85, A1)
During Space Shuttle mission 51-1 astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher spent seven hours and eight minutes, a new record for a spacewalk, in the first stage of repair of the Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. During the walk, they retrieved the 15,000-lb. satellite, fastened Discovery's mechanical arm onto it, disarmed its Minuteman rocket motor, and exposed its electronic connections. Later Fisher said he could see no evidence of what caused the satellite to go dead after astronauts deployed it in April. "There is no evidence of debris on anything that would cause a problem. It's clean as a whistle," He said. Van Hoften and Fisher were outside the Space Shuttle from about 8:00 a.m. to shortly after 3:00 p.m. EDT, breaking by one minute the spacewalk record set April 1984 by van Hoften and George Nelson when they repaired the scientific satellite Solar Max. Although the astronauts accomplished more than half of what was needed in the salvage mission, they were planning a four-hour spacewalk on September 1 to finish the job. They would put a "space blanket" over the engine bell that served as the Minuteman motor's rocket nozzle to trap more of the sun's heat to warm it, because Leasat-3 had been in the cold of space so long that its rocket motor was too cold to fire correctly. Then the astronauts would install a vertical bar along the 20-foot length of the satellite to serve as a handle for van Hoften to spin the satellite and push it away from Discovery into space. It would then be seven days before the satellite acquired enough power to thaw its liquid-fuel tanks and almost two months before the solid-fuel rocket motor was warm enough for ground controllers to command it to ignite. (W Post, Sept 1/85, A5)
NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft's (SCA) functional check flight was successfully flown today following engine repairs made in accordance with specifications. The SCA would fly the Atlantis orbiter to Kennedy Space Center on April 12, with one refueling stop. (NASA Daily Activities Report, Apr 11/85)
NASA announced it signed with Rockwell Internatl. Corp. a memorandum of understanding (MOU) covering Space Shuttle flight assignments for Rockwell's materials-processing laboratory, which flew on STS 41-D and, using the float-zone technique, grew a single indium crystal with a lattice structure originating from a crystal seed. The agreement called for Rockwell to develop an industrial space-processing program under which research institutions and commercial firms would install and operate experiments in the modular laboratory. Rockwell designed its fluids-experiment apparatus (FEA), the first zero-gravity laboratory for basic and product research in low-earth orbit, to fit in the Space Shuttle's mid-deck stowage area where crew could operate and monitor it. Experiments could range from processing applications to liquid chemistry, fluid physics, thermodynamics, crystal growth, and biological-cell culturing. The laboratory, about the size of a 19-inch TV, could heat, cool, expose to vacuum, and manipulate experiment samples that might be gaseous, liquid, or solid, and could mix or stir, remove, and change samples during a mission. A motion-picture or video camera would record sample behavior and instrument data displays. (NASA Release 85-2)
The Washington Times, in its report on the Space Shuttle 51—E mission delay, said that NASA Administrator James Beggs had indicated the delay might be a week or two. In announcing earlier delays, NASA had said they would not alter the planned March 19 launch of the 51-D Space Shuttle mission, Aerospace Daily reported. However, in announcing the new 51—E launch date, NASA said the current 51-D mission launch would slip three days. (W Times, Feb 27/85, 4A; A/D, Feb 28/85, 1)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's crew on mission 51-D landed the orbiter at 8:54 a.m. EST April 19 at KSC, a return characterized by the worst damage in 16 Space Shuttle missions—a burn-hole in a wing, two failed brakes, two blown tires, and at least 123 broken heat-shield tiles, the Marshall Space Flight Center's Star and the Washington Post reported. NASA scheduled the mission to last five days, but extended it by two days to give the crew a chance to correct a malfunction in the Hughes Leasat 3 satellite. The damage to Discovery could set back preparation for its next mission scheduled for June 12. NASA would have to replace protective tiles, probably damaged when the Space Shuttle lifted off through the rain [see Apr. 12]. "There's little question that we suffered more severe damage on this landing than on any other so far," Space Shuttle launch director Robert Sieck said. Concerning the brakes, Sieck said, "Brake damage we've seen on previous flights. Brake failure is something we've never seen." NASA had waved off Discovery for a 7:16 a.m. landing because of rain over Cape Canaveral. One orbit later, Discovery headed down to KSC, where NASA told Commander Karol Bobko to land on runway 33 instead of 15 because of sun glare. Bobko landed with no headwind to slow him, touching down at 231 mph, the fastest any Space Shuttle had landed. As Discovery rolled down the three-mile concrete runway, it encountered a nine-knot crosswind and began veering to the right. When Bobko corrected for the wind by braking one side, the strain apparently caused one of the inboard brake assemblies to lock. Moments later the inboard brake assembly on the other side also locked, causing rubber to burn. A burn-hole the size of a dinner plate nearly penetrated through aluminum on the Space Shuttle's left wingtip where a landing flap apparently dislodged several protective tiles. Regarding the Leasat 3, a Hughes representative said initial belief that a lever failed to release was in error [see Apr. 18]. Once Discovery had maneuvered to within 10 feet of the satellite, the crew reported the lever had released. The crew successfully snagged the lever twice to ensure it was fully released, and reported the only change in the satellite's status was a slowing from two to one revolution per minute. The first congressional observer in space, Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), had difficulty negotiating the steps down to the runway and required assistance into the van that took the crew to the dispensary for medical examinations. There had been some controversy over his presence on the flight, including a NY Times editorial that said, "Having pressured NASA to give him his space trip, Mr. Garn is now indebted to the agency. That's a pity for those whom he represents in supervising NASA's budget and its request to build an $8 billion space station." However, Garn commented that "I'm carrying my own weight. I knew I had to prove myself . . . I've dealt with NASA for 10 years. I'm working on the space station right now, setting policy." (Marshall Star, Apr 24/85, 1; W Post, Apr 11/85, B1, Apr 20/85, A1; NYT, Apr 20/85, 22)
The Teal Ruby experimental space-based aircraft detection system, which had encountered technical problems, would fly on the Space Shuttle around March 1986, Defense Daily reported. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Director Dr. Robert Cooper said DARPA had run into expected problems with the Teal Ruby flight sensor caused by heat leaks in the cryogenic system. The leaks posed two problems: they prevented the temperature of the instrument from getting low enough to provide necessary high sensitivity and threatened the one-year nominal life of the system. Cooper said the DARPA had found all leaks except one. Teal Ruby was the first large-scale demonstration of a two-dimensional, staring mosaic infrared detector array and lightweight telescope optics. Its goal was to establish the technology base for future space-based infrared surveillance systems capable of detecting aircraft and other low threshold targets against the earth's clutter background; it would develop a comprehensive radiometric background database and space qualify the advanced technologies embodied in its design. Teal Ruby would be the primary payload of the Air Force space test program satellite P80-1. (D/D, Mar 29/85, 167)
NASA announced it had signed with the International Space Corp. (ISC) an agreement for development of the Normal Freezing Furnace, a high-temperature furnace for producing several types of infrared semiconductor crystals in the microgravity environment of spaceflight. The furnace would produce materials through a directional solidification crystal growth process. The agreement call for NASA to fly the furnace aboard six to eight Space Shuttle missions to perfect the proposed crystal production process, and ISC would make the experimental equipment available to NASA for the agency's exploratory space processing operations. NASA anticipated that the experiments would lead to new space manufacturing techniques for producing crystal materials, thus enhancing the U.S. electronic industry's position in the highly competitive worldwide semiconductor market. (NASA Release 85-173)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power pointed out that the Soviets were developing a version of the U.S. Space Shuttle, a space plane, and directed-energy weapons and were engaged in military-related experiments abroad the Salyut 7space station, the Washington Times reported. The book concluded that the USSR's grand strategy was to attain global supremacy "by means short of war—exploiting the coercive leverage inherent in superior forces, particularly nuclear forces." (W Times, Apr 1/85, 1 A)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pioneered the concept of a satellite system for mobile users and, because a U.S. mobile satellite industry was emerging, was turning its attention to developing technologies critical for future systems, the JPL Universe reported. Similar to cellular phones popular in urban areas, the mobile satellite system (MSS) would provide voice and data communications for the entire North American continent, employing one or two satellites in geosynchronous orbit to relay communications instead of depending on ground-based, line-of-sight relay towers that celluar phones used. There were four categories of MSS users: people who needed uninterrupted communications while they traveled over wide geographical areas, for example interstate truckers; those responding to unpredictable events such as medical emergencies or natural disasters; people working at planned but temporary installations such as oil or gas drilling facilities, mining camps, or archeological excavations; and those in very remote areas. The new technologies JPL was developing included mechanically steerable low-profile and electronically steerable medium-gain vehicle antennas, digital speech compression, digital modems, and multiple-access techniques for integrated voice and data. NASA was working with industry and, through a joint endeavor agreement, would exchange a Space Shuttle deployment for 15% of the channel capacity for two years to test the system. “But first," said Dr. Firouz Naderi, JPL's mobile satellite experiment project manager, "we must further develop the technology and try to squeeze as many channels as we can from a very narrow frequency allocation. That is the biggest obstacle we face." Also, JPL must design sophisticated multi-beam antennas that service "spot areas" and create techniques so frequencies could be reused to provide the most efficient use of the limited spectrum. Recently JPL sponsored a two-day briefing on the state of the industry. Attending were more than 250 representatives of 120 organizations including the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which would regulate the MSS; 11 of 12 candidate companies that petitioned the FCC for the right to operate the system; communications equipment manufacturers such as General Electric, Harris, and Motorola; Canadian government and industry representatives; banking officials; and potential users of the system. At the briefing, the FCC said it hoped by the middle of 1986 to assign a frequency to the mobile satellite industry as well as license an operator to be in charge of the system. NASA scheduled for launch in 1990 the first generation satellite with a 5 to 7 m antenna. During the program's second phase, NASA would launch from the Space Shuttle a 20m (65 ft.) antenna. NASA then planned for the program's final phase to construct on the proposed space station a 50m (180 ft.) antenna for deployment into geosynchronous orbit. (JPL Universe, Nov 29/ 85, 1) During November. Quoting from the Congressional Record, NASA reported remarks of Rep. Don Fuqua, (D-Fla.) chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, who introduced the Federal Science and Technology Revitalization Act of 1985. The act ". . . would establish an alternative personnel management system for scientific and technical people in the federal government," Fuqua said. "This is something I have been interested in for a long time, and I am hopeful that the proposal I am introducing will be able to help improve the quality of government-operated federal laboratories by encouraging the recruiting and retention of highly qualified scientific and technical individuals." Major provisions of the bill would permit agencies to include scientific and technical personnel in the new personnel management systems; simplify job evaluation and remove covered positions from the classification requirements of 5 U.S.C., Chapter 51; provide flexibility to develop a salary structure that ensured a competitive position in the labor market and that reflected the hiring and pay policies needed to attract, retain, and motivate a highly qualified scientific and technical work force; increase base pay on performance, not longevity; allow waiver of the pay cap for up to 5% of specially qualified scientific and technical personnel; provide for performance and special awards and remove the pay cap for lump-sum awards; and create a senior scientific and technical personnel service. In May 1983 the Federal Laboratory Review Panel of the White House Science Council chaired by David Packard reported that federal laboratories had several serious deficiencies and, consequently, a number of them did not meet the quality and productivity standards that might be expected, Fuqua explained. The panel reported that salaries at federal laboratories were noncompetitive with the private sector at entry and senior levels and that federal laboratories had to deal with a personnel management system that was cumbersome and had little flexibility. As a result, there existed what the panel referred to as an alarming "inability of many federal laboratories—especially those under civil service constraints—to attract, retain, and motivate qualified scientists and engineers." The panel concluded that administrative and legislative actions should be initiated to create, at government-operated laboratories, a scientific-technical personnel system that was independent of current civil service personnel systems, Fuqua continued. This "bill is the legislative attempt to deal with these very real problems," Fuqua said. "My own experience ... is that the requirements for NASA and Department of Agriculture labs may be very different, but attracting and retaining quality personnel is absolutely essential for the space program and for emerging fields in agriculture." (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 9)
NASA announced the postlaunch status of the NOAA-A, -B, and -C missions carried out for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In addition, NASA announced it scheduled NOAA-D for launch in 1987.	NASA submitted on January 24, 1984 a postlaunch report for NOAA-E (launched March 18, 1983) and would submit a postlaunch report for NOAA-F (launched December 12, 1984) after a full year of data collection and evaluation. NASA successfully launched NO.AA-A (NOAA-6) June 27, 1979, from the Western Space and Missile Center into a sun-synchronous orbit. The satellite ceased providing usable atmospheric soundings on October 22, 1983, when the filter wheel assembly became inoperable. NASA still used the primary imaging system. NOAA-G would replace NOAA-6 in November 1985. During NOAA-B launch on May 29, 1980, one of the two Atlas booster engines had a thrust reduction. This premature booster engine cutoff caused a deficit in velocity and altitude of the Atlas, making the sustainer engine burn 55 seconds longer than planned. As the sustainer engine was still thrusting when the spacecraft attempted to separate from the launch vehicle, the spacecraft consumed most of its attitude control gas as it fought the booster for its attitude control. The apogee kick motor burn put NOAA-B into a highly elliptical, 269 x 1466 km, 92.5° inclination orbit. As a result of the combination of incorrect orbit and loss of attitude control, NASA terminated the mission. The aborted NOAA-B mission brought about changes in subsequent NOAA launches, and the next three launches were successful. On June 23, 1981, NASA successfully launched NOAA-C (NOAA-7) from the Eastern Space and Missile Center into a sun-synchronous orbit. Failure of the filter wheel assembly on February 7, 1985, terminated the collection of usable atmospheric soundings. On February 25, 1985, NASA placed the primary imaging system on standby when NOAA-9 became the operational spacecraft for afternoon observations. NASA achieved the mission objectives of NOAA-A and -C, and the spacecraft provided useful sounding and imaging data far in excess of their two-year design life. NASA certified these missions successful. Due to launch vehicle malfunction, NASA terminated the NOAA-B mission and reported that mission unsuccessful. (NASA MOR E-615-79-01 [postlaunch], E—615— 80-02 [postlaunch], E-615-81-03 [postlaunch] Apr 16/85) During May: The Canadian government had cut $5 million (Canadian) from the National Research Council of Canada's space sciences budget, eliminating the sounding rocket program and most of the balloon research, Spaceflight reported. The cuts meant the end of nearly a quarter-century of space research with the indigenous Black Brant family of sounding rockets. The council did not cut major satellite and Space Shuttle research projects. (Spaceflight,, May 85, 201)
measure the response of the GAS Bridge to the Space Shuttle environment during liftoff, orbit, and landing (GSFC). RCA developed the IR-IE infrared camera, and during the mission payload specialist Rober Cenker would supervise its operation to acquire radiometric information that appeared within the field of view of the self-contained optical system. RCA hoped it might photograph storms, volcanic activity, or other natural occurrences. Middeck payloads would include the Comet Halley Active Monitoring Program (CHAMP) [see Astronomy, Dec. 17], Initial Blood Storage Experiment (IBSE), Protein Crystal Growth (PC 6), and three student experiments. IBSE, funded by Johnson Space Center and led by the Center for Blood Research, would study blood storage and sedimentation characteristics in microgravity. Rep. Bill Nelson would assist with an experiment sponsored by the University of Alabama, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Comprehensive Cancer Center to try to grow crystal proteins in space for cancer research. There would be three Shuttle Student Involvement Project (SSIP) experiments on board Columbia. In the Measurement of Auxin Level and Starch Grains in Plant Roots experiment, bean plants would be grown and frozen in space. Researchers would analyze the plant roots after the flight for auxin location and concentration and correlation with statolith in the cells. The Air Injection as an Alternative To Honeycombing experiment would investigate the feasibility of producing a high stiffness, density ratio, low-weight casting with an internal framework. And the Study of Paper Fiber Formation in Microgravity experiment would further increase basic papermaking knowledge through a drainage study of paper fiber formation in microgravity and later comparison to this same formation on earth. NASA scheduled Columbia to land on the sixth day of the flight at KSC, the first landing there since mission 51-D on April 19, 1985. (NASA Release 85107; NASA FOR M-989-61-C [prelaunch] Dec 16/85; Spaceport News, Dec 6/85, 4; Goddard News, Dec 85, 1) Shuttle Orbiter
NASA officials said they might alter Space Shuttle launch countdown procedures to avoid the type of last-second problem that forced postponement of mission 51-F earlier in July [see Space Transportation System, Launch Schedules, July 12], the NY Times reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, said in an interview that "We want to minimize the chances of a needless shutdown. There may be a way to soften up some of our criteria. "Before you take off on an airplane the pilot normally tries all his flaps and hydraulics," Moore said. "We don't have a chance to do that on the launch pad right now, and we want to perform those kinds of checks." Moore indicated new procedures being considered for the countdown included increasing the amount of time allowed for the Space Shuttle's computers to verify the correct functioning of the engine valves and broadening the criteria under which they were meant to operate. Moore added that criteria for safety would not change. The new procedures would add "no risk" to crew members, he said. The consideration of new procedures likely reflected growing confidence in the Space Shuttle as well as concern about foreign competition for launches. NASA officials said Space Shuttle launches must proceed smoothly and regularly if the program is to be a commercial success and that the current schedule called for one launch a month, eventually going to one every two weeks. (NYT, July 29/85, A8)
NASA announced the Lewis Research Center awarded a $10,169,016 contract to General Dynamics Corp. for management and engineering services in support of the Atlas/Centaur launch vehicle program. The contract also called for the company to provide technical management, engineering design, analysis and development, engine testing and development, and reliability and quality assurance. The cost-plus-award fee follow-on contract would begin July 1985 and continue through December 31, 1986. Centaur was a high-energy, upper-stage used with expendable boosters to deliver large payloads to geosynchronous orbit. NASA was modifying it for use as an upper stage on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 85-110)
