Shuttle director Richard H. Truly announced NASA's interest in an improved, secondgeneration solid rocket motor design for study by the National Space Transportation System program manager. Among the requested changes were asbestosfree insulation, alternate case and propellant design, and modified burn rate for improved performance. Outside geometry and interfaces with other Space Shuttle elements would not be affected. He added, however, that the tentative schedule for launching a Shuttle in early 1988 would not be contingent upon this newly designed booster rocket. (NASA Release 8694; NY Times, Jul 21/86)
The Wall Street Journal reported that a Reagan administration interagency group would soon recommend that NASA discontinue commercial and foreign launches. NASA objected to the idea because of the likely permanent loss of the business to foreign competitors. The group also recommended a replacement for the Shuttle Challenger and a greater supply of expendable launch vehicles, but did not suggest how these costs could be met. (WSJ, Apr 3/86)
President Ronald Reagan issued an executive order through his press secretary that established a commission to investigate the Challenger accident. According to the order, the ad hoc commission would review the circumstances surrounding the accident, develop recommendations for corrective or other action0*based on the findings, and submit a final report to the president and to the NASA Administrator. (The White House Executive Order establishing the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 3/86)
As further testimony was heard by the President's Commission, NASA manager Larry Mulloy stated that objections made by Morton Thiokol engineers to halt liftoff seemed illogical, but added that had he known that all of the company's engineers held the opinion, he might have changed his mind. Other testimony given by NASA officials conceded that they argued against the idea of cold weather being detrimental to a launch, but had little data to demonstrate this, and insisted that this opposition in no way pressured Morton Thiokol management to reverse the recommendation of its engineers. (Official Transcript Proceedings Before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 26/86; NY Times, Feb 27/86; C Trib, Feb `"27/86; LA Times, Feb 27/86; W Post, Feb 27/86; P Inq, Feb 27/86; (#W Times, Feb 27/86; WSJ Feb 27/86)
USA Today reported that 40yearold Karen Kofoed, a reporter for the Camden CourierPost, was the first journalist to apply to be part of a crew aboard a Space Shuttle into space. As of January 6, only 20 of the 4000 reporters who requested applications had submitted the completed forms, which were due by January 15. The contest for the first journalist in space was administered for NASA by the Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communications at the University of South Carolina. (USA Today, Jan 6/86)
Dr. Dale D. Myers became Deputy Administrator for NASA; he succeeded Dr. William R. Graham who left NASA to become Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Myers had served as an atlarge member to the NASA Advisory Council and before that as president and chief operating officer for Jacobs Engineering Group. Other achievements include positions as Undersecretary for the U.S. Department of Energy, vicepresident of Rockwell International, president of North American Aircraft, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, and vice president/program manager for both the Apollo Command/Service Module Program and the Space Shuttle Program at Rockwell International. (NASA Release 86149)'?0*October 21: Several senior staff changes were made at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to include: Robert C. Goetz, from Deputy Center Director to Technical Assistant to the Center Director; Clifford E. Charlesworth, from Director of Space Operations to Special Assistant to the Director; Henry O. Pohl, from Division Chief to Director of Engineering; William R. Kelly, from Director of Center Support to Director, Administration; Dr. Wayne R. Young was named Deputy Director for Administration; Paul J. Weitz, from Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office to Technical Assistant to the Center Director. (NASA Release 86151)
NASA announced that Aaron Cohen would be appointed as Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, and that Jesse W. Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that position to be Special Assistant to the General Manager, NASA Headquarters. Since 1962 Cohen had served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then in the Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of the Engineering and Development Directorate, and then as overall Director of Research and Engineering at the JSC. Moore came to NASA in 1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science. From there he was appointed Director of the Space Flight Division; Director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division; and Deputy Associate Administrator and acting Associate Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86138; NY Times, Oct 3/86)
For the sixth time, launching of the Shuttle Challenger was scrubbed, this time because of a stuck fuel valve in one of the main engines. (CSM, Jan 9/86; W Times, Jan 9/86; NY Times, Jan 9/86; P Inq, Jan 9/86)
NASA released a list containing 748 critical parts of the Space Shuttle that could lead to disaster if they did not function properly. All of these components lacked a backup system and were therefore placed in the "Criticality 1" category. Unlike the fuselage or heatshielding tiles, for example, 617 of the0*critical parts could be covered by backup equipment, but engineers waived the measure as they felt confident that failure of them was unlikely. Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation System, said, "We are reviewing in detail all the items on the Critical Items list." (Nat Sp Trans Sys: Critical Items List; W Post, Mar 18/86; W Times, Mar 18/86; B Sun, Mar
NASA and SPACEHAB signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish cooperation for the latter's efforts to develop and market payload bay habitable modules, truncated metal cylinders that would be additions to the orbiter's crew department and connected by tunnel adapters. These modules, designed to increase the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle, would serve as additional living and work space for the astronauts by providing an additional 1,000 cubic feet. Another MOU, signed by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), was intended to give NASA access to Synthetic Aperture Radar data from the first European Remote Sensing Satellite for Government research purposes at the Fairbanks, Alaska, station0*that NASA was developing in connection with its Navy Remote Ocean Sensing Satellite System Scatterometer (NROSS). The data received from the ERS1 satellite, engineers hoped, would enhance NASAsupported polar ice research, NROSS, the Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation and Shuttle Imaging RadarC. NASA was then to exchange its Scatterometer and radar imagery for other ERS1 data of interest. The ERS1 was scheduled for launch in 1989. (NASA Release 866; 867; B Sun, Jan 17/86)
The scheduled launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed, this time because of inclement weather at landing sights in Spain and the Sahara Desert. The weather situations in these distant areas were of concern to engineers at the Kennedy Space Center because the sites provided emergency landing in the event of an engine failure during the first few minutes of flight. This fifth delay, four in three weeks, raised questions concerning the NASA's ability to launch 15 scheduled Shuttle flights during 1986. (W Post, Jan 8/86; NY Times, Jan 8/86; USA `"Today Jan 8/86; P Inq, Jan 8/86)
The Peoples Republic of China announced that it was nearing human space flight and was in the process of choosing astronauts for its planned Space Shuttle. It had built and was using an extensive training center and had solved many of the problems space has to offer, such as maintaining life support. No date was given as to when a craft would be built. (W Post, Sep 1/86; W Times, Sep 1/86)
In a data gathering activity in support of the Challenger accident investigation, destacking of solid rocket motors to gather information and assess the preflight conditions in and around the field joints was scheduled for early April. Inspections would focus on the field joint orings, putty used in the joints, rocket motor case ovality or "roundness," with any assembly damage, clevis gapopening resulting from stacking, and the degree of propellant slumping that occurred as a result of vertical stacking. Any relevant data from the destacking inspections that might be useful to the investigation was to be assembled by the NASA 51L Data and Design Analysis Task Force and provided to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8637)
A Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope for studying gamma ray sources in the universe was the basis for a $93,000 contract awarded to Martin Marietta. By housing the telescope inside of a Space Shuttle external liquid hydrogen tank, which is normally discarded just before the Shuttle achieves orbit, Martin Marietta deemed it possible that the unit could also be set into orbit. Telescope components would be carried in the cargo bay and assembled inside the emptied tank by astronauts, who could enter via an existing 36inch aft manhole port or through tank modifications. The satellite could then be pressurized to provide the needed environment for gamma ray detection technique; the rays would be converted to positrons and electrons that travel the length of the telescope emitting light. Gamma ray astronomy is essential to understanding the evolution of stars and the universe and the physical processes occurring in pulsars, quasars, and black holes. (NASA Release 86111)
White House officials announced that top members of President Ronald Reagan's cabinet were in favor of halting commercial launches aboard the Space Shuttle, a move that would cost NASA $850 million in revenue. White House spokesman Larry Speaks argued that eliminating the launches would stimulate the private aerospace industry, reluctant to compete with NASA in the past, to quickly fill the void. Another reason for the reduced number of launches, he noted, was the increasing backlog of scientific and military payloads. Focus on those two types of missions exclusively would ease the immediate need for a fourth At the same time, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge said that he intended to ask Congress for $2.6 billion in order to acquire a fleet of rockets that would reduce both the backlog of 21 payloads and the Pentagon's dependance on the Space Shuttle. He added that no Space Shuttles would be launched from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base until 1992, a saving to tax payers of $1 billion. (W Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug 1/86; W Post, Aug 1/86; B Sun, Aug 1/86; NY Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced four key appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet the goal of getting the Space Shuttle back to full operation. Dr. Judson A. Lovingood was named Associate Director for Propulsion Systems, with responsibility for propulsion projects for the Space Shuttle Main Engine, Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility, and Marshall Centerassigned payloads and Spacelab payload integration. John P. McCartney was named Director, Propulsion Laboratory to oversee research and development, engineering, and technical direction of propulsion systems design, and analysis related to launch and space vehicles. Dr. George F. McDonough was named Director,'E0*Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with responsibility for research and development in structural design and analysis of launch and space vehicles, analysis dynamics behavior, specification of dynamicsrelated design criteria, and analysis of atmospheric and environmental processes. (NASA Release 86164)
NASA launched its first successful rocket since the Challenger accident, a Delta rocket from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Carrying two payloads for the Strategic Defense Program, one satellite would attempt to track down and intercept the other. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, manufacturer of the rocket, viewed the event as a stepping stone that might lead to the company's entry into commercial launches. NASA had two more Delta rockets in its inventory, one committed to a U.S. Government weather satellite identical to the one lost in May and the other to an Indonesian weather satellite. (NASA Release 8632; WSJ, Sep 8/86, P Inq, Sep 6/86; NY Times, Sep 6/86; Sep 8/86; W Post, Sep 6/86; C Trib, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 6/86)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command and former NASA astronaut, was appointed Associate Administrator for Space Flight. The new position called for Truly to head the Space Shuttle program and to direct NASA's Design and Data Analysis Task Force, which reviewed the Shuttle Challenger's January accident. He succeeded Jesse W. Moore in both of these roles. (NASA Release 8615; WSJ, Feb 20/86; NY Times, Feb 20/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; B Sun, Feb 21/86)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. was awarded a contract to replace the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost in the Challenger accident. Plans called for a replacement spacecraft and followon satellites to keep the TDRS system operational through the end of the century. As of this date, one TDRS was in geosynchronous orbit near Brazil over the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 8670; WSJ, May 30/86)
NASA announced that it would terminate further development of the $1 billion Centaur Upper Stage for launching other spacecraft on board a Space Shuttle. The Shuttle 51L accident prompted major safety reviews and safety criteria, which the Centaur, even after modifications, could not meet. Under Richard H. Truly's direction, NASA initiated efforts to examine alternatives for those national security missions that had planned to use Centaur. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions were dependant on such a launch, other options for launching them from the Shuttle with a Titan rocket were being considered. (NASA Release 8680, W Times Jun 20/86; W Post, Jun 20/86; WSJ, Jun 20/86; NY Times, Jun 20/86; CSM, Jun 23/86)
For the second time in two days, launch of the Shuttle Challenger at Cape Canaveral, Florida, was postponed because of bad weather. Meanwhile, NASA began conducting tests at Edwards Air Force Base in California to determine the effect of rain on insulating tiles and readied a sophisticated instrument landing system, hoping to minimize the weather factor in launches and landings for future orbiter flights at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (W Times, Jan 27/86; USA Today, Jan 27/86; P Inq, Jan 27/86; C Trib, Jan 27/86; B Sun, Jan 27/86)
A House Science and Technology Committee issued a report stating that Congress and the White House shared the blame for the launch schedule pressure that led to the January 28 Challenger accident. The report agreed with many of the findings laid out by the Rogers Commission, but differed by stating that the accident was not a result of poor communication through NASA management, but "poor technical decisionmaking [by them] over several years." The report concluded that NASA's management lacked the expertise needed to operate the Space Shuttle and warned the Agency not to succumb to similar pressure concerning future flights. The National Research Council, in an independent study requested by Congress, urged NASA on October 9 to limit its Shuttle flights in the 1990s to 11 or 13, not the 16 annual flights proposed by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. (Investigation of the Challenger Accident: Report of the Committee on Science and Technology, House of Representatives, Oct 29/68; W Post, Oct 8/86; Oct 10/86; W Times, Oct 8/86; NY Times, Oct 8/86)
Joseph F. Sutter was appointed chairman of the NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, an advisory group to the NASA Administrator. Sutter, in 1986, had a 41year career with the Boeing Company as an aerodynamicist, received numerous awards for development of jetpowered airliners, and was nominated to receive the Wright Memorial Trophy, to be presented in Washington, D.C. He had also been appointed to the Presidentiaal Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86154)
NASA ruled out a recommendation to supplement its Shuttle flights with untended launch vehicles for building the Space Station. The combination would accelerate assembly by up to nine months, said Space Station manager John Dunning, but the time savings would be offset by a 10 to 40 percent increase in potentially dangerous space walks. Using expendable launch vehicles, he went on, would also require an orbital maneuvering rocket to keep the parts in place. (NY Times, Dec 28/86)
NASA engineers settled on a design for the Shuttle's new booster rockets, and beginning in early 1987, four fullscale tests were planned. John Thomas, manager of the booster design project at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, predicted that the tests would run smoothly and that Shuttle flight would resume in February 1988. (C Trib, Oct 28/86)
The Presidential Commission questioned NASA scientists regarding faulty orings as a cause of the Challenger accident. The panel learned that these seals could indeed malfunction in cold weather and also that erosion (not the result of cold0*weather) had occurred in 6 of 171 seals on previous flights. Morton Thiokol, the firm responsible for manufacturing the orings, had raised concerns about launching the Shuttle in cold weather, but NASA engineers concluded that the backup ring would function if the primary seal failed. Released NASA documents also showed concern expressed by engineers, who, three years prior to the accident, concluded that the mechanism for sealing segments of the solid rocket booster could fail and result in "loss of mission, vehicle, and crew." One risk analysis received by NASA from an outside agency estimated the chances for an accident involving the boosters as 1 in 35. NASA's safety advisory board stated in their 1985 annual report that 18 Shuttle flights per year were "very optimistic" because these launches were anything but routine. However, "the requirement to launch has not been a prerequisite," said acting NASA Administrator Dr. William R. Graham, "The prerequisite has been safety." (Official Transcript Proceedings before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 11/86; P Inq, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; B Sun, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; CSM, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; C Trib, Feb 12/86; Feb 14/86; Feb 13/86; WSJ, Feb 12/86; USA Today, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; NY Times, Feb 13/86; W Post, Feb 13/86)
TRW, Inc. was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for design and delivery of the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), a reusable, remotely operated propulsion vehicle for hauling satellites from one orbit to another. The OMV's primary uses would be spacecraft delivery, retrieval, boost, deboost, and close proximity visual observation beyond the operating range of a Space Shuttle. The OMV, "space tug," was also to be made to adapt for use in Space Station activities. (NASA Release 8681; WSJ, Jun 26/86; LA Times, Jun 27/86)')0** The first flight of an aircraft with both a digital jet engine control system and a mated digital flight control system took place at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility with a modified F15. The integration of engine and flight control (Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control) between the system's computers could increase performance 2 to 10 percent. (NASA Release 8682)
The Federal Aviation Administration has become increasingly concerned with the problem of inadequate airline maintenance. Because they maintain a 17hourperday schedule and are involved in repeated takeoffs and landings, commercial jetliners are prone to numerous mechanical breakdowns. Although "modern jets are designed to fly despite even serious defects" and although U.S. carriers employ an army of airline mechanics repairing planes in between scheduled flights, several U.S. carriers were fined by the Federal Aviation Administration last summer for a "series of maintenancerelated transgressions." The National Transportation Safety Board was considering whether a crash of a Midwest Express Airline jet in September 1985, in which 31 people were killed, was caused by poor maintenance. Some airsafety experts expressed fear that airline companies had become too cost conscious about safety; still, maintenance error ranked third behind pilot error and bad weather as a cause of fatal airline crashes. (WSJ, Jan 3/86) 0*January 6: NASA renamed two planetary missions scheduled for flight in 1988 and 1990. The mission to map the planet Venus, previously known as Venus Radar Mapper and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in April 1988 and arrival at Venus in July 1989, was renamed Magellan. The Magellan spacecraft, attached to a CentaurG upper stage, would map the entire surface of the planet Venus for the first time, using a syntheticaperture radar instrument. The spacecraft would orbit the planet about once every three hours, coming as close as 250 kilometers from the The mission to map the planet Mars, previously known as the Mars Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in August 1990 and arrival at Mars in August 1999, was renamed Mars Observer. The Observer spacecraft, adapted from an existing productionline type of Earthorbital spacecraft to reduce costs, would map the planet Mars to determine the global elemental and mineralogical character of its surface and to investigate the Martian climate, both present and past. The Magellan and Mars Observer projects were managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 861)
The U.S. Marine Corps salvage operation for the 51L Space Shuttle accident, which involved the Freedom Star, the Liberty Star, and the Independence vessels, came to an end after a sevenmonth effort. It was the largest ocean recovery operation in history and at its peak involved 22 ships and 6,000 personnel, as well as numerous aircraft. The search yielded 45 percent of the Challenger, 50 percent of the external tank and solid rocket boosters, 95 percent of the SpartanHalley spacecraft, 35 percent of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, and 90 percent of the Inertial Upper Stage. (NASA Release 86121; C Trib, Aug 29/86; B Sun, Aug 29/86; W Times, Aug 29/86; W Post, Aug 31/86)
In a part of NASA's strategy to return the Space Shuttle safely to flight, Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator, announced the new management and operations structure for the National Space Transportation System (NSTS or Space Shuttle program). The changes were aimed at establishing clear lines of communication in the information transfer and decision making processes. The management change, which also moved control of the operation to Washington, D.C., was directed by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly and followed recommendations made by the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology and the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. As part of the restructuring, Arnold D. Aldrich, who joined NASA in 1959, was named Director, NSTS, and Richard H. Kohrs and Robert L. Crippen were named his deputies. Truly stated that "the formation of this program management organization is one of the most positive steps NASA has taken in the last several months to strengthen the Shuttle program and return to flight status." (NASA Release 86159; W Post, Nov 6/86; NY Times, Nov 6/86)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident released its report, two hundred pages, plus appendices, that recommended reorganization of NASA's management structure. Other changes cited by the Commission included more rigid quality control, reorganization of the lines of communication in the NASA chain of command, a larger role for NASA astronauts in Shuttle matters, and a Shuttle escape system. By the time these conclusions were announced, the report had been sent to the printers; it was scheduled to be on President Ronald Reagan's desk by June 9. (Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident; W Post, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; B Sun, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86; WSJ, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86)
United Technologies Corporation proposed implementing the launch propulsion and guidance system used in NASA's Space Shuttle for an untended space vehicle. The guidance system, they averred, would allow untended rockets to deliver much heavier'B0*payloads at a cheaper cost than the Shuttle. Operation, they claimed, would begin about three years after NASA approved the plan. (AP, Nov 8/86)
For the first time since the Challenger accident, astronauts boarded a Space Shuttle; they took part in a mock countdown at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on the Atlantis. Computers halted the drill 25 seconds short of simulated engine firing, but officials deemed the test successful. (W Post Nov 19/86; NY Times, Nov 19/86)
In a White House meeting President Ronald Reagan indicated that he would allow NASA to honor only some of its higher priority contracts for commercial and foreign satellite launches from the Space Shuttle. Regarding a new orbiter, Chief of Staff Donald Regan has reversed his stance and now favors the replacement. Regan changed his mind, he stated, because he believed that NASA would not just correct its major faults, but would bring the Shuttle up to date with current technology. In a related matter, the Senate agreed to reimburse NASA with $56.3 million for military launches, a move protested by Senator Sam Nunn, who claimed that the money would come at the expense of intelligence activities. (NY Times, Aug 8/86; W Post, Aug 8/86)
The White House accelerated its search for a permanent head of NASA to replace James M. Beggs, indicted in December on fraud charges unrelated to the agency. Beggs was on an unpaid leave of absence during the time of the Challenger accident; Deputy Administrator William R. Graham was Acting Administrator. Beggs was later acquitted of all wrong doing and the Justice Department apologized for the erroneous charges. (W Post, Feb 7/86; Bus Wk, Feb 17/86)
Debris brought to shore on March 19 was determined to be part of the right booster rocket from the Challenger accident. The white outer skin of the pieces were discolored from excessive heat, and the suspected oring, officials said, may lie inside of one 4footbyfoot piece of wreckage. (W Times, Mar 21/86; USA Today, Mar 21/86)
NASA said it had canceled 18 Space Shuttle missions over a 5year period for Spacelab because of the Challenger accident. The agency further stated that it planned to release a list of other scrubbed missions. (W Post Sep 1/86)
The Soviet Union recently had their version of the Space Shuttle on a launch pad for tests. Photos of the incident were taken by a U.S. satellite, and Government officials predicted that the country would begin human space flight in 1988. (B Sun, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86)
Two hundred fiftyeight members of Congress signed a letter addressed to NASA urging them to find a second supplier for its Space Shuttle booster rockets. Congress, described as further tightening the rein on NASA, believed that competition for the sole provider, Morton Thiokol, would equate to savings. Aerojet General said it was ready to build a seamless booster, a safer design. Congress also wanted NASA to eliminate some of the rules that favored Thiokol, such as requiring any second manufacturer to purchase nozzles for the rocket from them. (W Times, Jun 6/86; WSJ, Jun 6/86; P Inq, Jun 6/86; B Sun, Jun 6/86)
Because of the Challenger accident and the absence of any Shuttle activity, NASA was expected to announce layoffs at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where 800 to 1,000 employees would lose their jobs. For the same reason, Martin Marietta said that 700 to 800 of its workers would be laid off, by October 3, from its plant that produced Shuttle fuel tanks. (W Post, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 5/86)
The Presidential Commission's investigation of the Challenger accident, said the Chicago Tribune, had nearly concluded that cold weather led to reduced elasticity of the rubber seal in the rocket booster and the subsequent leak of gasses. Engineers from Morton Thiokol, the rocket booster manufacturer, objected to the cold weather launch, but officials higher up in that company gave NASA the go ahead. (NY Times, Feb 20/86; C Trib, Feb 20/86; W Post Feb 20/86)
Further investigation into the Challenger accident opened a number of theories into the booster rocket's failure. One pointed to bad fuel segments, perhaps caused by cold temperatures. "Propellants can crack the way you crack a cookie. When they crack...it allows you new sites where gases can be generated," opined Herman Krier from the University of Illinois. Another theory suggested that improper handling had produced hairline cracks while fuel segments were cast or during launch preparation, or that installation of badly joined seams between the fuel segments caused uneven burning. It was noted that workers ignored standard operating procedures. A third theory looked into the possibility that a solidrocket booster nozzle had burned through, as had nearly happened on a previous flight. Still another theory cited cold weather or vibrations resulting from launch as a possible culprit for a failure in the suspected seam that joined two fuel segments. Other theories speculated that the external tank experienced over heating, leading to expansion of its contents and rupture of the tank, or even direct burnthrough from the 5,900 degrees exhaust leaving the rocket booster or that there might have been a preexisting hole in the tank. However the hydrogen came to leak, it was ignited by the heated air surrounding it or by the thin flame from the solid NASA Engineers thought, in that point in the investigation, that cold weather had no adverse affect on either the solid fuel or the seals, but were concerned with the possibility of leakage between segments of the rocket motors because deterioration of these seals had been noted on previous flights. Back up seals, they added, performed adequately. (P Inq, Feb 5/86; Feb 10/86; W Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; CSM, Feb 5/86; C Trib, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; NY Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 7/86; Feb 9/86; B Sun, Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; WSJ, Feb 6/86)
The Congressional Budget Office estimated that it would cost $5 billion to both replace the Challenger Shuttle and build more expendable launch vehicles for carrying payloads into space. NASA had planned to make all of its satellite launches from an orbiter, but changed its position after the Challenger accident. The shift was welcome news to the rocket industry, even though the companies would need two years to get ready for launch inasmuch as the rocket program, with no crew assistance, had been all but replaced in the United States by the Shuttle program. (NY Times, Mar 13/86; W Post, Mar 13/86)0** NASA and Morton Thiokol found new evidence suggesting that the putty used in joints of the solid rockets to protect the orings could have stiffened from the cold and prevented the oring from sealing. They also noted that the putty could have cracked and exposed the oring to hot gases. Adequate data measuring the effect of cold on the putty did not exist. Dr. William Graham notified the Presidential Commission of these findings. (WSJ, Mar
Initial investigation, and tape review of the Challenger accident, pointed to the right solid fuel rocket booster and showed a leak near one of its seams. An apparent rupture between two sections of the rocket emitted flames that soon found their way to the external fuel tank, igniting the volatile contents. Meanwhile, salvage operations recovered two large objects believed to be part of the Shuttle from the ocean floor, but most of the craft was still unaccounted for. NASA planned to bring in a recovery vessel equipped with a remotecontrolled robot and (#cameras. (WSJ, Feb 3/86; NY Times, Feb 3/86; W Post, Feb 3/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher became NASA's administrator for the second time. His first term in this position ran from April 1971 to May 1977. During the interim, he held the William K. Whitford Professorship of Energy Resources and Technology at the University of Pittsburgh and headed his own consulting firm. Past achievements include positions as research physicist with the United States Navy Bureau of Ordinance, research associate at Harvard University, instructor at Princeton University, positions in the private sector with Hughes Aircraft Company, RamoWooldridge Corporation and Space Electronics Corporation, and president of Space General Corporation. He also developed patents in sonar devices and missile guidance systems and has been associated with the President's Science Advisory Committee. After being sworn in, Fletcher announced that Space Shuttle flight would not resume for another 12 to 18 months and promised to fully review NASA's quality control program and decisionmaking process. He also noted that the 70 percent reduction in quality control staff for which NASA was recently criticized was "misleading" because "inhouse" work such as the Moonlaunched Saturn rockets were no longer a responsibility. A full Senate0*approved his nomination on May 6. (NASA Release 8660; B Sun, May 13/86; W Post, May 13/86; WSJ, May 13/86; NY Times, May 13/86)
Only 74 seconds after liftoff, the Space Shuttle Challenger, flight STS 51L, exploded at about 10 miles above the Earth, killing all seven crew members. It was the worst accident in the history of space exploration and the first time American fatalities occurred during space flight. Slow motion film of the launch revealed a thin flame between the left booster rocket and the Shuttle's main fuel tank, causing engineers to speculate that hydrogen from a ruptured tank ignited upon contact with air heated by the rocket motors or directly by the motors themselves. It was hoped that investigation of the debris that fell into the Atlantic Ocean could lend a better understanding of the accident. All crew tended spaceflight was halted until a thorough investigation was completed, stunting the ambitious space program that promised to bring the richest lode of scientific data ever imagined. (W Post, Jan 29/86; W Times, Jan 29/86; NY times, Jan 29/86; B Sun, Jan 29/86; P Inq Jan 29/86; C Trib, Jan 29/86)
Columbia, flight STS 61C, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a Space Shuttle record of seven postponements. The crew completed their mission of launching RCA's $50 million satellite into orbit, for which NASA received $14.2 million from the corporation. Ironically, after a 25day delay in getting off the ground, the Space Shuttle was told to come down a day early. NASA engineers feared that bad weather might hamper the original landing date. Already behind schedule, NASA wanted extra time to prepare the Shuttle for the next flight in March and its mission of observing Halley's Comet. The needed orbit for studying the comet would leave little room for delays of this launch. Most of Columbia's experiments were completed, but a camera device for photographing Halley's comet failed to work because a light intensifier had been inadvertently left on during the ship's seven launch delays. It was not until January 18, after a twoday delay because of poor weather, that Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California. Engineers had hoped to land the craft at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, from where it was scheduled to be launched on March 6. Therefore, an estimated five days were scheduled to be cut from its preparation time so that the critical date for observing Halley's Comet could be met. (NY Times, Jan 13/86; Jan 14/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 24/86; USA Today, Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86 W Times, Jan 13/86; CSM, Jan 13/86; Jan 21/86 P Inq, Jan 13/86; B Sun Jan 13/86; W Post Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 16/86; C Trib, Jan 13/86)
Hearings before the House of Representatives investigating the Challenger accident began on this date. Testimonies were given by William P. Rogers, Dr. James C. Fletcher, various NASA personnel, various personnel from Morton Thiokol, Inc., and various personnel from the military and industry. The hearings were to take place June 10, 11, 12, 17, 18 and 25, 1986 and July 15, 16, 23, and 24, 1986. (Investigation into the Challenger Accident: Hearings before the Committee on Science and Technology House of Representatives, 1986)
NASA signed an agreement with the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company (3M) allowing the company to fly 62 materials processing experiments aboard future Shuttle flights. The microgravity experiments in organic and polymer science were to be conducted on a spaceavailable basis, and NASA would have use of 3M's experiment equipment for scientific investigations. (UPI, Dec 9/86)
The President's Commission began probing into the Space Shuttle Challenger accident as it took statements from NASA officials Dr. William R. Graham, Acting Administrator; Jesse Moore, Associate Administrator; Arnold D. Aldrich, Space Shuttle Manager; Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager; and Robert B. Sieck, Director, Shuttle Operations. As several possible reasons into the cause of the accident were explored, Moore emphasized0*that space flight would always be dangerous. (NY Times, Feb 7/86)
The Soviet Union said that it was prepared to fill the void left by the United States and Europe for commercial space launches. Moscow revealed this fact in an announcement that also called for a World Space Organization. The Organization would oversee joint space projects that the Soviets hoped would unfold in the future. (C Trib, Jun 13/86; CSM, Jun 16/86) ''0*June 13: In a move that would greatly reduce the chances for resuming Shuttle flights by July 1987, President Ronald Reagan urged NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher to comply with all of the recommendations put forth by the Challenger commission. President Reagan also ordered Fletcher to report back to him after 30 days with details on how and when the findings would be implemented. Also, the two reportedly discussed approval of Federal funds for a replacement orbiter and the President's final decision was expected to follow after a few days. (Letter from President Reagan to James Fletcher, Jun 13/86; W Post, Jun 14/86; WSJ, Jun 16/86; W Times, Jun 16/86)
NASA announced that it had postponed three launches: the Ulysses mission to investigate the poles of the sun; the Galileo mission to orbit Jupiter and send a probe into the planet; and the Astro1 mission, an ultraviolet astronomy laboratory mounted in the Shuttle's payload bay that was to examine quasars, "hot" stars, galaxy centers, and Halley's Comet. The Ulysses and Galileo missions were scheduled for launch from a Shuttle in May, but both launches were dependent on certain relative positions of Jupiter and Earth, occurring only once every 13 months. The Astro1 had to be launched in the MarchApril timeframe in order to observe Halley's Comet, and with that opportunity gone no new date was requested. The delays were caused by the January Space Shuttle accident. (NASA Release 8611; NY Times, Feb 11/86)
NASA officials said that resuming Space Shuttle flight by
A student photography experiment, "CAN DO," from the Charleston County School District, South Carolina, scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle Columbia March 6 was rescheduled for April 524. The goal of the experiment was to observe Comet Halley from NASA's highflying Kuiper Airborne Observatory aircraft, a converted C141. The aircraft was scheduled for several highaltitude flights over New Zealand, a part of the southern hemisphere where the Comet would be most visible. Students from other schools, both in the United States and abroad, were to participate in the program by photographing the Comet from the ground and comparing their pictures with those taken in flight. The pictures taken at ground level would assist professional astronomers because most large observatory telescopes are not designed to view large objects, and resolving the fine detail in Comet Halley's tail could be enhanced with the much wider overall view from a standard camera lens. (NASA Release 8635)
After more than a year of study by NASA centers and contract teams, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced a baseline configuration for the permanently crewtended Space Station that would guide preliminary design activities for the remaining eight months of the Phase B studies. The contract called for development of the Space Station to begin in October 1986, ending with a permanently tended habitable station in 1994. A total of 14 Space Shuttle flights were thought to be required for Major features of the design included two vertical keels 361 feet long and connected by upper and lower horizontal booms 146 feet long (the Space Station measured 503 feet at its widest point); two 44.5foot long, 13.8foot interior diameter U.S. supplied modules, with external interconnects for laboratory functions and crew quarters for eight members and two smaller logistics modules to alternate between the ground and the station; modules located near the station's center of gravity to provide the best possible microgravity environment for experiments, with raft patterns having four nodes and two tunnels to serve as module interconnects; internal module pressure of 14.7 per square inch and 80/20 nitrogen/oxygen mixture ratio to approximate sea level Earth atmospheric conditions, with a closed loop environmental control and life support system where oxygen and water could be recycled and nitrogen and food could be resupplied; hybrid solar power system with 75 kilowatts of power, where 25 kilowatts would be provided by photovoltaic system and the remaining 50 by the solar dynamics system; five locations on the structure for placing attached payloads and a facility for servicing free flying spacecraft and platforms with a telerobotic servicer; polar platform with useful payload on single Shuttle launch and a coorbiting platform to support astrophysics and materials processing; gaseous hydrogen/oxygen propulsion system for altitude control (assembly would be at 220 nautical miles and operational altitude at 250 nautical miles minimum); metric as standard unit of measurement; and inclusion of international elements into the overall design, including the Canadian Mobile Servicing Center and hardware provided by Japan and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 8661; NY Times, May 15/86; W Times, May 15/86)'!0*May 15: NASA and Boeing Aerospace Company entered into an agreement concerning materials processing experiments. Crystals of a size and quality impossible to create on Earth would be attempted aboard three Space Shuttle flights. Working with the University of Alabama, Boeing agreed to fund the experiments, including a chemical vapor transport crystal growth furnace installed in the galley area. These crystals were expected to be of the type valuable in the commercial production of semiconductor and electrooptic devices. The experiments would underscore NASA's commitment to the development of commercial endeavors in space, and would continue with the Space Station. (NASA Release 8662)
The InterAgency Consultative Group (IACG) on Halley's Comet encounter was scheduled to meet March 49 in Moscow and March 1214 in Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Germany. Formed in 1981, the IACG comprised representatives from NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), the Soviet Union's Intercosmos Council, Japan's Institute for Space and Astronautical Studies (ISAS), and the International Halley Watch. ESA's Giotto, the Intercosmos Council's VEGA 1 and 2, and the ISAS Suisei (Comet) and Sakigake (Pioneer) spacecraft were launched in the previous 15 months to observe the Comet's passage around the Sun. NASA's Launching of a Spartan UV telescope and an Astro UV telescope to observe the Comet from Earth orbit was terminated because of the Challenger accident. But NASA's PioneerVenus spacecraft (launched in May 1978) had already completed five of its seven planned weeks of viewing the Comet, and the International Cometary Explorer spacecraft (launched in August 1978) was scheduled to monitor Halley's solar wind upstream. (NASA Release 8619; P Inq, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Mar
A fullscale Spacehab module mockup intended to double the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle middeck was delivered to NASA's Ames Research Center by Spacehab, Inc. The mockup was intended as a test bed for artificial intelligence, robotics systems, and human performance. Spacehab planned to build three of the modules over the next three years. Another corporation, Sverdrup Technology, was chosen for a $45 million support services contract in which they would provide test complex services for Space Shuttle main engines and engineering and laboratory and data work for NASA and 18 other Government agencies. NASA also planned a program that would develop software tools for writing computer programs in ADA, a language used by the Department of Defense for missioncritical computers. The project was expected to run for three or four years and cost $200 million. (Def News, Jul 7/86)
NASA extended a $1.32 billion contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company for processing services at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The contracted price, however, did not reflect the schedule changes brought on by the Challenger accident; the changes would be handled through contract amendments. NASA also awarded contracts at $500,000 million each to five different firms for the study of designs for second generation solid rocket boosters. The companies were required only to submit concepts for a newly designed rocket. (LA Times, Sep 6/86; WSJ Sep 8/86)'80** NASA cleared a site at Wallops Island, Virginia, for use by Space Services, Inc., a new rocket company, to launch its Conestoga rocket. The company planned to put cremated remains of 10,000 people on a satellite that was to orbit the Earth. (P Inq, Sep 9/86)
Dr. William R. Graham told a congressional committee that the suspected orings in the Challenger accident should be modified or redesigned. The manufacturer of the rocket boosters had submitted 43 possible modifications to NASA since February, and changes to the fleet, said Graham, would cost about $350 million. This was the first time any official from NASA had indicated a need for improving the seals since the January 28 The acting administrator also noted that recovery from the accident could cost the Nation $3.2 billion and replacing the Challenger would run another $2.8 billion. Not replacing the Shuttle, he warned, would restrict the fleet to military use and service flights. (Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Space Science Applications, Mar 11/90; P Inq, Mar 12/86; W Post, Mar 12/86; USA Today, Mar 12/86; W Times, Mar 12/86)
Thomas L. Moser, Director for Engineering at NASA's Johnson Space Center, was appointed as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight to investigate the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8616)
The Peoples Republic of China moved to fill the void left by the United States and Europe for commercial space launchings as it negotiated with two U.S. firms. Hughes Aircraft Company expressed an interest in working with China to establish a launch base in the Hawaiian islands. Peking, at the same time, announced an agreement it had made with the U.S. company Teresat, Inc., for putting two of their satellites into orbit in 1987 and 1989 at a price ranging from $20 million to $25 million, about 15 percent less than what Ariane and the Space Shuttle charged. Teresat, however, would first need to locate an insurer for launches and secure approval from the State Department. China claimed its program was capable of 10 to 12 launches per year. (W Post, Jun 16/86; CSM, Jun 16/86; WSJ, Jun 17/86; C Trib, Jun
Rocket debris recovered on April 13, 40 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 560 feet of water was determined by the President's Commission to be the part of the right booster thought to be responsible for the Challenger accident. In the area where photographs had shown a plume of flame was a onefoot by twofoot hole, lending concrete evidence to the theory that the oring and/or the putty used to protect it had failed to do its job of sealing two of the rocket's four segments. (C Trib, Apr 15/86; W Post, Apr 15/86; W Times, Apr 15/86; NY Times, Apr 15/86; B Sun, Apr 15/86)
The steering problem that halted the Shuttle Columbia's launch in December of 1985 was traced to a tiny electrical component that led ground computers astray. (W Times, Jan 3/86; NY Times, Jan 3/86)
Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge restated at a conference of the Aviation Space Writers that the USAF would like to purchase a new rocket that could lift medium weight satellites. The rockets, which the service calls "medium lift vehicles," were needed to launch 12 NAVSTAR navigation satellites scheduled for Shuttle flights. He also informed the conference of an interest in larger rockets, "complementary expendable launch vehicles," (an updated Titan rocket) for putting the Pentagon's heaviest satellites into orbit. (B Sun, May 14/86; NY Times, May 13/86; May 20/86)
NASA got back tapes from IBM that were recovered from the Atlantic Ocean six weeks after the Space Shuttle accident and revealed that the Challenger crew had no knowledge of events leading to the catastrophe. IBM engineers, who were simultaneously researching tape restoration, were called upon and after isolating the computer zeros and ones, NASA engineers began the job of translating the data into a facsimile of human voice. W Post, Jul 18/86; NY Times, Jul 18/86; B Sun, Jul 18/86)
Testing of recently installed weather protection structures was scheduled for August 19 at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida with Space Shuttle Atlantis. The $3.3 million system of sliding and folding doors and seals would cover previously exposed, lower portions of the orbiter and greatly reduce risk to the heat protection tiles, subject to damage from heavy rains, hail, and windblown debris. (NASA Release 8695)
Space Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to be ferried atop a modified Boeing 747 and transported to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California where it was expected to remain until early November. Testing would closely parallel that done at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), in Florida, in preparation for the first West Coast Space Shuttle launch. Upon arrival, Columbia would be moved to the launch pad and mated with a set of solid rocket boosters and an external tank for integrated vehicle testing, including the loading of cryogenic propellants in a "wet" countdown demonstration test. Prior to the move, processing at KSC would include installation of the main engine, auxiliary power units, and orbital maneuvering system pods, in parallel with structural inspections, approved modifications, and ferry flight preparation. (NASA Release 8640)
NASA scientists halted design of additional shielding for two nuclear powered satellites. The shield, they ascertained, would help only during the first two minutes of launch and would actually become a detriment after that. The Interagency Nuclear Safety Review Panel would not give launch approval for the scientific missions until 1999, but NASA officials saw a good chance for approval of launching the radioisotope thermoelectric generator powered satellites from the Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Dec 15/86)
The United States Space Foundation outlined plans to provide a focal point that would raise funds for a replacement of the Space Shuttle Challenger. The Challenger 7 Fund reached out to individuals and organizations for contributions while hoping that Congress would authorize the replacement. (NASA Release 8618)
In response to a recent order, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher handed President Ronald Reagan a 50page report that outlined the agency's plans for implementing the Rogers Commission's recommendations. Among the items detailed were booster redesign, changes in NASA's management, review of "critical items" whose failure would lead to vehicle loss, establishment of a safety organization, improved communications, landing safety, launch abort and crew escape, flight rate, and maintenance safeguards. Fletcher also submitted a companion letter urging the President to authorize funds for replacement of the Challenger. Because of the requirements for getting the Shuttle flying again, NASA confirmed the aircraft would be grounded until at least early 1988. (Actions to Implement the Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Jul 14/86; NY Times, Jul 15/86; W `"Post, Jul 15/86; B Sun, Jul 15/86; W Times, Jul 15/86; P Inq, Jul (#15/86; C Trib, Jul 15/86)
NASA announced that the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and the launch of the first Earth Observation Mission have been switched. Under the new schedule, the Space Telescope would be launched on October 27, 1986, and the Earth Observation Mission would lift off on August 18, 1986. The change was made to provide additional time for delivery of the Space Telescope from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The Space Telescope would be deployed into orbit from Space Shuttle Atlantis. It was expected to see 7 times farther and 10 times more clearly than any telescope on Earth. (NASA Release 862)
NASA announced plans for extending operations to five of its ground tracking stations located at Ascension Island in the southeast Atlantic, Santiago (Chili), Guam, Hawaii, and western Australia. Closing dates for these stations was moved up and was conditional on the February 1988 launch by the Space Shuttle of a second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS); a TDRS was destroyed during the Challenger accident. Two TDRS's could provide 85 percent coverage of an orbiting spacecraft, compared with the 50 percent coverage provided by ground stations. (NASA Release 86157)
Astronaut Owen K. Garriott planned to leave both NASA and government service during the current week. His past achievements include a 2month stay in space aboard Skylab and the 10day Spacelab 1 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 8675)
The cause of the faulty engine valve that was responsible for Shuttle Columbia's sixth delay was discovered to be a 5inch thermometer that was broken during fuel loading. After engineers removed the thermometer, they were hopeful for a launch later in the day, but feared that overcast weather might cause yet another delay. (W Times, Jan 10/86; W Post, Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86)
The President's Space Shuttle Commission gathered in private before beginning its formal investigation into the disaster. Headed by former Secretary of State William P. Rogers, the Commission planned to weigh all of the evidence and make a recommendation, with assistance from NASA, after 120 days. (USA Today, Feb 5/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the $10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year 1987, a 40 percent increase from fiscal year 1986. Fletcher, according to NASA officials, planned to meet with President Ronald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of years of underfunding. The increased funds could support the Civil Space Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military aeronautics research program; and the Xray Astrophysics Facility, advanced technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 billion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov
Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June
A NASA study found that the part of the booster rocket that was suspect in the Challenger accident had reached a temperature of only about 29 degrees Fahrenheit at the time of liftoff, 9 degrees cooler than the surrounding air. Both NASA and Morton Thiokol engineers, the study noted, had knowledge of0*the ring's susceptibility to damage in 50degree temperatures. A member of the President's Commission pointed out that NASA officials should have been aware of this as earlier temperatures were in the 20s and the orings would not heat up quickly. (W Post, Feb 24/86)
James R. Thompson, vicechairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, announced that the cause of the disaster would be pinpointed within a month. Although the right booster rocket, which would be a tremendous help, was still unrecovered, and tapes from the crew compartment shed no light, Thompson noted that photographic evidence and other data already available would eventually yield the answer. He also stated that
James R. Thompson, of Princeton University's Plasma Physics Lab, nationally recognized propulsion expert, and former NASA propulsion engineer, was named vice chairman of the NASA task force inquiring into the Challenger accident. His appointment was in support of the Commission assigned by President Ronald Reagan to perform the investigation of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8620)' 0*March 3: NASA announced a comprehensive project to evaluate the implications of the Challenger accident on the space program. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions had been postponed, NASA announced that the Shuttle Discovery would be modified so that it could launch spacecraft with a Centaur upper stage rocket. The Challenger accident left only the Shuttle Atlantis with the capability for carrying Centaur payloads. These decisions were made by the Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. William R. Graham, on the recommendation of the Headquarters Replanning Task Force, headed by Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, set up to study program alternatives in the wake of the accident. Other matters considered by the task force included: (1) the requirements for all aspects for an orbiter to replace the Challenger as well as the lost Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) launch vehicle and its support structure attached to a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost with the Shuttle; (2) new launch schedules for the remaining three Shuttles; (3) an additional launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base; (4) the role of expendable launch vehicles for commercial use; (5) the retention of ground communications because only one TDRS, instead of two, was in orbit to link spacecraft to earth because of the accident; (6) and identification of monetary losses other than those from the destroyed equipment. In the meantime, customers who had hoped to launch their satellites from the Space Shuttle were being forced to examine other alternatives. With launch schedules certain to fall far behind and military and scientific communities getting first priority, commercial interests would have either to put their projects on the back burner or use NASA's rival, the European Space Agency's Arianespace company, for more expensive launches. With NASA's announcement that its Shuttle program would be put on hold for 1218 months, Shuttlelinked businesses were searching for other options as well. (NASA Release 8622; C Trib, Mar 3/86; B Sun, Mar 4/86; USA Today, Mar 4/86)
NASA officials provided investigators with new evidence challenging the theory that the Challenger accident was triggered by failed rocket seals caused by cold weather. They presented prelaunch photographs showing a flaw in the suspected oring on the right side booster, a possible correlation to the fact that workers assembling the booster were hampered with a misshaped rocket segment. New tests on the orings conducted at Morton Thiokol's plant demonstrated that they sealed properly to temperatures at 10 degrees below zero. Also, the Challenger, according to meteorologist Irving P. Krick, sustained wind shear of 125 to 150 miles per hour just prior to the accident, which would have been similar to "flying into a tornado." (W Post, Mar
In a response to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the establishment of the Office of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance and the appointment of George A. Rodney, from Martin Marietta Corporation, to head the office as Associate Administrator. Objectives of the office were to ensure a program that monitored equipment status and designed validation problem analysis and system acceptability in Agencywide plans and programs. Rodney's responsibilities were to have oversight of safety, reliability, and quality assurance functions related to all NASA activities. (NASA Release 8687; W Post, Jul 9/86; W Times, Jul 9/86; B Sun, July 9/86; P Inq, Jul 6/86)
Speaking to NASA employees, Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an intense safety program to include reassessment of Shuttle management structure, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for aborting Shuttle flights, and recertification of all critical Shuttle parts. He noted that "the business of flying in space is a bold business," and added, "We cannot print enough money to make it totally riskfree. But we certainly are going to correct any mistakes we have made...and we're going to get going ahead just as soon as we can." When the Shuttle Program resumes, he continued, the first Shuttle would be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards Air Force Base, in California. (USA Today, Mar 26/68; W Post, Mar 26/86; WSJ, Mar 26/86; NY Times, Mar 26/86; W Times, Mar 26/86)
NASA extended a oneyear, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86184) 'J0** The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to a 10year, $99 million contract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the personnel, equipment, and supplies necessary to carry out duties at the Slidell Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86185) During 1986: The Space Shuttle Challenger accident and the subsequent investigation and recovery activities headed the list of prominent events for NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of note: Voyager 2 encountered the planet Uranus in January, continued with its journey and was expected to reach Neptune by 1989. A new baseline configuration was drafted for the Space Stationa major milestone for development. NASA and the Department of Defense initiated a joint AeroSpace Plane research program concerning vehicles capable of horizontal takeoff and landing, singlestage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle, and Dr. James C. Fletcher, for the second time, became Administrator of NASA. Two books concerning NASA endeavors were published in 1986. Joseph P. Allen's EnteringSpace deals with an astronaut's journey into the last frontier, and William E. Burrows' Deep Black looks into space espionage and national security. (NASA Release 86177)
Top officials at Rockwell International, builder of NASA's orbiters and closely tied to the Shuttle program, testified that they believed cold weather had made launch of the Challenger unsafe. The President's panel concluded that NASA's launch decision process was flawed because criteria for approval should not have been changed at the last minute. The New York Times concluded, "The picture emerging from the inquiry into the loss of the Space Shuttle is one of chronic failure in the space agency and its contractors to communicate lifeanddeath problems up the chain of command." (W Post, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Feb 28/86; C Trib, Feb 28/86; WSJ, Feb 28/86;
In a statement released by the White House Press Secretary, President Ronald Reagan announced "two steps that will ensure America's leadership in space exploration and utilization." His first target was the building of a fourth Space Shuttle beginning in fiscal year 1987, deemed necessary for accomplishments in space (especially the Space Station). He also announced that NASA would ease out of the business of launching commercial satellites by allowing the private sector to assume the responsibility, which, he said, would eventually be done "better and cheaper." NASA, he stressed, should focus solely on the exploration of space. (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Statement by the President, Aug 15/86)
The Challenger accident forced NASA to reconsider expendable launch vehicles as a means for putting satellites into space. Believed to have been rendered obsolete by the Shuttle, these rockets were once again deemed necessary for meeting the growing schedule of launches. The change of position0*notwithstanding, NASA and the Department of Defense appeared ready to request another orbiter. (B Sun, Feb 27/68)
NASA announced to Congress plans for modifying the Space Station that Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher predicted would be finished by 1994. The new design cut the amount of space walks during construction in half, increased the amount of living and laboratory space, and kept all human aspects concerning the project at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The Space Station, according to plans for assembly, would need 17 Space Shuttle flights between 1993 and 1994. In the meantime, Congress approved legislation, based on a
The first Soviet Space Shuttle, expected to be launched in 1986, would likely look very similar to U.S. orbiters, said scientists. Photographs of a scale model Soviet space plane that splashed down in the Indian Ocean revealed a miniature American Shuttle. Plans for the plane were easy for scientists to obtain as the program was never top secret and sources noted that the Soviets had often copied Western aircraft in the past. On a similar note, a report concerning the secretive launch from, presumably, the Soviet Union in summer 1985 concluded that an antisatellite weapon had gone up. Radar tracked debris that had orbited the Earth before burning up in the atmosphere, and researchers quickly deduced that the metallic scrap had come from a satellite on which the weapon was tested. The illegal launches were the first such unannounced flights by the Soviet Union since `"testing of orbital thermonuclear weapons. (W Times, Jan 21/86; (#WSJ, Jan 21/86)
NASA scientists were searching for ways to clean up the orbiting debris left from nuclear powered satellites and wreckage from antisatellite weapons testing. Considering the high speed of orbiting craft, scientists reported that even a fleck of paint could be dangerous, the probable culprit that caused a cracked windshield in the seventh U.S. Shuttle flight. Because slightly larger objects could result in catastrophic damage, the planned Space Station sacrificed some valuable weight to armor crew quarters. (W Times, Oct 13/86)
NASA announced another test of a Space Shuttle engine to take place later in that week. The purpose was to collect additional data to be added to the previous test of the same engine, that ran for 250 seconds, at the National Space Technology Laboratory. (NASA Release 8697)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an independent panel to review NASA's management practices, especially the decisionmaking process on the morning of the January 28 Challenger accident. The review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that Shuttle flights would likely resume by July 1987, with an optimum of seven launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his "highest priority." Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told members of Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would investigate the transfer of two Morton Thiokol engineers, Allan McDonald and Roger Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently' 0*objected to the Challenger launch on the morning prior to its deadly flight and later detailed their scenarios before Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow be involved with the reassignments. The subcommittee advised NASA to reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened to severely reduce NASA's budget for new space programs if the agency did not undergo some drastic changes. (Department of Housing and Urban Development Independent Agencies Appropriations for 1987, May 13/86; W Times, May 14/86; W Post, May 14/86; WSJ, May 14/86; NY Times, May 14/86; P Inq, May 14/86; C Trib, May 14/86; B Sun, May 14/86)
James R. Thompson, vice chairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, said that NASA officials could be "walking on the edge of a cliff" if they did not correct flaws in the solid rocket booster. Previous problems, he noted, simply were not taken seriously enough; he then added that NASA could say conclusively that the right solid rocket booster had caused the Shuttle accident. The task force, said Thompson, focused on four factors of the joint in the booster rocket: the tendency of the joints to rotate during liftoff; the impact of subfreezing temperatures on the orings; defects in the putty used to protect them; and slight damage to the orings during assembly. James Kingsbury, director of Science and Engineering Directorate disagreed with Thompson's findings because the rockets had performed well on 24 previous flights. (USA Today, Apr 9/86; W Post, Apr 9/86; P Inq, Apr 9/86)
Documents released by the Roger's Commission investigating the Challenger accident revealed that the Space Shuttle Columbia had narrowly avoided a severe mishap on January 6 when it came within 31 seconds of launch after 18,000 pounds of liquid oxygen had been inadvertently drained from its external tank. The mistake would have left the ship without enough fuel to obtain orbit; the error was blamed on fatigue among the ground crew, who were pursuing a rigid schedule. (NY Times, Aug 6/86; W Post, Aug 6/86; W Times, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
Lawrence B. Mulloy, a manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, in charge of the solid rocket motors that were held responsible for the Challenger accident, announced his retirement after more than 30 years of Government'-0*service. He was among those who opted for liftoff of the illfated Shuttle and was repeatedly faulted for this judgement by William P. Rogers, chairman of the commission investigating the accident. He was the third Marshall manager to retire since the accident, following William R. Lucas and George B. Hardy. (W Post, Jul 17/86; P Inq, Jul 17/86; B Sun, Jul 17/86)
The results of a study conducted by Geologists Dr. Matthew Golombek and Dr. Laurie Brown suggested that the northwest Mojave Desert had shifted about 25 degrees clockwise because of periodic, violent earthquakes some 16 to 20 million years ago. Golombek reported that "results of magnetic studies of volcanic rocks taken from 19 sites suggested that the movement was caused by shear (the Earth's tectonic plates sliding past or over one another) from the Pacific Plate sliding along the fault past the North American Plate." Magnetic minerals had once lined up parallel with the Earth's magnetic field to the North, but the study found minerals now pointing 25 degrees to the east, and it was determined that tectonic movement had rotated the rocks. (NASA Release 86160; LA Times, Nov 30/86) 'D0*November 26: NASA selected the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS), a launch vehicle that fits in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle, to carry three probes for planetary missions. Despite earlier plans for alternative launch vehicles following cancellation of the Shuttle/Centaur Upper Stage and the Challenger accident, NASA felt an urgent need to reestablish its planetary program. The probes scheduled for launch in 1989 and 1990 included the Galileo, a joint mission with Germany that would circle Jupiter and measure electromagnetic fields and plasma particles; the Magellan, which would orbit and map Venus using radar; and the Ulysses, a joint mission with the European Space Agency designed to orbit and study the poles of the sun. These three were the first missions for orbit around bodies other than Earth that would employ the IUS. The IUS boosters were manufactured by Boeing to launch three scientific missions. They were to have launched the General Dynamics hydrogenfueled Centaur rockets, but the highly volatile boosters, thought possibly unsafe for human space flight, were grounded after the Challenger accident. Because of its less powerful rocket, the Galileo needed to slingshot Venus in order to reach Jupiter, as opposed to flying directly to the planet. The added time for the mission was expected to run $50 million. (NASA Release 86161; NY Times, Nov 27/86)
A panel of scientists and engineers, established at the behest of the Roger's Commission, endorsed NASA's redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket, but urged the Agency to increase its test schedule and to consider alternative designs. NASA's efforts had been limited by confining any redesign to plans that incorporated the rocket segments already ordered before the Challenger accident. Because the chosen design could prove inadequate and because NASA would begin investigating second generation booster rockets, all alternative design changes, the panel concluded, were in need of study. (P Inq, Oct 14/86; W Post, Oct 14/86; NY Times, Oct 14/86)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced assignments to the NASA 51L Data and0*Design Analysis Task Force. The task force was to collect and analyze information to support a thorough review of all aspects and potential causes of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release
Following a speech in Washington, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge told reporters that the Space Shuttle would not fly again until early 1988. The Air Force, he said, would use the expendable launch vehicles being developed as often as possible and that NASA's goal was to have military and nonmilitary payloads on a 5050 schedule. For reasons of security, Aldridge had hoped President Ronald Reagan would authorize funds for a new orbiter, but sources revealed that the President would hold back any decisions concerning the space program until after NASA began implementing some of the recommendations from the Roger's Commission. (W Post, Jun 24/86; W Times, Jun 24/86; NY Times, Jun
NASA planned to shift its original plan of carrying a mixture of scientific, military, and commercial payloads and give greater emphasis to the military when Shuttle flights resumed. The military, they added, always had top priority and five to seven of the flights slated for next year were devoted to them. NY Times, Mar 24/86)
Unpublished test results done for the Presidential Commission studying the Challenger accident showed that cold weather on the morning of the Challenger launch made failure inevitable. Other findings by the commission concluded that a second joint on the righthand booster rocket ruptured seconds after the Challenger breakup, suggesting that the joint was unduly fragile; reusable booster rockets ballooned about twohundredths of an inch after each previous flight, and segments of the ill fated rocket did not match well; a breach of the bottom of the external tank led to a structural failure but the nose cone of the booster rocket crashing into the fuel tank was not responsible for the final breakup; and the Shuttle did not explode, but rather a hydrogenoxygen flash fire caused it simply to fall apart. (NY Times, Apr 30/86)
Richard G. Smith, Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, announced his retirement. He plans to join the private sector with General Space Corporation. His achievements span 35 years in the space program and include work with the rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal; management of',0*the Saturn Rocket program at Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Headquarters, Director of the Skylab Task Force, and he is the recipient of awards for his contributions to Apollo, Skylab, and Space Shuttle programs. Smith had earlier warned that investigation into the Challenger accident would result in a mass exodus from NASA and later added that the investigation damaged the reputations of many officials. (NASA Release 8689; W Times, Jul 11/86; W Post, Jul 11/86; NY Times, Jul 11/86; LA Times, Jul 11/86
NASA located a video tape concerning the Shuttle mission 51E Flight Readiness Review (FRR) that contained twoandonehalf minutes of discussion on previous oring erosion. Because there was no requirement to record audio or video of FRR's, no cataloging of the tape was made. The Presidential Commission was provided with the tape but informed NASA that no new information was on it. (NASA 8677)
Astronaut Paul J. Weitz was named deputy director of the Johnson Space Center (JCS), Houston, Texas. Past achievements include participation in the first astronaut visit to the Skylab, serving as commander of the sixth Space Shuttle mission, and serving as technical assistant to the JSC Director. (NASA Release
Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a Senate subcommittee and testified that the $7.7 billion budget for NASA was "barely adequate" and could further delay Shuttle flights while possibly stripping the private sector of some 25,000 jobs. He also said that the currently designed Space Station was intended to be built using four Shuttles. With only three Shuttles, the Station would need to go back to the drawing board. The Senate appeared to be looking at a civilian sponsored space program for commercial launches as a way to reduce costs. (W Post, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
A section of debris recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in March was found to be the part of the right booster rocket suspected as the cause of the Challenger accident. Although the piece was a section opposite the flame seen coming from a joint in the rocket, it contained part of the joint. Recovery of the section could both aid investigators and assist engineers in their redesign. (B Sun, Apr 2/86; W Post, Apr 2/86; NY Times, Apr
NASA opted to use the deactivated Minuteman facilities'<0*at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for longterm storage of debris recovered from the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Large concrete covers were to be placed over the tubes for a weather tight seal, concluding NASA's primary activities related to the analysis and disposition of recovered hardware. (NASA Release 86141)
For the third time in 19 days, launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed. This time, a malfunction with Columbia's computer control failed to close an oxygen valve. Engineers were successful in closing the valve under manual control, but the additional time it was open resulted in 1,500 gallons to 3,000 gallons of oxygen entering the fuel lines to the main engine, lowering temperatures to an unacceptable level. With 15 flights slated for 1886, another attempt was immediately planned for January 7. The chief goal of the mission was to carry a $50 million communications satellite, Satcom, for RCA. When an RCA engineer announced that 8:47 PM was the cut off point for a launch that would later deliver the satellite at an optimum time, the mission was canceled. Scheduled to ride into space with NASA's astronauts and engineers was Florida's Democratic Congressman Bill Nelson, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications that oversees NASA's budget. (NY Times, Jan 7/86; W Post, Jan 7/86; P Inq, Jan 7/86; C Trib, Jan 7/86; W Times, Jan 7/86; B Sun, Jan 7/86)
An Energy Department analysis released to Representative Edward Markey stated that radioactive releases resulting from a Space Shuttle accident carrying a plutoniumpowered satellite could cause 367 cancer cases and contaminate 367 square miles of land. The former estimate hinged on people staying in the launch site area for more than a year. (W Post, May 19/86; C Trib, May
NASA disclaimed an April 2324 twopart article in the New York Times that accused the organization of ignoring audits and safety standards, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle program. According to NASA, some of the examples mentioned in the article "are related to activities of several years ago and have since been corrected or are being corrected." Moreover, "NASA has always considered audits to be a necessary management tool to be used in conjunction with other management processes...during the existence of NASA prior to and since the Inspector General Act, management has used its own internal audits to uncover and correct deficiencies and to strengthen internal controls." In addition, NASA has been responsive to external audit reports through tighter management." Indeed, says NASA, $749.3 million in savings, cost avoidances, and cost recoveries were realized from 19781985 because of internal and external audits. NASA also noted that many of the audit reports dealt with research and development projects into which new technologies had to be figured, making for an uncertain budget Other allegations: Various violations of law and Federal codes have occurred within NASA. The Agency predicted that Shuttle cargo would cost around $100 per pound but actual cost was closer to $5264 per pound; the Shuttle was not equipped with the amount of hardware for test purposes that was available to the Apollo program; in financing a Government guaranteed loan for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System program (TDRSS), NASA wasted $1 billion; NASA lost $2.4 million of equipment in In defense, NASA noted that the original estimate for Shuttle cargo was $160 per pound and the most recent was $615 per poundbesides, cost per pound was only a partial indicator of the Shuttle's utility; the Shuttle program did not parallel the Apollo program in regard to safety test hardware, but introduced longer periods of testing, not substandard safety precautions; the $1 billion said to have been wasted in the TDRSS program was in fact attributable primarily to significant interest cost increases; the lost equipment was a 1950's state of the art computer that by 1983 was so obsolete that no one else would take ithence the machine was dismantled and disposed of; ties to graft at NASA have to do with individual misconduct, such as that by Lewis Research Center and Marshall Space Flight Center officials, who were prosecuted in Federal court, indicating that the internal NASA investigation process was working well. (NASA Release 8652) 0** A statement by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly noted that the remains of the crew of the Space Shuttle Challenger were soon to be transferred, but no positive determination of the cause of the accident had yet been made. The three approaches pursued were the examination of remains, direct examination of the wreckage, and analysis of photography and radar to determine forces imposed on the vehicle. An examination of the remains revealed no new information, and the wreckage examination was hampered by the amount of damage done at water impact. Photo and radar analysis, he hoped, would lead to a determination of the magnitude and the direction of the forces imposed on the cabin during and after breakup. (NASA Release 8653)
Astronaut James Van Hoften announced his resignation from NASA to enter private industry. His past achievements include two Space Shuttle Flights and the position of Assistant Professor of Civil Engineering at the University of Houston. He was the fifth astronaut to leave NASA since the January 28 accident. (NASA Release 8678; USA Today, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jul 29/86)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
NASA planned to proceed with construction of a second horizontal test stand for redesign and recertification of the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Motor (SRM) at the Morton Thiokol, Inc., Wasatch facility in Utah. The newer test stand would more'>0*closely simulate the stresses on the SRM during an actual launch and ascent. (NASA Release 86146; W Times, Oct 17/86)
NASA released transcriptions of the prelaunch intercom tape of the 51L, Space Shuttle Challenger, for public consumption. The tape was about an hour long, beginning when the crew first entered the craft to two minutes and five seconds before liftoff. It contained nothing that was relevant to the';0*accident and was not provided to the Presidential Commission in support of the investigation. Because the intercom channel provides a private mechanism for exchanging spontaneous comments and recording information of a personal nature, NASA had not released these transcripts previously. Because of media inquiries, however, the prelaunch tape was transcribed. (NASA Release 86135; 86137; 51L Transcript Folder; NY Times, Oct
Recovery operations for the Space Shuttle Challenger crew cabin were completed. Scattered debris and the remains of all seven crew members were located in an effort that was hampered by heavy seas, high winds, and reduced underwater visibility. Final forensic work and future planning in accordance with family requests were expected to finish shortly thereafter. (NASA Release 8646; C Trib, Apr 21/86; NY Times, Apr 21/86)
Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that John W. Thomas, Spacelab Program Officer Manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to assume management responsibility for the Solid Rocket Motor redesign team at the Marshall Space Flight Center on May 12, 1986. The Space Shuttle Challenger accident investigation uncovered several deficiencies in the design of the solid rocket motor joint. An independent group of senior experts would also be involved in all phases of the program; they would report to NASA Administrators and review and integrate the findings and recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8658)
Another NASA launch ended in failure as a $30 million0*Delta rocket carrying a $55.7 million weather satellite was destroyed shortly after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. An order to destruct by remote control came when the rocket's main engine failed and it tumbled off course. This was the first mishap for the Delta rocket, praised as NASA's most dependable launch vehicle, in 9 years and 43 consecutive launches. The four most used vehicles for launching satellites (the Delta, Titan 3D and Atlas Centaur rockets and the Space Shuttle) were all put on hold, grounding the agency for an undetermined amount of time. A short circut was the leading suspect the Delta loss. (W Times, May 5/86; May 6/86; W Post, May 5/86; May 6/86; WSJ, May 5/86; May 6/86; NY Times, May 5/86; May 6/86)
Astronaut Sally K. Ride was named Special Assistant to the Administrator for strategic planning, where she would be responsible for reviewing NASA's goals and objectives for near'40*tolongterm planning. Ride was a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle flights and a member of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86114)
