NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, at Headquarters in Washington, D.C., selected 29 life sciences investigators for space flight study. According to Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, Director of NASA's Life Sciences Division, the first phase of the study, the definition phase, which is expected to begin in the early fall of 1987 and last less than a year, would be followed by selection of investigators for actual flights aboard the Space Shuttle. Chosen investigators could participate in future Space Shuttle missions anytime between 1991 and 1994, or even later. (NASA Release 8754)
NASA announced that secondary payloads for the next Space Shuttle mission would include five microgravity experiments, life sciences, atmospheric science and infrared communications experiments, as well as two student experiments. (NASA Release 87144)
NASA announced that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle launch had again been rescheduled, this time for June 1988. The 4month delay was caused by the need to perform further tests on the liquidfuel main engines and because of needed redesigning and testing of the Shuttle's rocket boosters. The postponement caused a decrease in the number of crew tended flights planned for 1988 and 1989. NASA said that three Spaceh)0*0*0*Shuttles, instead of the five originally planned, would be flown in 1988 and seven, instead of the ten planned, would be flown in 1989. The reductions in Space Shuttle launches, NASA believed, would further slow U.S. efforts to regain primacy in space exploration and utilization. (LA Times, May 21/87; NY Times, May 21/87; B Sun, May 21/87; W Post, May 21/87)
NASA announced that a more detailed examination of the results of the December 23 cold weather testfiring of the redesigned booster rocket revealed that an outer ring which anchors the booster's nozzle came apart during the test. The nozzle steers the Space Shuttle during the first two minutes of flight. The setback forced NASA to cancel the June 2, 1987, launch of the Space Shuttle. NASA officials said they were confident the launch would be delayed about three months, since the critical elements of the booster rocket, the redesigned field joints, functioned perfectly during the test. (B Sun, Dec 30/87; NY Times, Dec 30/87; WSJ, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87; W Times, Dec 30/87)
In an effort to reduce reliance on the U.S. Space Shuttle, NASA would rely more heavily on untended rockets, declared Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. He said that the primary goal was to "accelerate the deployment of the Nation's backlog of spacescience missions." NASA hoped to launch as many as five satellites and space probes by untended rockets by 1992. WSJ, May 18/87)
NASA announced plans to study the feasibility of building an untended rocket to carry heavy materials for use in Space Station construction. The proposed concept calls for a space freighter capable of carrying more than three times as much cargo as the Space Shuttle. The vehicle would use the same type of solid fuel boosters as the Space Shuttle. NASA surmised that such a vehicle, whose estimated costs were put at $1.5 billion, could be delivered in 1993. (H Chron, Aug 6/87; H Post, Aug 6/87; W Times, Aug 6/87; USA Today, Aug 6/87)
NASA said it had completed negotiations with Rockwell International Corporation for a new Space Shuttle. The new space vehicle, to replace the Challenger lost in the 1986 accident, was expected to be delivered in April 1991. The cost of the new Space Shuttle was estimated at $1.3 billion. (C Trib, Aug 2/87; H Post, Aug 1/87; LA Times, Aug 1/87; B Sun, Aug 1/87)
An apparent technical problem forced the cancellation of the test firing of the redesigned 126footlong, 1.2millionpound Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, Development Motor9 (DM9), to be used in the first postChallenger flight. The failed test took place at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was cancelled one second before ignition. This was the second of at least five fullscale tests planned to check the operation of the booster's redesigned oring joints. The first fullduration test firing of a redesigned motor took place on August 30, 1987. (NASA Release 87183; P Inq, Dec 20/87; W Post, Dec 20/87)
NASA announced that White Sands Space Harbor, New Mexico, was designated an alternate endofmission landing site for Space Shuttle missions STS26 through STS28. The new site was to be used for a Shuttle landing when conditions at Edwards Air Force Base in California precluded landing. (NASA Release 87 189)
A report sent to President Ronald Reagan by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle would have an escape hatch. But a decision on the rocket assist system necessary to eject the crew safely in emergency had not yet been made. The escape hatch was one of many significant changes made in the Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch in June 1988. Twentyone major changes were made in the Shuttle's main engines alone, in order to increase operating life, safety, and reliability. These and other changes listed in the NASA report to the White House reflected recommendations made by the Rogers Commission, following their H&investigation of the Challenger accident. (C Trib, July 2/87; LA Times, July 1/87; NY Times, July 1/87) During June: General Dynamics Corporation said that it would build 18 rockets over the next 5 years to launch communicationsh)0*0*0*satellites. According to a company spokesman, General Dynamics would spend $100 million to start production of the AtlasCentaur rocket. General Dynamics became the third U.S. company, together with McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, to attempt to move into launch vehicles production after the Challenger accident. (WSJ, June 16/87)
NASA announced that the three Space Shuttle main engines are undergoing acceptance testing at its National Space Technology Laboratories in Mississippi. The Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International performed the tests. The engines tested were to be used in the next Shuttle mission, STS26, scheduled for launch in June 1988. The tests were to be completed in December 1987. (NASA Release 87130; CSM, Sept 5/87)
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)
Carver Kennedy, Vice President for Space Services at Morton Thiokol, Inc., said that engineers successfully testfired the company's redesigned Space Shuttle booster rocket, planned for use when NASA resumed Shuttle flights in June 1988. (WSJ, Dec 24/87; W Post, Dec 24/87; W Times, Dec 24/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful than the American Space Shuttle. According to the Soviet Tass News Agency, the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central Asia, fired correctly but a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a "twostage multipurpose launch vehicle" capable of putting into orbit more than 100 tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could carry. (LA Times, May 17/87; C Trib, May 18/87; W Times, May 18/87)
NASA announced that the allowable endofmission landing weight for Space Shuttle orbiters would be increased from 211,000 to 230,000 pounds. The increase means that roughly 19,000 pounds more payload can be carried aloft. The new capability was made possible by structural analysis and additional review of forces encountered by the orbiter during maneuvers shortly before landing. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly said that this new capability would add considerable flexibility and efficiency to NASA's Space Transportation System. (NASA Release 87168; AvWk, Nov 9/87; W Post, Nov 10/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and European Space Agency (ESA) Director General Reimar Luest announced that the Space Shuttle would be used for the launch of the joint NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the Sun in October 1990. At the same time, they announced that the launch, also from the Space Shuttle, of the Galileo mission to Jupiter had been moved up to October/November 1989. Since the distance to the Sun is considerably shorter than to Jupiter, the Ulysses spacecraft would begin to transmit data in 1994, a year earlier than the Galileo spacecraft. (NASA Release 8751) 0*0*0*April 6: NASA selected Boeing Computer Services Company, Seattle, Washington, for negotiating a technical and management information system contract in support of the Space Station program. (NASA Release 8752)
NASA announced that Morton Thiokol, Inc., the builder of the booster rocket that caused the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion, voluntarily accepted a $10 million reduction in fees and agreed to take no profit from $409 million worth of work required to fix future rockets. The company also agreed to replace the rockets lost in the accident. The agreement between Thiokol and NASA negated any lawsuits growing out of the January 28, 1986, accident that destroyed the Shuttle and killed the crew of seven. (C Trib, Feb 25/87; W Post, Feb 25/87; B Sun, Feb 25/87; WSJ, Feb 25/87)
Officials at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, reported that NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory would leave on October 31, 1987, for New Zealand on a monthlong mission to study the supernova SN1987a. Scientists aboard the Kuiper would make eight research flights to study the supernova, located 170,000 light years away. Supernova SN1987a is the closest supernova to Earth since the invention of a telescope some 400 years ago. (NASA Release 87162; AvWk, Nov. 9/87)h)#0*0*0*November 3: NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs James T. Rose announced new program initiatives to encourage and expand commercial space activity. Rose told some 270 executives from across the country, meeting for a threeday workshop in Nashville, Tennessee, that the new programs will build on earlier NASA commercial development policies. According to Rose, the agency already had awarded $50,000 grants to 206 small businesses for feasibility studies in this area. One of the program initiatives announced by Rose called for 28 percent space allocation for commercial secondary payloads aboard the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 87/165; NY Times, Nov 5/87; Tennessean, Nov 4/87; W Times, Nov 5/87)
NASA selected five American principal investigators and five Italian scientists for a joint U.S.Italian Tethered Satellite System (TSS1) project. The TSS1, a deplorable subsatellite to be 'tethered' to the Space Shuttle via a retractable cable, was expected to lift aboard Columbia in the fall of 1990. (NASA Release
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
Two firms, General Dynamics, San Diego, California, and Martin Marietta, New Orleans, Louisiana, were chosen by NASA for liquidfueled rocket booster design studies. The liquidfueled rocket boosters could be used on the Space Shuttle and future launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87138; H Chron, Sept 17/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
The first fullscale test of the redesigned Space Shuttle booster since the Challenger accident was labeled a spectacular success by all who watched it. The firing of the 126foot Shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains, witnessed by 300 officials from NASA and Morton Thiokol, Inc., the company that designed the booster rocket, was the first of six fullscale tests. Also present at this test were the five astronauts scheduled to fly the Space Shuttle in June 1988. (B Sun, May 28/87; NY Times, May 28/87; W Post, May 28/87)
Five aerospace firms were awarded contracts by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, to develop preliminary advanced solid rocket motor designs for the Space Shuttle. The five firms receiving the awards were Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, Sacramento, California; Atlantic Research Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia; Hercules Aerospace Company's Aerospace division of Salt Lake city, Utah; Morton Thiokol Inc., Brigham City, Utah; and United Technologies Chemical System Division, San Jose, California. The results of the preliminary studies would determine whether NASA will pursue the design, development, test and production of an advanced motor for Shuttle flights in fiscal year 1989. (NASA Release 87120)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
The NASA Advisory Council recommended that the space agency acquire a diversified fleet of expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) to preserve the Space Shuttle for missions requiring unique capabilities. (NASA Release 8730)
NASA selected five crew members for STS27, a Department of Defense Space Shuttle mission. The five crew members, scheduled for launch on Atlantis in early fall 1988, included Robert L. Gibson (Cdr., USN), Commander; Guy S. Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), Pilot; and Mission Specialists Richard M. Mullane (Col., USAF), Jerry L. Ross (Lt. Col., USAF), and William M. Shepherd, (Cdr., USN). (NASA Release 87139; LA Times, Sept 16/87; USA Today, Sept
NASA announced that two Shuttle crew escape systems would be tested in November at the Naval Weapons Center in China Lake, California, using dummies and Navy volunteers. NASA is toh)$0*0*0*make a decision early in 1988 on whichif eitherof the two systems would be installed aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. One of the escape systems involved the installation of twofootlong tractor rockets that would extract the astronauts through an open hatch. The other system consisted of a telescoping slide pole that would extend through the hatch for the crew members to slide down, away from the disabled spacecraft. The crew would be connected to the rocket or the slide pole with a lanyard. Neither system would be of use in a Challengertype explosion that occurred without warning. But either could function in the event of a main engine failure aborting the mission during launch. Both systems require the Shuttle to be equipped with a hatch that can be blown off the spacecraft in an emergency. (NASA Release 87170; H Chron, Nov 13/87; H Post, Nov 13/87; NY Times, Nov 14/87)
NASA announced that its fiscal year 1988 budget request did not include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 million for the launching of the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. The Agency said it planned to launch the spacecraft in 1992 from the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8732; LA Times, Mar 14/87; NY Times, Mar 15/87)
NASA released a report, requested by the U.S. Congress, on the extendedduration Space Shuttle orbiter. The report examined key aspects of a program that would allow the Space Shuttle to perform Earthorbital missions for as long as 16 days. An extendedduration orbiter, according to the report, would be of great benefit for space science and technology. It also could prove useful in developing experiments and crew procedures in preparation for the Space Station era. (NASA Release 87174)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers announced that James T. Rose had been selected as Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, effective October 5, 1987. He would be responsible for NASA's commercial programs, the use of space by the U.S. private sector, the use of NASA technology by private industry, and NASA's support of innovative research by small business firms. James T. Rose joined NASA in 1957 as a research engineer for the Vanguard Program experiments. In 1962 he became head of the Manned Spacecraft Center's Mission Planning Office for the Gemini flights. From 1964 to 1974, Rose held a series of key positions at the McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. He returned to NASA in 1974 as Director, Space Shuttle Engineering, in the Office of Space Flight. From 1976 to 1986, he was Director of McDonnell Douglas' Space Manufacturing Initiatives. In June 1987, he again returned to NASA to become the Director of Space in NASA's Office of H&Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 87145; Huntsville Times, Oct 1/87)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced NASA had completed negotiations with Rockwell International to build a replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. The new orbiter would contain existing structural spares, but would also feature the latest technology evolving from the current returntoflight activities. The new Space Shuttle orbiter was expected to be ready for use within 45 months. (NASA Release
NASA announced that 5 civilians and 10 military officers were selected as new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. Of the 15, 7 were chosen as pilot astronaut candidates and 8 as mission specialist candidates. The elite group also included the first Black woman, Dr. Mae C. Jemison, to be chosen for the program. (NASA Release 8793; NY Times, June 6/87; LA Times, June 6/87; H Chron, June 6/87)
The Soviet Union launched into orbit a Soyuz TM3 with two Soviet cosmonauts and a Syrian space traveler aboard. The liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome, in Soviet Kazakhstan, was the Soviet Union's third crewtended space launch since the U.S. Space Shuttle explosion on January 28, 1986. The Soyuz TM3, piloted by Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Alexandrov, was scheduled to dock with the Soviet Mir space station after two days of orbiting around the Earth. The Syrian space traveler, Lieutenant Colonel Mohammed Faris, was the second Arab in space. The first was the Saudi Prince Sultan bin Salman, a nephew of Saudi Arabia's King Fahd. Prince Sultan bin Salman was a payload specialist aboard the (#U.S. Shuttle Discovery in 1985. (H Chron, July 22/87)
NASA announced that Morton Thiokol Space Division, a NASA contractor, would test fire the first redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor on August 27, 1987. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound development motor (DM8) would be fitted with 250 instruments to measure acceleration, pressure, deflection, thrust, strain, temperature, and electrical properties. (NASA Release 87125)
NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, announced that more than 400 modifications were planned for the Space Shuttle program. Speaking at a news conference called to discuss NASA's recovery from the effects of the Challenger accident, which killed all seven Shuttle crew members, Truly emphasized the Agency's commitment to "a trueh)0*0*0*enhancement to safety." Included among the safety modifications listed were better brakes, more efficient engines, and eventually an escape system for the Shuttle crew. However, it was pointed out that the escape system probably would not be ready for the next planned Shuttle flight in February 1988. (UPI, Jan 20/87; LA Times, Jan 21/87; NY Times, Jan 21/87; P Inq, Jan 21/87; W Post, Jan 21/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain and strengthen the existing Space Shuttle processing arrangement at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, with Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida. The decision was recommended by a senior review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. The group was chaired by Roy S. Estess, Deputy Director, National Space Technology Laboratories, Mississippi, and included representatives from NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 8726)
Because of complications encountered in the nozzle fabrication process, NASA moved the test of the flight configuration of the redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) to middle or late December 1987. (NASA Release 87151)
NASA announced that the longdelayed mission to Jupiter, originally scheduled for 1982, would be launched in 1989. The 5,870pound untended Galileo spacecraft was to be launched from the Shuttle Discovery. After the Challenger accident, NASA decided to use less powerful rockets than the originally planned Centaur rockets, which are fueled with volative hydrogen. The substitution required an "audacious" rerouting of the spacecraft in order to use the gravitational force of Venus and Earth to propel Galileo toward The Galileo mission was expected to reach Jupiter in 1995. Upon reaching Jupiter, the spacecraft was to release a 737pound probe that would penetrate the atmosphere of the giant gaseous planet. h)&0*0*0*In addition, the spacecraft was to spend two years orbiting Jupiter and making flybys of its four largest moons. (CSM, Dec 3/87; LA Times, Dec 3/87; USA Today, Dec 3/87; W Post, Dec 3/87)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force signed a pricing agreement, establishing reimbursement policies for Department of Defense (DoD) flights on the Space Shuttle and NASA flights on DoDprocured expendable launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87147)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and General Kabbaj, the Inspector of the Royal Moroccan Air Force, signed an agreement permitting the United States the use of Morocco's Ben Guerir Air Force Base for emergency landing of the Space Shuttle. The facility would be ready for such an emergency in February 1988. (NASA Release 876)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
NASA announced that the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite would be launched on a Delta expendable launch vehicle in early 1989 rather than on the Space Shuttle in July 1988, as originally planned. The change in schedule was caused by the backlog of science payloads awaiting launch on the Space Shuttle as a result of the Challenger accident. Designed to study the "Big Bang," COBE would be launched into a 560statutemile, sunsynchronous orbit from Vandenburg Air Force Base in California. Because of the switch from the Shuttle to Delta, COBE would be reduced in weight from 10,500 pounds to 5,000 pounds and in size from 15 feet to 8 feet in diameter. Scaling down the spacecraft would also require that COBE be redesigned. (NASA Release 871)
NASA announced that it had established a team to review launch decision processes used for NASA expendable launch vehicles and the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the review, which was to be completed by July 3, 1987, was to ensure consistent approaches and risk evaluations for all NASA launches. Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, and Robert L. Crippen, Deputy Director of the National Space Transportation System Operations, were selected as cochairmen of the team. (NASA Release
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced NASA planned to develop an advanced solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8747)
President Ronald Reagan's proposed fiscal year 1987 budget called for a 12.7 percent increase in NASA funding. The intent of the increase in the NASA budget was to resume the Space Shuttle flights, which had been suspended after the Challenger disaster. The President's budget also called for nearly $767 million for work on the crewtended Space Shuttle. No funds were included for the untended rockets program, despite recommendations by several expert panels that NASA was overdependent on the Space Shuttle. (NY Times, Jan 6/87)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced that the next Space Shuttle orbiter would be assembled in Palmdale, California. He gave costs and schedule factors as the reasons why this site was chosen over Califonia's Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 87100; H Chron, June 18/87)
NASA and West Germany signed a cooperative Earthh)!0*0*0*observation agreement. Under the agreement, West Germany, together with Italy, was to provide an Xband synthetic aperture radar (XSAR) to fly with the spaceborne imaging radarc (SIRC) on the Space Shuttle. The SIRC will allow the Shuttleborne imaging radar mission to view a site from different angles and at different radar frequencies. An advanced XSAR was expected to combine later with the NASA Earth Observation System to fly on a NASA polar platform, providing a third frequency to the combined mission. (NASA Release 87149)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher issued a statement in response to Senator William Proxmire's request in Congress to abolish the Space Station program. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the Space Station proposal has been repeatedly debated in Congress and each time has received bipartisan congressional support. He stressed that by abolishing the Space Shuttle program, the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new scientific and technological advances and would "provide infrastructure for future exploration of the solar system by manned spacecraft." (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in Response to Senator Proxmire's Statement Asking for Abolishment of the Space Station, August 27, 1987)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
NASA announced that its scientists had joined with scientists from the Brazilian Institute for Space Research and from U.S. and Brazilian universities and institutes to conduct a 45day study of tropospheric (part of the atmosphere closest to Earth) chemistry in the atmosphere over the Amazon River Basin tropical rain forest during the wet season. NASA's program of global tropospheric experiments to study the chemistry of Earth's atmosphere and its interaction with land and oceans began in the 1980's. NASA used the Space Shuttle in 1981 and 1984 to measure tropospheric carbon monoxide with a gas filter radiometer. In July and August 1985, NASA's Amazon boundary layer experiment (ABLE) documented the importance of biosphereatmosphere interactions in determining chemical processes in the troposphere over undisturbed rain forests. The second ABLE experiment, begun in midApril 1987, was to study how tropical forests affect the gas exchange, chemistry, and budgets of several key gases in the troposphere. A NASA Electra aircraft, stationed in Manasus, Brazil, in the center of the Amazon River Basin, was expected to measure atmospheric trace gasses and aerosols during a series of flights. The results from the experiments aboard the Electra aircraft and from several investigations carried out at ground sites would be evaluated by the team of scientists late in 1987. NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications in Washington, D.C., was responsible for the tropospheric chemistry program. Langley's Atmospheric Sciences Division, with logistical support from the Bionetics Corporation in Hampton, Virginia, managed the ABLE project. (Nasa Release 8766)
In a major organizational shift, NASA announced the adoption of new postChallenger era commercial activity policies. The released decision memoranda, covering the new policies, were signed by Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers. The new policies resulted from the report of the Commercialization of Space Reviewh)0*0*0*Task Force and covered such general activities as joint endeavor agreements, microgravity research, secondary payloads on the Space Shuttle, expendable launch vehicles, and commercial activities. According to the new policies, the Office of Commercial Programs would henceforth determine, in coordination with concerned Headquarters offices, whether NASA should participate in any proposed joint program. Responsibility for programs utilizing the microgravity environment was transferred from the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology to the Office of Space Science and Applications. Secondary payload space would be carefully allocated by the Deputy Administrator and implemented by the Office of Space Flight to accomplish specific NASA objectives. To encourage and facilitate as much as possible the private domestic access to space, NASA's Office of Space Flight would contract private industry for launch of Expendable Launch Vehicles. Finally, the Office of Commercial Programs would, to the fullest extent possible, facilitate the utilization of space for commercial purposes. (NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Responsibility for Programs Utilizing the Microgravity Environment, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Secondary STS Payloads, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV's) Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; LA Times, June 13/87)
