NASA issued the newest update of its mixedfleet manifest, reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles (launch vehicles) through fiscal year 1993. The manifest reflected changes made to accommodate a slower than expected resumption of Shuttle flights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve the launch windows for three major planetary missions. Among the major changes made was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch from
The fifth and final shortduration solid rocket motor Nozzle Joint Environment Simulator (NJES) firing test was carried out. The overall objective of the test, part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program, was to evaluate the failsafe performance of the redesigned casetonozzle joint with verified defects. (NASA Release 8856)
An engineer who, only hours before the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch the spacecraft in cold weather was named a winner of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award. Roger M. Boisjoly, a former engineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.the manufacturer of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor blamed for the Challenger accident that0*killed seven crew memberswas honored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for attempting to halt the launch and for his attempts to have the flawed rocket redesigned. The AAAS, in an announcement, cited Boisjoly "for his exemplary and repeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as an engineer by alerting others to life threatening design problems on the Challenger Space Shuttle and for steadfastly recommending against the tragic launch." Boisjoly was to receive the AAAS award during February 14 ceremonies in Boston. (LA Star News, Jan 27/88)
NASA announced that it would lease to the U.S. Government unassigned space aboard a commercially developed space facility. The leasing agreement would apply for five years beginning at the end of fiscal year 1993. At least 30 percent of the facility would be available for commercial use. The facility would be deployed, checked out, and serviced periodically on orbit by Space Shuttle crews. It would provide a crewtended, shirtsleeve workspace and would also be able to operate in an untended, freeflying mode, providing a microgravity environment for periods of four to six months. NASA would initiate an open competition to be managed by the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 8825)
NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a longduration, humantended scientific satellite called the Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA's four proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would study highenergy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable information about these phenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic research in plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the various forms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determine whether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could be scheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatory would be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 1215 tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above the Earth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 881)
The fifth firing in a series of Transient Pressure Test Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program. For this test, flaws were intentionally cut into both the test article's field joints, the casetonozzle joint, and other components of the redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify the structural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability of the redesigned field and casetonozzle joints. (MSFC Release on
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
Negotiators from NASA and the government of Japan reached agreement in substance on the text of a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the permanently crew tended civil Space Station. The Japanese Science and Technology Agency would serve as NASA's counterpart in implementing this MOU. Under the terms of the new MOU, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM)a permanently attached, pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The pressurized portion of the JEM would provide a shirtsleeve environment for the Space Station crew to perform research activities. The JEM's exposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earth observation, communications, advanced technology development and other activities requiring direct exposure to space. The experiment logistics module, which would provide transportation and storage of logistics items, would be transported to the Station by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8870)
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
The third fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was carried out at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126foot long, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor6 (QM6), underwent a fullduration horizontal test firing of two minutes. The test, tentatively labeled a success, was the third of five test firings to be carried out prior to the scheduled resumption of Shuttle flights in August 1988. (NASA Release 8851; MSFC Releases 8843, 8844; AP, Apr 20/88; UPI, Apr 20/88; NY Times Apr 21/88; W Post, Apr 21/88; USA Today, Apr 21/88; W Times, Apr0*21/88)
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
NASA announced selection of the Government sites to be used as production and testing facilities for the Agency's planned Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The Tennessee Valley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM production facility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilization also would be made of available manufacturing and computer capability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the Slidell Computer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimize total program costs. The planned ASRM, which would replace the current Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid1990s, would incorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability and safety margins, as well as provide a significant added performance capability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88104; MSFC Release 88102; UPI, Jul 27/88; W Post, Jul 27/88; USA Today, Jul 27/88) During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of a new hightemperature superconductor. According to a paper published in Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrated that "samples of yttriumbariumcopper oxide, when mixed with silver oxide, heat treated, and exposed to 320 degrees Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trapped in the sample." Because superconducting material excludes a magnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch. According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of the scientific team, the implications of high temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous. "In space, with the elimination of the weight associated with gravity, it should be possible to develop lowvibration, lowfriction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance of the discovery is that this new material not only has stronger suspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties: it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normal temperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than other high temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88104)
Defense Shuttle mission to an expendable launch vehicle. (Payload Flight AssignmentsNASA Mixed Fleet, Aug 1988; NASA Release 88120) During August: A Cray YMP, the fastest supercomputer in the world, arrived at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and underwent acceptance tests in the Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) Facility. The NAS was established as a national facility available to leading U.S. research institutions through a national network. It had longterm support from Congress to use the fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress in U.S. aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics, and chemistry. Supercomputer systems were complementing and extending aerospace research being done in wind tunnels and highvelocity (4,000 to 15,000 mph) shock tunnels. The new YMP central processor would not only solve old problems four times as fast as existing systems, but also would be used to investigate flow phenomena that could not be investigated currently by wind tunnels or computers. Another important application of the NAS supercomputer system would be the modeling of air flows for hypersonic vehicles such as the National AeroSpace Plane and the Space Shuttle. '!0*Ames was the first customer to take delivery of this new supercomputer, expected to be fully operational by January 1989. (ARC Release 8880)
NASA announced that it had negotiated a contract with Rockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division to consolidate Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida launch site. Under the contract, Rockwell's orbiter logistics operations in Downey, California, would be transferred to existing Launch Support Operations activity at KSC. During this same period, Rockwell's component overhaul and repair activities would move from its network of original Shuttle equipment manufacturers to the Rockwell Service Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. The move would complete a consolidation begun in 1985. (NASA Release 88156)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was rolled out to Launch Pad 39B for a scheduled launch in late November of STS27, a classified Department of Defense mission. (NASA Release 88171) '&0*November 6: A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched into orbit aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle. Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, inaugurated its Mark III Hypercube parallel supercomputer, the result of a 5year research and development effort at the JPL Center for Space Microelectronics Technology and the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). The Mark III spearheaded the arrival of massively parallel supercomputing. Its first module, placed online at the Caltech computer network, contained 32 nodes, or processing units, which together had a peak speed of about 512 million floating point operations per second. Three more 32node modules would be added during the next nine months to form a 128node hypercube with a peak speed of 2 billion floating point operations per second. The Mark II Hypercube was being used for scientific, engineering, and defense research applications, including analysis of NASA multispectral space imaging data; analysis of NASA synthetic aperture radar images taken from the Space Shuttle; and simulation of the Strategic Defense System. (NASA Release 8888)
NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747100 jetliner to serve as a second Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) for the space transportation system. A letter contract was signed with Boeing Military Airplane Company, a division of the Boeing Company, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for NASA use. The additional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability and eliminate a potential singlepoint failure in the space transportation system. The 231foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttle orbiter vehicles from landing sites to orbiter processing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The 747100, which is nearly identical to the original SCA, was selected to minimize costs associated with modifications and operation. (NASA Release 8828; JSC Release 88005) During February:
EG&G Florida, Inc. was awarded a $635,529 contract to make modifications to the Space Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF). This work would include grinding a 3,500foot section at each end of the runway to smooth the surface texture, removing cross grooves and adding longitudinal "corduroy grooving." Additionally, existing landing zone light fixtures were to be modified and markings on the entire runway and overruns repainted. These modifications were intended to enhance landing safety by reducing Space Shuttle orbiter tire wear during landing operations. The SLF is 15,000 feet long and 300 feet wide, with a 1,000foot paved safety overrun at each end. Work was scheduled to begin January 26 and be completed by midMarch 1988. (NASA Release 8810)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
NASA commemorated the second anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. At the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, workers preparing to resume Shuttle flights paused to pay silent tribute to the Challenger crew by halting all activity at 11:38 a.m., the time of the Challenger lift off from launch Pad 39B on January 28, 1986. Flags around KSC and at NASA Centers throughout the country were lowered to half staff while workers stood silent for 73 seconds, the length of the fatal Challenger flight. Just before the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S. McCartney spoke to workers over a television circuit and loudspeakers saying: "As we make preparations to return the Space Shuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to remember the men and women of the Challenger crew." (UPI, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 29/88; C Trib, Jan 29/88;
The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle was rolled out of the Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) to Launch Pad 39B in preparation for mission STS26, scheduled for late September. (UPI, Jul 4/88; NY Times, Jul 5/88; W Post, Jul 5/88; WSJ, Jul 5/88; W Times, Jul 5/88; P Inq, Jul
NASA set a target launch date of September 29 for STS26, the next Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of the launch date followed an updated assessment of the projected impact of Hurricane Gilbert on mission control and training facilities at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. In connection with the announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said, "NASA's decision to set this launch date is based on over two years of persistence and dedication by NASA and contractor personnel, culminating in the STS26 flight readiness review held at the Kennedy Space Center on
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on the agency's proposed 1989 budget. He stressed that 1989 would be a crucial year for NASA, a year that would "make or break" the Nation's space program. The proposed budget included funds to increase the rate of Shuttle flights in 1989 in order to "fly off" the backlog of vital defense and science missions. A build up of funding for Space Station hardware development was also requested. Dr. Fletcher testified that the requested additional funds for the Space Station were the minimum necessary to avoid the disbandment of development teams and the indefinite deferral or cancellation of that program. He also warned that if funds for advanced technology were not approved, the necessary technological foundation for future achievements would not be built, and the goal of longterm U.S. space leadership would "become an idle dream." (1989 NASA Authorization Hearings Before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 8831; AP, Mar 22/88; W Times Mar 23/88; LA Times Mar 23/88)
NASA submitted to the Congress its acquisition plan for the Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The plan contained NASA's strategy for a full and open competition to introduce an ASRM into the Shuttle system. NASA contended that a new booster design would result in substantive improvements in flight safety, reliability, and performance over the current SRMs produced by contractor Morton Thiokol. The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advanced version of the segmented boosters currently in use in the Shuttle program. The new boosters would have a more reliable field joint design and would be more powerful than the current SRMs, providing for a 12,000pound increase in the Shuttle's payload capacity. Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttling the Space Shuttle's main engines during the period of maximum dynamic pressure, thereby reducing or eliminating about 175 "criticality 1/1r" failure modes for the Shuttle system. An important aspect of NASA's ASRM acquisition plan was the proposal that the boosters be developed in a new Governmentowned contractor operated (GOCO) facility and that the contract be subjected to competitive bidding. In response to protests by Morton Thiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, led by Senator Jake Garn, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility of building the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. The overall cost to develop the ASRM was estimated at just under $1 billion, including modern tooling and equipment, plus $200$300 million for construction of facilities. Under the current production schedule, the first ASRMs would be flight certified by 1993. Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the ASRM at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 8854; UPI, Apr 18/88; AP, Apr 19/88; USA Today, Apr 19/88; W Times, Apr 19/88; NY Times Apr 20/88; W Post Apr 20/88; WSJ, Apr 20/88; )
After an aborted first attempt on August 4, a 22second flight readiness firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines was conducted on the launch pad at the Kennedy Space0*Center's Launch Complex 39B. The first FRF attempt had been halted inside the T10 second mark because of a sluggish fuel bleed valve on the number 2 main engine. The faulty valve was replaced prior to the FRF. (AP, Aug 10/88; UPI, Aug 10/88; NY Times, Aug 11/88; W Post, Aug 11/88; WSJ, Aug 11/88; CSM, Aug 11/88; W Times, Aug 11/88; B Sun, Aug 11/88; P Inq, Aug 11/88)
NASA announced that it would remove and inspect the liquid oxygen turbopumps aboard the Shuttle Discovery, a move that was expected to delay Discovery's launch beyond the scheduled date of August 4. The pumps will be inspected to ensure that critical bolts in the devices are properly tightened and have not been stripped. Delays resulting from the inspection are expected to push back Discovery's launch date until late August. (UPI, Apr 2/88; W Post, Apr 3/88; USA Today, Apr 4/88; P Inq, Apr 4/88)
After several delays, the Soviet Union successfully completed an automated orbital flight test of the Space Shuttle Buran. The untended Soviet orbiterwhich is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiterswas launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198foot Energia rocket with two strapon boosters in a configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlike the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's engines for ascent to orbit. According to Soviet sources, the Soviet shuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landinga capability the U.S. Shuttles lack. After completing two orbits, Buran landed successfully on a 2.7mile runway at the Baikonur facility, ending the 31/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agency hailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude to crewtended Shuttle flights. In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBISSOV88222,''0*Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A; AP, Nov 15/88; UPI, Nov 15/88; NY Times, Nov 16/88; WSJ, Nov 16/88; W Post, Nov 16/88; LA Times, Nov 15/88; W Times, Nov 16/88; B Sun, Nov 16/88; P Inq, Nov 16/88; C Trib, Nov
NASA selected a telescoping pole as the egress method for the Space Shuttle's new crew escape system. The escape system, to be carried on all future Shuttle flights, would provide crew escape capability from the orbiter during controlled, gliding flight following failures or difficulties during ascent or entry where landing at a suitable landing field could not be achieved. Tests conducted in February and March, using a fixed pole extending through a hatchlike opening in a C141 aircraft, demonstrated that the pole would provide adequate orbiter clearance in an emergency egress situation. The telescoping pole system had been chosen over an alternative tractor rocket extraction system. (NASA Release 8850; JSC Release 88014; AP Apr 8/88; NY Times, Apr 8/88; W Post, Apr 8/88; USA Today, Apr 8/88; LA Times, C Trib, Apr 9/88; Apr 8/88; P Inq Apr 8/88; H Post, Apr 8/88; H Chron, Apr 8/88)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
A series of powerful explosions destroyed the Pacific Engineering & Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring over 350 people. The plant was a major supplier of the ammonium perchlorate oxidizer used aboard the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motors and other military and civilian boosters. The explosions produced flames that shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 footwide crater at the facility site. Seismographs at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 200 miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two of the blasts registered at 3.0 and 3.5 on the Richter scale. The cause of the explosions was investigated. 0*The destruction of the oxidizer plant raised concerns among NASA and contractor Morton Thiokol over the availability of solid fuel oxidizer beyond the next four Space Shuttle flights. A prolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering's production activities would also threaten the military's missile production schedule. (UPI, May 5/88; AP, May 5/88; NY Times, May 5/88; W Post, May 5/88; WSJ, May 5/88; USA Today, May 5/88; W Times, May 5/88; B Sun, May 5/88;
Engineers at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah concluded that a design flaw had led to the failure of a previously untested Space Shuttle booster part during a fullscale test firing December 23. NASA officials delayed the flight schedule after they discovered that a portion of the booster's nozzle assembly, which guides the vehicle, had fallen apart during testing, a month Engineers finished taking the booster motor apart and recovered all six missing pieces of the failed nozzle part. Known as the outer boot ring, the failed part anchored the booster's nozzle to a flexible rubbery "boot" that allowed the nozzle to swivel. One purpose of the boot ring was to shield the metal and rubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intense heat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster's nozzle was deliberately moved to the maximum seven degreessome three degrees beyond what would be required during a normal Shuttle flight. NASA was looking into the possibility that the extreme steering might have caused the boot ring to come apart or A group of officials at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, developers of the original design test requirements for an extreme swiveling of the nozzle, studied whether the maneuver should be repeated in future tests of whatever design is adopted, or whether a less severe maneuver would be an adequate test under the more stringent, postChallenger standards. The test failure would probably force a delay of 6 to 10 weeks in the resumption of Space Shuttle flights, delaying the STS26 flight of Discovery to no earlier than August 1988. (NASA Release 87190; UPI, Jan 4/88; W Post, Jan 5/88; NY Times, Jan 6/88) 0*January 11: Speaking at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics supported Aerospace Sciences Conference, Ross M. Jones, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, presented a proposal to launch very small, low cost scientific probes to various destinations in the solar system by using Earthorbiting electromagnetic launchers or railguns. Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong electromagnetic forces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities, were being developed by the U.S. military for use both on the ground and in space. (NASA Release 884; M News, Jan 11/88; W Times, Jan 11/88; LA Times, Jan 11/88; LA Star News, Jan 12/88)
A Wet Countdown Demonstration Test (WCDT) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's External Tank (ET) was conducted following several unplanned holds as a result of problems with ground support equipment. The WCDDT, carried out with Discovery deployed for launch at the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39B, consisted of loading the ET with liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen in mock preparation for a Shuttle launch. (NASA STS26 Press Kit)
NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope from February 1990 to an earlier date of December 1989. The earlier date was made possible following reassessment of a variety of factors, including payload requirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during the period. (NASA Release 88143)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
The fourth fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor7 (QM7), underwent a fullduration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. After a preliminary examination of the fired motor, NASA and Morton Thiokol officials declared the test an apparent success. The exercise involved the first use of a new test stand at Morton Thiokol. One remaining fullduration test, Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), would be conducted in July, prior to the next Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 887; NY Times, Jun 15/88)
A Space Systems Development Agreement was signed by NASA and Spacehab, Inc., a private firm that was developing a Shuttlebased pressurized module for commercial applications. According to the agreement, NASA agreed to provide Shuttle payload bay space for Spacehab's middeck augmentation module on six Shuttle flights beginning in 1991. Spacehab would pay $28.2 million (adjusted for inflation) for standard services for each flight. The Spacehab module, to be constructed by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntsville, Alabama, would be a metal truncated cylinder measuring 10 feet in length by 13 feet in diameter, designed to fit in the Shuttle's cargo bay. Shuttle crew members would access the module through a tunnel from the Shuttle's middeck. The company would make available to customers a variety of locker and rack accommodations, with associated support and integration services. Spacehab was specifically identified in the President's Commercial Space Initiative, announced in February, in which the Reagan administration committed to make the best efforts to launch the commercial module in the early 1990s.(NASA Release 88114)
A segment of a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was test fired at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah in a test of the solid rocket motor nozzle joint. The overall test objective was to evaluate performance of the redesigned solid rocket motor casetonozzle joint that had an insulation adhesive defect and damaged oring in order to determine the failsafe performance of the redesigned joint. The redesigned casetonozzle joint included 100 added radial bolts, adhesively bonded insulation surfaces, and an added "wiper" oring designed to keep the adhesive on the insulation surfaces during assembly. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. (NASA Release 8823)
The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
The fifth and final test of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, prior to resumption of Shuttle flights, was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126footlong, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), underwent a full duration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. The motor was extensively flawed to demonstrate the failsafe characteristics of the redesign. (NASA Release 88113; AP, Aug 18/88; UPI, Aug 18/88; NY Times, Aug 19/88; W Post, Aug 19/88; WSJ, Aug 19/88; USA Today, Aug 19/88; W Times, Aug 19/88; B Sun, Aug 19/88 )
NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles through fiscal year 1993. Two interplanetary missions were planned for launch in 1989: Magellan, a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative project with Germany to survey Jupiter and its moons. The Hubble Space Telescope also maintained the flight assignment date of June 1989. Astro1, a Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in the ultraviolet spectrum, was being reconfigured to enhance the study of Supernova 1987a and was slated to fly on STS35 in November 1989. Two additional Spacelab missions were assigned flights for September 1990a Spacelab Life Sciences mission in March and the first Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS1)0*mission. The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in the projected schedule for a March 1990 launch, and the Ulysses mission to study the Sun and its environment remained at the projected
It was announced in a recent NASA press briefing that there had been a total of 230 reported "close calls" since the Challenger accident. A "close call" was defined by NASA as an incident in which there is no injury, no damage, and no impact on schedule, but which possesses the potential for a more serious mishap. (NASA Release 12988)
Morton Thiokol announced that it would not bid on a $1.5 billion contract to build the proposed Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). Instead, Thiokol officials stated they would concentrate on building the current generation of redesigned solid rocket motors, currently undergoing final testing prior to the resumption of Space Shuttle flights in September. (UPI, Jun 6/88; AP, Jun 6/88; NY Times, Jun 7/88; WSJ, Jun 7/88; LA Times, Jun
