NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)
NASA said that engineers have launched a review of the Space Shuttle Columbia's liftoff to identify debris seen near Columbia's three main engines.  A spokesman said that the Shuttle performed flawlessly during its ascent, but that officials were intrigued by video images that captured an object "of unknown origin" falling into the fiery engine plume about 45 seconds after liftoff. (RTw, Oct 19/93)
A spokesman for Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California said that a pressure buildup ripped apart an experimental supergun designed to fire objects into space. The accident delayed a demonstration scheduled for this spring. Scientists hoped to use the gun, which is like an enormous air rifle, to shoot payloads into space at a fraction of the cost of sending them into orbit via a Space Shuttle. (AP, Mar 18/93; USA Today, Mar 18/93;
According to a report in the Baltimore Sun, Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off with a pair of pliers stuck on a rocket booster. Officials said the pliers posed no danger during liftoff, but the incident was getting much attention in management circles. A Kennedy space center spokeswoman said that the pliers were noted missing in a daily tool inventory at Discovery's launch pad on April 2 but that a proper lost-and-found report, which would have prompted a search, was not filed. Nasa was also investigating how a foot-long metal scrap that could have set off an explosion became lodged in one of four launch-pad posts that held up one of Shuttle Discovery's rocket boosters. (B Sun, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
A biography of Christa McAuliffe, the teacher-astronaut who was killed when the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, is the subject of a new biography, written by her mother, Grace George Corrigan. The biography, A Journal for Christa, published  on September 7, by the University of Nebraska Press, lends weight to arguments that NASA pressed ahead with the high-profile flight to win mention of it in President Reagan's State of the Union Message, which had been scheduled for January 28, the day of the launch. (AP, Sep 7/93; NY Times, Sep 8/93; B Sun, Sep 8/93)
U.S. and European space officials announced that they had postponed a planned rocket firing intended to move the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) to a position where it could be retrieved by a Space Shuttle next month. An apparent gyroscope problem aboard the orbiting research satellite forced the postponement. (RTw, May 18/93)
NASA announced that a mysterious glitch had caused the Ulysses solar explorer spacecraft to shut down its instruments and stop sending data over the weekend. Eight of the instruments were working by the Tuesday following the shutdown, and NASA predicted that the ninth instrument would be operational within days. A similar, still unexplained malfunction occurred in 1991. Ulysses was released from a Space Shuttle in 1990 on a $750 mission to study the sun's poles in 1994-95. (AP, Feb 16/93; W Post, Feb 17/93); USA Today, Feb 17/93; AP, Feb 17/93)
NASA spokeswoman June Malone said a broken pin was responsible for a leaky engine valve removed from Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled to lift off on an atmospheric research mission next week. The alignment pin broke while technicians were removing plumbing from around the valve for leak tests ordered after the March 22 main engine shutdown of Columbia. (AP, Apr 1/93)
The House of Representatives voted to deny funding requests for two science projects: President Clinton's request for $640 million for the superconducting Super Collider and $4 billion for NASA's request to build a more powerful Space Shuttle engine. (AP, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 20/93; USA Today, Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93; NY Times, Oct 20/93; W Post, Oct 21/93, Oct 22/93; C Trib, Oct 22/93; B Sun, Oct 25/93)
Space Shuttle Columbia was launched on Monday, April 26, on a German science mission that had been delayed for over two months. This was the third attempt at launching the
The launch of Space Shuttle Discovery's eight-day scientific mission, scheduled for 2:32 a.m. April 6 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, was aborted 11 seconds before liftoff when computers detected a problem. It was the second aborted launch in two weeks for the Shuttle program. The previous launch, involving the Shuttle Columbia, was halted three seconds from liftoff on March 22.
According to a report in Reuters, the Arianespace consortium continued to be the world leader in number of commercial satellite launches. Ariane filled the void when NASA stopped launching commercial payloads after the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded in January 1986. U.S. launchers, especially the General Dynamics Atlas series, which has the capacity to launch large payloads, were fighting for each launch contract. (RTw, Mar 14/93)
NASA said that the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour would be delayed for at least two weeks because the Shuttle's engine maker, Rocketdyne, had failed to correctly document whether one of the engine's parts was reliable. In a review of Rocketdyne's operation, NASA discovered many problems with how the company documented its work. In one case earlier in the year, a paperwork problem made it impossible for NASA to determine whether a Shuttle's engines contained proper seal retainers or older, phased-out models.
The media reported that the Space Shuttle Columbia landed May 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California, after low clouds at Cape Canaveral, Florida, forced it to divert to California.
Germany's space agency was scheduled to be in charge of the scientific aspect of Shuttle Columbia's next research mission. NASA would oversee Shuttle operations during the flight. Ninety-three experiments were planned, two-thirds sponsored by German institutions and the rest by other European countries, the United States, and Japan. This would only be the second time in 32 years of American manned spaceflight that a mission had been managed from outside the United States. (AP, Jan 20/97)
Astronaut Ellen Ochoa, scheduled to be aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery when it was launched in April, would be the first Hispanic female to fly in space. Ochoa, an expert with the shuttle's 50-foot-long robot arm, was scheduled to deploy and retrieve a $6 million spacecraft while on the mission. (FL Today, Apr 3/93)
As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use.
NASA began replacing Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines in preparation for another launch attempt next month.  The third countdown for Discovery ended on August 12 with an engine shutdown three seconds before launch.  Engineers traced the problem to a sensor that was supposed to monitor the flow of fuel in main engine No. 2. (AP, Aug 18/93)
Belgian scientists, using research from outer space, invented a new detection system they hoped would prevent crib deaths. Physics professor Manuel Paiva monitored the breathing of astronauts during a Space Shuttle mission two months ago by using a custom-made space suit with special sensors built into the garment. Paiva said that he had used the same technique for babies by attaching the electronic sensors inside pajamas.  The sensors are able to detect a range of respiration problems. Paiva said research had so far been promising but another six months were needed to complete the studies. (RTw, Jul 28/93)
Shuttle Discovery lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:29 a.m., ET, on an eight-day mission to study Earth's endangered ozone layer. Thursday's liftoff followed an earlier aborted launch. According to reports, the Shuttle, which carried a crew of five, lit up the night like a huge blowtorch as it rocketed into orbit. (AP, April 4/93; RT, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 4/93; USA Today, Apr 8/93; W Post, Apr 8/93; B Sun, Apr 8/93)
The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced agency plans to use its nearly completed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) Yellow Creek facilities in Iuka, Mississippi, for manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. (NASA Release 93-215)
NASA announced that a German-chartered Space Shuttle mission was scheduled for launch March 14 after a delay of more than two weeks. NASA said the delay was caused by a false alarm with the space shuttle Columbia's main engines, which were suspected of containing outdated parts. (W Times, Feb 27/93)
NASA announced that, despite transmitting problems, the on-board data recovery system of Space Shuttle STS-56 had captured 103 orbital sunrises and sunsets observed by the Atmospheric Trace Molecule Spectroscopy (ATMOS) instrument aboard the Shuttle. (NASA Release 93-118)
NASA announced that the December flight of the Endeavor Space Shuttle mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope was scheduled to last ll days and to involve a record five spacewalks, with the possibility of two additional walks, if needed. (NASA Release 93-76; W Times, Apr 25/93)
Working with a team of Hopkins scientists last spring, Kimberly Ennico, a 20-year-old junior at Johns Hopkins University, discovered a small flaw in the video camera that acts as a range finder for the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in January 1995. Ms. Ennico discovered that the telescope's video range finder slightly distorted the positions of stars and distant galaxies. Her discovery allowed astronomers to compensate for the flaw by adjusting their computations. (B Sun, Jan 28/93)
NASA unveiled a $300 million radar system that can take color pictures of Earth's damaged environment from a Space Shuttle. According to NASA project scientist Diane Evans, "In many case, radar is the only way scientists can explore unaccessible regions on Earth's surface." The camera was scheduled to fly on the Shuttle three times, in 1994, 1995, and 1996. NASA and the German and Italian space agencies cooperated on the project. NASA paid half the cost. (AP, May 14/93)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
NASA announced that April marked the 10th anniversary of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a space-based network developed to meet telecommunications needs of Space Shuttle, Space Station, and other low Earth-orbiting spacecraft missions. The TDRSS is equipped to support up to 24 user spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle, simultaneously. (NASA Release 93-60)
NASA announced that it would soon begin tests using a modified Convair 990 commercial jet airliner to expand the operational landing capabilities of the Space Shuttle system. The Convair has been undergoing modifications for two years in preparation for tests that would help Johnson Space Center researchers better understand the operational capabilities of the Shuttle system. (Desert Wings, Jan 8/93)
NASA delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to blast off on June 20, because of poor weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. A second launch attempt was expected for Monday morning, June 21. (RTw, June 20/93; UPI, June 20/93, June 21/93; Ap, June 21/93; NY Times, June 21/93; LA Times, June 21/93; W Post, June 21/93; USA Today, June 21/93; W Times, June 21/93; B Sun, June 21/93)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia left their medical and scientific studies on Tuesday, April 27, to work on repairing a malfunctioning toilet and waste-water system. Engineers believed that a device that squirts waste overboard from a storage tank got stuck and caused the tank to spring a small nitrogen leak. The astronauts rerouted the waste into two rubber-lined storage bags until the problem could be fixed. NASA said that the problem would not endanger the nine-day mission.	Earlier in the day, the astronauts carried out a series of medical and scientific experiments. (UPI, Apr 27/93; AP, Apr 28/93; RTw, Apr 27/93, Apr 28/93; NY Times, Apr 28/93; C Trib, Apr 28/93)
President Clinton thanked the crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour for giving "a great deal of credibility" to his attempt to save the Space Station. The President called the crew on Tuesday, June 22. (USA Today, June 23/93; NY Times, June 23/93; W Times, June 23/93)
According to Neal Pellis of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, a research project from the Cancer Center aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour could provide "a big step in developing better treatments for cancer patients." The experiment will attempt to find out more about the human immune system and why it doesn't work as well in long-term space travel. (H Post, Jan 6/93)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
A European Space Agency official said that a re-usable science satellite scheduled to be rescued during Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission next week would be mothballed after astronauts returned it to earth and experiments were removed from it. The satellite was scheduled to be flown four more times, but there was no budget for additional flights. (RTw, June 16/93)
NASA added a spacewalk to a U.S. Shuttle mission scheduled for July as part of a continuing program to give astronauts experience before start of Space Station construction in 1996. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden instructed senior NASA managers to begin a five-month study that would examine whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005 or upgrade the fleet so that shuttles could fly until 2030. The study was being led by Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Systems Development. (Space News, Feb. 8-14/93)
A last-minute glitch in a computer system that monitors Shuttle takeoffs to ensure people's safety on the ground forced NASA to scrub the launch of Shuttle Columbia on a medical research mission. NASA said that it would try for an October 15 launch, if the weather cooperated.
NASA halted the countdown for Space Shuttle Discovery less than an hour before scheduled liftoff because of a bad electrical circuit controlling a set of launch pad safety locks.  A second launch attempt was expected to take place no earlier than late next week. (AP, Jul 17/93; UPn, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 17/93; USA Today, Jul 19/93; P Inq, Jul 18/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93; W Times, Jul 18/93; W Post, Jul 18/93)
NASA named representatives from government and industry and academic experts from across the country to take part in an independent review of NASA's Space shuttle redesign options. A total of 16 individuals were invited to serve on the committee. Charles M. Vest had previously been named by Vice President Albert Gore to head the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station. The Advisory Committee was to submit its recommendations in June. (NASA Release 93-59)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
Space Shuttle Columbia, carrying seven astronauts, 48 rats, and a medical research lab, blasted into orbit for a record 14 days of experiments to learn more about keeping astronauts healthy during long voyages in weightlessness. The research was also expected to shed light on other health issues, including hypertension, anemia, and osteoporosis.  This mission was only the second mission in 58 Shuttle trips focused entirely on medical research.
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-61 to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was scheduled for December 1, 1993. The flight was the first in a series of planned visits to the orbiting telescope. The 11-day mission was designed to accommodate a record five spacewalks with the capability for an additional two if needed.
NASA named Astronauts Tamara E. Jernigan, Thomas David Jones, James S. Voss, and Ellen Ochoa payload commanders on upcoming Space Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 93-140)
House-Senate conferees killed NASA's program to search for signs of intelligent civilization beyond Earth and reduced funding available for a reflight of the agency's lost Mars Observer mission. In approving a total agency budget of $14.5 billion, the legislators barely preserved a program to build a more powerful rocket booster for the Space Shuttle and provided very little funding for developing new technology needed for the National Aerospace Plane.  The planned Space Station was fully funded at $2.l billion for fiscal 1994. (W Post, Oct. 2/93; AP Oct 2/93)
NASA announced that NASA and the Russian Space Agency had agreed to up to 10 Shuttle flights to Mir with a total of 24 months time on board Mir for U.S. astronauts, a program of scientific and technological research, and the upgrade and extension of the Mir lifetime during the period 1995-1997. (NASA Release 93-222)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, had awarded the Space Shuttle Orbiter Avionics Software contract to IBM Corporation, Houston.  The contract was for the development and maintenance of the primary avionics support software, tool development and maintenance, and certification of primary flight software. (NASA Release C93-s)
A NASA study of safety in the Space Shuttle program found that honest mistaken go unreported if workers fear blunders can cost their jobs.  The study found no major safety concerns but said managers had not bridged the communications gap identified in the investigation of the 1986 Challenger disaster. The report said that "exaggerated" news coverage of safety-related incidents led to the mistaken perception among workers that reporting incident and mistakes might result in punitive action. (Rtw, Jul 26/93)
After a one-day weather delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour lifted off before dawn on a mission to repair the out-of-focus $3 billion Hubble Space Telescope. Four members of the Shuttle crew, made up of six men and one woman, were to take five planned day-long spacewalks in an attempt to restore the full capability of the Hubble observatory. (WP, Dec 3/93; Dec 2/93; TRw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; NY Times, Dec 3/93; APn, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93)
NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)
The Washington Times reported that Space Shuttle Endeavour had to delay firing a jet to avoid possibly coming in contact with a piece of space trash, in this instance, a 27-year-old spent Russian rocket. This was the fourth time in two years that Shuttle astronauts had to take measures to avoid trash in space. There were hundreds of thousands of pieces of trash floating in space as a result of space missions. (AP, June 23/93; W Times, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93)
A NASA official said that Rocketdyne might lose as much as $29 million in profits on its Space Shuttle engine program because of manufacturing problems at its Canoga Park plant. The company could lose the funds, known as award fees, if NASA determined that the company had performed poorly between November and April. NASA was completing a review of Rocketdyne's space shuttle engine manufacturing operation. (Daily News, June 3/93)
Late this month, the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft was scheduled to visit a big chunk of rock named Ida, only the second asteroid to be explored up close.  Galileo, launched from a Space Shuttle in 1989, was scheduled to be within 1,500 miles of Ida in late August, on its way to its 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. Galileo made the world's first asteroid encounter--with Gaspra--in October 1991.
Bernard A. Harris, MD, an African American, was set to make his first Shuttle flight aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in late February. He was scheduled to conduct experiments exploring the behavior of humans, living organisms, and materials.
NASA ground crews began final preparations to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite delivery mission.  The liftoff was scheduled for August 12.  Discovery was to carry two satellites.  Five astronauts were scheduled to put one satellite in orbit to conduct advanced communications experiments.  The other, a telescope, was to be let out of the cargo bay for several days of celestial observations, then captured and returned to Earth.  (Rtw, Aug 9/93; AP, Aug 9/93, Aug 10/93; W Post, Aug 10/93; UPI, Aug 8/93)
The Space Shuttle Discovery, with five astronauts on board, was scheduled to lift off at 1:32 a.m. April 6 to study the condition of the Earth's ozone layer and sample 30 to 40 other gases. Three instruments in the Shuttle cargo bay would measure ozone, and four others would probe solar energy. A nighttime launch was necessary to put Discovery on the desired course for observing sunrises in the Northern Hemisphere. Meteorologists predicted an 80 percent chance of good weather. (W Post, Apr 5/93, Apr 6/93; W Times, Apr 5/93; LA Times, Apr 5/93; NY Times, Apr 4/93; AP, Apr 5/93; UPn, Apr 3/93; RTw, Apr 3/97)
NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)
NASA announced that June 3, 1993 had been set as the target date for the STS-57 mission of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The mission would be highlighted by the retrieval of the European observation satellite EURECA and the first flight of Spacehab, a commercial spacelab facility. (NASA Editors Note N93-28)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched on a satellite-deployment mission after two months of delays.  The liftoff had been postponed five times for equipment failure, payload problems, and a meteor shower.  After a short delay caused by a minor communications problem, astronauts on board successfully deployed the $363 million Advanced Communication Technology Satellite (ACTS). The satellite could one day shrink the diameter of satellite dishes to one and one-half feet.
NASA announced an August 4 launch attempt for the Space Shuttle Discovery. (RTw, Jul 7/93; USA Today, Jul 28/93)
An x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunctioned while scanning the space between stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, were attempting to correct the problem. The spectrometer measures low-energy x-rays emitted from the space between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped to prove or disprove the theory that a bubble of hot gas in the Milky Way Galaxy was produced by a nearby exploding star. Meanwhile, Endeavour crew members conducted medical tests and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school classroom presentation called "Physics of Toys." (NY Times, Jan 15/93; AP, Jan 15/93)
A recent Space Shuttle experiment on rats some day may lead to the discovery of the genes that direct bone cells to produce more bone.  The third Physiological and Anatomical Rodent Experiment (PARE-3) studied changes in the activity of bone-forming cells after nine days of spaceflight.  It also investigated whether these changes were reversed within three days of return to Earth. (NASA Release 93-181)
Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)
NASA announced that three engine pumps that had been removed from Space Shuttle Columbia for fear that the seal retainers in the pumps were an old variety that required inspection after each flight were a newer version that did not need automatic pre-flight inspection. The confusion stemmed from a paperwork mixup at the Rockwell International Corporation, maker of the engines. (NY Times, Feb 19/93)
The countdown began for the Hubble Telescope repair mission, considered by many to be NASA's biggest challenge in space since the Apollo moon landings. The Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to lift off on the 11-day flight on December 1. (B Sun, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; USA Today, Nov 29/93; P Inq, Nov 29/93; NY Times Magazine, Nov 28/93; USA Weekend, Nov 26-28; W Post, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; RTw, Nov 27/93, 28/93; APn, Nov 27/93, Nov 28/93; UPn, Nov 26/93, Nov 28/93; W Times, Dec 1/93)
NASA reported that the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia had been halted three seconds before liftoff because of a main engine failure caused by a malfunctioning engine valve. When the Shuttle's computers detected a faulty valve, the safety system shut down the Shuttle's main engines. Officials stressed that the crew on the $1 billion German-charted research mission was never in any danger because of the aborted liftoff. Repairs were expected to take about three weeks. The shutdown was the third launch pad abort in Shuttle program history. (Reuters, Mar 22/93, Mar 23/93; AP, Mar 22/93; UPI, Mar 22/93; B Sun, Mar 23/93; P Inq, Mar 23/93; CSM, Mar 23/93; NY Times, Mar 23/93; USA Today, Mar 23/93; W Post, Mar 23/93; W Times, Mar 23/93; WSJ, Mar 23/93)
Reinhard Furrer, a former German astronaut, criticized the German government for planning to cut funds for manned space flights such as the U.S.-German Shuttle mission now orbiting the Earth. Furrer flew on a joint U.S.-German scientific mission in 1885. (RTw, Apr 27/93)
NASA announced the formation of an investigation board to examine the causes of a simultaneous detonation of two Super*Zip explosive cords, one primary and the other a backup, that occurred during the deployment of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite(ACTS) and its Transfer Orbit State (TS) booster from Discovery during Shuttle Mission STS-51 (September 12-20, 1993). (NASA Release 93-184)
After a month of delays, NASA prepared for launch  of the Shuttle Columbia's German mission. Forecasters were predicting a 70 percent chance of favorable lift-off conditions. The flight would be Columbia's 14th in 12 years.
NASA reported that NASA's Shuttle Mission, STS-57, scheduled for launch in early June, would highlight the beginning of a new era in the commercial development of space. The Endeavour's six-person crew was scheduled to retrieve a European satellite and also was scheduled to use experiments designed by and for students, operate a payload that might improve crystal growth techniques, and demonstrate possible on-earth refueling techniques. (NASA Release 093-78)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
NASA announced that Shuttle Columbia, with a science mission paid for and directed by Germany, was scheduled to be launched on April 24. The launch was scheduled to take place just seven days after Discovery's return from an atmospheric research flight. An engine shutdown March 22 halted Columbia's launch with just three seconds to go. (AP, 4/21; 93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 21/93; USA Today, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 22/93)
NASA selected USN Commander James D. Wetherbee to command the STS-63 mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in mid-1994.  Other crew members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foal, Janice E. Voss, Bernard A. Harris, Jr., and Russian Air Force Colonel Vladimir G. Titov. Collins is the agency's first woman pilot.
The Smithsonian Museum put the Air and Space Museum Annex proposed for Dulles Airport on its priority list for 1993. The annex would display, for the first time, such pieces of aeronautical history as the Enola Gay atomic bomber, the Space Shuttle Enterprise, and the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane.
A NASA panel recommended that the space agency plan two Space Shuttle missions rather than the scheduled one to repair the Hubble telescope. The panel agreed that the repairs could be done, but suggested that because of the complexity of the task, a back-up mission should be planned. (UPI, May 25/93; AP, May 25/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.
In an interview in the Scientist, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the current NASA reorganization would make science more of a priority in NASA and involve the science community in correcting problems at NASA. He stated, "NASA is science and exploration, not infrastructure and bureaucracy." In response to a question about jobs, he noted that NASA was not a jobs program, but rather existed for "inspiration and hope, and a basic understanding of science." He said that he hoped to launch a small discovery satellite every year, while cutting back Space Shuttle flights from 12 or 13 to six a year. (The Scientist, Jan 11/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego proposed returning to the moon for a 21-day, two-person mission in 1999. The mission would use a capsule and return vehicle transported by the U.S. Space Shuttle and a Titan 4 rocket with a Centaur upper stage; the proposal did not call for the construction of a new launcher. However, NASA's head of exploration called many of the calculations in the proposal overly optimistic. NASA's own rough draft for a lunar base program entailed construction of a new launcher and higher costs than those projected in the General Dynamics proposal. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
NASA announced the selection of 11 new science mission concepts in the Discovery Program for further study during this fiscal year. The Discovery missions were selected from 73 concepts discussed at the Discovery Mission Workshop held last November. The potential projects were those thought to have the highest scientific value as well as a reasonable chance of meeting budgetary guidelines.	 Discovery missions were designed to proceed from development to flight in less than three years.
A spokesman said that NASA had delayed loading the Hubble Space Telescope's replacement parts into Space Shuttle Endeavour because a fine, sandy substance had been found on two sealed plastic bags containing instruments needed to repair the telescope. A wind storm was thought responsible.  Officials were to inspect the instruments to make sure they had not been damaged. NASA did not believe the inspection would delay the mission's target liftoff of Dec. 1. (AP, Nov 2/93; RTw, Nov 2/93, Nov 4/98; B Sun, Nov 4/93)
Intelsat and Martin Marietta reached a tentative settlement of lawsuits connected with a communications satellite that Space Shuttle astronauts rescued after it was stranded in low orbit. The lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 1990 launch of a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went into a low, useless orbit after a Martin Marietta rocket launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts attached a new rocket booster package to the satellite in May 1992, and the satellite then fired itself into its proper orbit. (W Times, June 12/93; W Post, June 12/93)
Space Shuttle Columbia was fueled for the third launch attempt of a science mission chartered by Germany. The mission, which was years behind schedule, was scheduled for launch Monday, April 26 at 10:52 a.m. (UPI, Apr 25/93; AP, Apr 26/93; NY Times, Apr 26/93; USA Today, Apr 26/93; RTw, Apr 26/93
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly at Edwards Air Force Base after 14 days in orbit, ending the Shuttle program's longest flight with a wealth of new data on weightless in humans. Columbia's mission was only the second in U.S. history totally devoted to medical research.  The Shuttle logged 5.8 million miles and circled Earth 225 times during its journey, which began October 18.  Columbia performed well but sustained damage to thermal barriers around engine heat shields and to its protective tiles.  Both problems have occurred before and will continue to be investigated, a NASA spokesperson said.
The Houston Post reported that a faulty command from Mission Control during a Shuttle flight a month ago caused sparks aboard Endeavour and knocked out power to some of its equipment. The six astronauts aboard the Shuttle were in no danger, and power was restored in 10 minutes.  The incident, however, did lead NASA to convene a safety board meeting.  (AP, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 5/93; RTw, Aug 4/93; UPI, Aug 4/93)
NASA released 45 photos of the Space Shuttle Challenger's smashed crew cabin, after they were given to the New York Times by a man who had obtained them under the federal Freedom of Information Act. The pictures were taken after the crew cabin was recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in 1986. (AP, Feb 15/93; B Sun, Feb 15; W Post, Feb 15/93; USA Today, Feb 15/93; P Inq, Feb 15/93; NY Times, Feb 13/93)
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
A National Research Council (NCR) study found that Space Shuttle computer software programs were flawed by lax attention to safety by NASA engineers. Nancy Leveson, who headed the NRC committee that prepared the report, said that "many of the same kinds of mistakes that played a role in the Challenger accident are now being repeated with the shuttle flight software." NASA, which requested the study, was considering some of the report's recommendations. (AP, June 28/93; USA Today, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93)
A spacewalk was added to Space Shuttle mission STS-57 aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour as part of a series of spacewalk tests NASA planned to conduct during the next three years to prepare for the construction and maintenance of Space Station Freedom. Endeavour was scheduled for an April launch. The main objectives of the STS-57 mission were retrieval of the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) deployed during a Shuttle flight in August 1992 and the conducting of research in the Spacehab module. (NASA Release 93-31)
Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park unit of Rockwell International, was blamed for the last-minute blastoff delay of Space Shuttle Discovery.  The shutdown was traced to a faulty fuel sensor in one of Discovery's engines, built by Rocketdyne.
The Washington Post reported that Maxime Faget, chairman and founder of Space International Inc., had resigned from his position as consultant to the Space Shuttle redesign team. Some NASA employees questioned Faget's objectivity because his company had earlier proposed its own alternative Space Station and design and because the company would likely bid on any new design proposal. Faget's resignation "was determined by both NASA and Space Industries as necessary." (W Post, Mar 24/93)
NASA announced at least a two-day delay in the planned March 14 launch of Space Shuttle Columbia because of a ruptured hydraulic hose that had sprayed fluid in the engine compartment. This was the second delay in three weeks for the German Spacelab mission. (AP, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; P Inq, Mar 4/93; USA Today, Mar 4/93; RTw, Mar 3/93)
NASA announced that NASA personnel had moved the Space Shuttle Discovery to the launch pad on Monday March 15. Discovery was scheduled to be launched in April on an atmospheric research mission. Meanwhile preflight work resumed on Columbia, which was scheduled to be launched in less than a week. (W Times, Mar 16/93; USA Today, Mar 16/93; AP, Mar 15/93)
NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Discovery would be sent on its eight-day atmospheric research mission next week, pushing Columbia's German-sponsored science flight into late April. The Columbia was scheduled for launch April 24. (UPI, Mar 30/93; W Post, Mar 31/93; RTw, Mar 31/93)
The Navy announced that it was turning over the Moffett Naval Air Station, located 40 miles south of San Francisco, California, to NASA's Ames Research Center, which is located on the base. The Center was to continue developing and testing space and aircraft-related technologies. The center's wind tunnels, flight simulators, and other facilities have helped produce and test generations of spacecraft and commercial aircraft, including the Space Shuttle. (AP, Jan 4/93)
A spaceship, with two cosmonauts on board, was launched from Kazakhstan to test a new docking procedure for a possible linkup with a U.S. Space Shuttle. The spaceship was scheduled to dock with the orbiting Space Station Mir and deliver the two cosmonauts, who would replace the two currently on board the Mir.  (W Times, Jan 23/93; AP, Jan 24/93; UPI, Jan 24/93)
China's state-run media reported that China had reached its first agreement with the United States to rent payload space in the U.S. Space Shuttle program for scientific research projects.  Jian Jingshan, director of the Center for Space  Science and Applied Research at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said his center had rented eight payload booths to carry equipment for experiments in space physics. (C Trib, Dec 5/93)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee voted June 9 to prevent NASA from moving about 90 Space Shuttle jobs from Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to Johnson Space Center in Houston. (Space News, June 21-27/93)
Bad weather delayed the landing of Space Shuttle Endeavour at Kennedy Space Center. The landing was rescheduled for June 30, weather permitting. (UPI, June 29/93, June 30/93; W Post, June 30/93; USA Today, June 30/93; NY Times, June 30/93; B Sun, June 30/93; AP, June 30/93; RTw, June 30/93)
The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)
Technical breakthroughs in space have helped launch clinical advances on earth. Space Shuttle experiments, which focus on determining how best to maintain the health of astronauts aboard a future Space Station, continue to provide spin-offs for clinical medicine on earth, from programmable pacemakers to a better understanding of vestibular disorders. The cost, however, is very high, and the question remains whether the Space Station project represents a potentially giant leap for medicine or a small step for a select few. (Medical World News, Aug 15/93)
USA Today reported that an article in Florida Today suggested that cuts in quality-control staffs at NASA and workers' fear of admitting error were creating potentially deadly problems for the Space Shuttle program. (USA Today, June 14/93)
NASA announced that it had set July 17 as the launch date for the Space Shuttle Discovery's 17th flight.  The nine-day mission of STS-51 was to include deployment of an Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) and deployment and retrieval of the German-built ORFEUS-SPAS astrophysics free-
USA Today reported that scientists on the Space Shuttle Columbia during its fall mission were scheduled to behead five white rats. Space program scientists Frank Sulzman said that killing the rats in orbit would give researchers better information on the effect of weightlessness on the animals. (USA Today, May 12/93)
Senior astronaut Jerry Ross, payload commander for the Shuttle Columbia's February 25 mission, said that NASA should revamp globe-spanning training because such programs endangered fliers' family life and could lead to physical and mental exhaustion. Ross and another astronaut spent about 28 weeks in Germany preparing for the German spacelab mission aboard Columbia. (USA Today, Feb 5/93; W Times, Feb 5/93; AP, Feb 4/93; Space News, Feb 8-14)
NASA postponed a scheduled launch of Space Shuttle Discovery until August 12 because of the Perseid meteor shower.  This was the third time the mission had been delayed.  The Perseid meteor shower occurs each August; it was expected to be more intense than usual this August, raising the possibility that a spacecraft in Earth orbit could be damaged by a piece of debris. (UPI, Jul 30/93; Rtw, Jul 30/93; AP, Jul 31/93; W Post, Jul 31/93; NY Times, Jul 31/93; B Sun, Aug 4/93; USA Today, Aug 10/93, Aug 11/93, Aug 12/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts Colonel Vladimir G. Titov and Sergei K. Krikalev were scheduled to meet with the media for interviews on Tuesday, March 9. The two cosmonauts were training as mission specialists for Shuttle mission STS-60 set to be launched in late 1993. (NASA Editors Note N93-9)
NASA announced that it planned to use the eight Space Shuttle flights scheduled for 1993 for research relating to the building and operation of Space Station Freedom, scheduled to be launched in three years.
NASA announced that bad weather had forced the military to postpone launch of a rocket scheduled to unfurl a tether in space and that the delay had forced NASA to bump the launch of shuttle Columbia from Sunday to Monday. (RTw, Mar 19/93; AP, Mar 19/93; UPI, Mar 19/93; W Post, Mar 19/93)
An improperly etched spring in one of Space Shuttle Endeavour's three oxygen turbopumps could delay next week's planned launch of the Space Shuttle. The inspection stamp was etched in a high-stress area rather than in a spot with minimal stress, NASA officials said. The spring holds the pump bearings in place. If the improperly marked spring broke at liftoff, the affected bearing cage could come loose. (AP, May 25/93)
NASA astronaut Bernard A. Harris Jr., M.D. was scheduled to present a National Urban League (NLU) banner, flown on the STS-55 Space Shuttle mission, to NLU president John Jacob during the organization's opening keynote ceremony on Sunday, August 1, in Washington, D.C. (NASA Media Advisory)
Two Russia cosmonauts training for a U.S. Shuttle flight said that they were eager to try out America's spaceship. The two cosmonauts had two and one-half years of space experience between them. (AP, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 10/93)
NASA officials said that Germany was being charged only $150 million of the $400 million cost of launching a science mission aboard Shuttle Columbia on February 25. Columbia's crew was expected to include two German researchers and a laboratory of German science experiments. The price was agreed upon in 1986 under a pricing policy NASA officials admitted was outdated. (O Sen Star, Feb 4/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
In a report to Congress, the General Accounting Office (GAO) reported that NASA  had underestimated the cost of its programs by billions of dollars. The report noted that original estimates for 25 of the 29 NASA programs GAO analyzed were too low. GAO found that more than a third cost more than double the early estimates, while only four cost less than those estimates. Most of the programs cost between 50 and 99 percent more than the early projections. One notable exception was Space Shuttle Endeavour; its $1.8 billion cost was $399 million less than the original estimate. NASA officials cited "overoptimism" as a reason why initial estimates were often significantly lower than current estimates. (NY Times, Jan 31/93; AP, Jan 30/93; Space News, Feb 8-14/94)
Astrophysicists reported that data from an x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour might have come from a million-degree gas produced by a nearby and fairly recent supernova, or exploding star. Scientists have puzzled over these x-rays for 25 year. Wilton T. Sanders from the University of Wisconsin commented, "There's a lot more analysis that needs to be done before we can start pinning down the exact origin of these x-rays. At this point, we're just very happy with the results that we're getting. The x-rays do seem to clearly be from a thermal process." (W Times, Jan 19/93; B Sun, Jan 19/93; NASA Release, Jan 21/93)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Columbus were to be injected with a saline solution and wired with catheters during next week's research mission in an attempt to help doctors understand the effects of weightlessness on the body. The two German astronauts on board would also have catheters in their veins during the launch in order to measure blood pressure.
NASA added a spacewalk to Space Shuttle mission STS-51 aboard Discovery, set for launch in July. The spacewalk would continue extravehicular activity tests that began with the addition of a spacewalk to NASA's first Shuttle flight in January of this year. (NASA Release 93-21)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that a NASA advisory panel had found that the Hubble Space Telescope would have had even more component failure in orbit if the launch had not slipped from 1986 to 1990 as a result of the Challenger accident. The delay enabled technicians to do additional testing that revealed suspect parts. (AvWk, May 24/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour's spacewalkers were the first to wear new spacesuit gloves that provide not only more thermal protection but also a better sense of touch than earlier models. The gloves are the first to have breaks in the gray silicone-coated Keviar finger and palm surface so joints can bend easier.  They are also insulated with Nomex felt for added warmth in space, where temperatures can plunge to hundreds of degrees below zero. (USA Today, Dec 7/93)
NASA announced that results from a Spacelab crystal growth experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle last summer had brought researchers closer to understanding the molecular structure of proteins; such understanding would aid scientists in developing more effective disease-fighting, anti-parasitic drugs. (NASA Release 93-166)
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
The Los Angeles Times reported that NASA was using a new x-ray machine, called the Reverse Geometry x-ray system, to examine parts of the Space Shuttle. The new technology, produced by the Digiray Corporation, eliminates fuzzy images and displays a 3-D picture almost instantly. (LA Times, Apr 25/93; AP, May 24/93)
NASA completed its review of the flight readiness of Columbia Shuttle Mission STS-55, a mission dedicated primarily to the German Space Agency for research in life and microgravity sciences. During the review, inspectors decided to replace the Shuttle's high pressure oxidizer pumps.
An article in Flight International featured the U.S. Spacehab, the world's first privately owned, manned microgravity-laboratory. The Spacehab was scheduled to be lifted aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour mission on June 3.
NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)
Technicians re-entered the engine compartment of Space Shuttle Discovery to replace what was believed to be a bad temperature sensor. The problem delayed some launch countdown preparations but, according to Shuttle Test Director Mike Leinbach, posed no threat to the launch, scheduled for the morning of August 12. (B Sun, Aug 12/93; RTw Aug, 11/93, Aug 12/93; UPI, Aug 11/93; P Inq, Aug 12/93; W Post, Aug 12/93; USA Today, Aug 12/93)
NASA announced that June 20, 1993, had been set as the new launch date for the next flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The launch originally had been scheduled for June 3. (NASA Launch Advisory)
Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)
The Christian Science Monitor, noting that Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission would symbolize what NASA called "the year of commercial space," reported that companies had been slow to exploit the commercial possibilities of space. For example, although NASA had leased 200 of the 300 locker spaces available on Spacehab's first six flights, the agency had few customers for the other 100 lockers. (CSM, June 3/93)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts released a spacecraft that was to study the solar wind and the sun's corona. The spacecraft would be picked up by Discovery after two days.
A NASA safety panel reported that inspection of recovered Space Shuttle solid rocket motors had found traces of soot on O-rings and recommended a redesign of one of the motor's main joints. The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP) warned NASA on March 18 that the possibility of a problem was "sufficiently high" to warrant the joint's redesign. (Space News, Mar 22/93)
Russian officials announced that two Russian cosmonauts had taken a space walk to rearrange solar panels on the outside of the Mir Space Station in order to increase the panels' efficiency. The rearrangement also would prepare the Mir for an eventual docking by the U.S. Space Shuttle. The cosmonauts encountered several problems during the walk and had to stay outside their capsule longer than planned. (AP, Apr 4/19, Apr 4/20; RTw, Apr 20/93; USA Today, Apr 20/93)
A panel of experts tasked with examining the Space Shuttle's main engines said that they were safe to fly provided that technical checks were made "vigorously and rigorously." The panel noted that the engines were so fussy that they needed constant maintenance. Such attention was one of the factors that had driven the cost of each Shuttle flight to about $500 million. The panel suggested that NASA continue to press forward on a number of technical improvements already in the works. (AP, Feb 12/93)
An official of Japan's Science and Technology Agency announced that it would spend $4.6 billion developing an unmanned Space Shuttle that would repair satellites, act as a space transporter, and serve as a laboratory for micro-gravity experiments. (Rtw, Jul 7/93)
Shortly after Space Shuttle Endeavour's launch later this month, technicians and engineers from GTE Government Systems Corporation were to establish an almost continuous communications link with the Shuttle. The space link to earth would come through a system of tracking and data relay satellites (TDRS), which would be supplemented by a satellite carried by Endeavor. (Business Wire, Jan 5, 93).
NASA reported that Space Shuttle Discovery's astronauts had retrieved the $6 million satellite, called the Spartan, that they had released into space two days previously. When the Shuttle came to within 35 of the satellite, astronaut Ellen Ochoa grabbed it with the arm of the Space Shuttle's robot and placed it in its cradle in the Shuttle bay. The Spartan spent about 50 hours as a free-flying satellite with two automated telescopes gathering data about the sun and the solar wind streaming from it. (AP, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 13/93; W Times, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93; W Post, Apr 14/93; B Sun, Apr 14/93; P Inq, Apr 14/93; UPI, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; USA Today, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93, Apr 15/93; C Trib, Apr 15/93)
NASA removed scientific samples and volatile fuels from the Space Shuttle Columbia on Tuesday. The Shuttle was grounded for at least three weeks because of an engine shutdown that had occurred three seconds before liftoff. (AP, Mar 24/93; UPI, Mar 24/93)
NASA said that two ozone monitors aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery were having difficulty sending measurements to ground controllers. Two monitors--one German and the other American--had trouble sending measurements to the ground. The U.S. monitor, which was supposed to supply most of the atmospheric research data, was also in danger of losing information. Timothy Miller, mission scientist for NASA, said a backup recorder for the U.S. ozone instrument could hold just over half the amount of data sought. Nasa ground controllers were attempting to solve the problem. (B Sun, Apr 9/93; NY Times, Apr 9/93; USA Today, Apr 9/93; W Post, Apr 9/93; UPI, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 9/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
Astronauts assigned to the Space Shuttle Columbia mission in the fall of 1993 were scheduled to conduct experiments on rats while in orbit. After beheading the rats, they were to dissect them. This would be the first dissection of an animal in space, to NASA's knowledge. The remaining rats aboard the Shuttle were scheduled for a similar fate once they returned to Earth.  NASA's Willy Hinds, a biologist and immunologist who is in charge of the project, said that "these tissues...are the biological equivalent of the moon rocks."  (AP, Aug 30/93; LA Times, Sept 5/93)
NASA reported that it had lost all contact with Shuttle Columbia for 80 minutes on May 4 because of an erroneous computer command sent to the Shuttle. The blackout led to the loss of some science data but did not cause any major problems; NASA officials, however, reviewed procedures for creating and sending commands to the Shuttle antenna.
The media reported that the crew aboard Shuttle Columbia had succeeded in flushing urine and other waste water into space from a backup storage system. This was the first time crew members had attempted to dump fluid overboard from contingency containers. Later in the day, the astronauts repaired a nitrogen gas line, restoring the shuttle's normal water pressure, which had dropped as a result of the Shuttle's plumbing problems. The mission's science experiments continued as planned.
NASA reported that an explosive designed to free a satellite aboard Space Shuttle Discovery accidentally detonated while the Shuttle was in orbit last month, hurling shrapnel though the cargo compartment.  The five astronauts were never in any danger, a NASA official said. The damage would not delay Discovery's next flight in January. (RTw, Oct 7/93; AP, Oct 8/93; Fla Today, Oct 11/93, Oct 14/93)
NASA canceled the Space Shuttle Columbia launch, scheduled for April 24, because of problems with a key navigational aid. The launch was rescheduled for 10:50 a.m. April 26. (UPI, Apr 24/93; RTw, Apr 24/93; P Inq, Apr 25/93; NY Times, Apr 25/93; B Sun, Apr 24/93)
NASA announced that the material that keeps the Space Shuttle from burning up when it returns from space may help treat medical problems on earth. Researchers from NASA's Ames Research Center in California were working with physicians in San Antonio to determine whether the Space Shuttle's ceramic surface insulation materials could be used in bone transplants. (NASA Release 93-102)
