Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
Lockheed Martin announced its intention to cut 200 jobs at its facility for the production of external fuel tanks for NASA’s Space Shuttle. NASA’s budget reductions had caused the layoffs, according to Lockheed. Lockheed Martin’s facility in New Orleans employed more than 2,500 workers in 1996.
Shuttle Columbia lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking upon Mission STS-78. The Shuttle carried U.S. astronauts Terrence T. Henricks, Kevin R. Kregel, Richard M. Linnehan, Susan J. Helms, and Charles E. Brady Jr.; French astronaut Jean-Jacques Favier; and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thrisk. NASA planned to use an orbiting research laboratory to conduct a variety of experiments during the mission. In addition to its human cargo, the Shuttle transported the payload for the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences, used to conduct research on musculoskeletal physiology and on the responses of living organisms to a low- gravity environment.(NASA, “Life and Microgravity Science Research Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-78,” news release 96-116, June 1996; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 103.)
For the first time in its history, NASA allowed a researcher to direct an experiment from his home university, rather than from Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Martin Glickman led a group of scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, taking control of a crystal experiment aboard Shuttle Columbia. Both NASA and the scientific community praised the experiment as a crucial step in the relationship between astronauts and academic scientists. Because they did not have to travel to NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, the scientists were able to use their own instruments and data systems. Using remote control, they repeatedly cooled and heated the crystal samples on the Shuttle. Scientists hoped that allowing universities to control experiments from their own institutions would facilitate greater student participation in experiments conducted in space.
Shuttle Columbia landed at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Forced to remain in space an additional day because of bad weather, Columbia and its crew had set an endurance record of nearly 18 days in space, only one day short of the previous record of 17 days. Heavy fog in Florida was the cause of the landing delay.(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Sets a Record for a Mission,” 7 December 1996.)
NASA and the scientific community celebrated the 15th anniversary of the Space Shuttle program. NASA had adopted the Shuttle as a means of controlling the costs of exploring space. However, NASA conceded that, since its deployment, the Shuttle had flown only nine times per year, compared with the 24 to 60 Shuttle flights per year anticipated. Furthermore, the cost of flying the Shuttle had reached almost US$500,000 more per mission than expected. During its first 15 years, the Shuttles had flown 76 missions, including 51 following the Challenger accident. The Shuttles had transported 545 tons (490,000 kilograms or 490 tonnes) of payloads to space, bringing back to Earth 18.5 tons (17,000 kilograms or 17 tonnes) of payloads. During the same period, 440 astronauts from 12 countries flew aboard the Shuttles. NASA experts predicted that the Shuttle would remain the primary vehicle of space exploration well into the 21st century.(Martin Burkey, “A Lean, Mean Teen: Shuttle Turns 15,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 April 1996; Seth Borenstein, “Costly History Dogs Shuttle on Anniversary,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 12 April 1996.)
NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russia’s Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-François Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, “Crew Named to Sixth Shuttle–Mir Docking Mission,” news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission,” 10 March 1996.)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel reported its findings on the safety of the Space Shuttle program, concluding that aggressive cost-cutting measures had not increased risks. The review responded to critics who had suggested that measures, such as outsourcing flight operations, had been too drastic, causing a precipitous decline in NASA workers’ morale. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, responsible for making NASA a more fiscally lean organization, praised NASA’s “clean bill of health.” However, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel warned NASA about challenges that would arise during the assembly of the ISS, cautioning those in favor of cutting the budget against trimming NASA’s funds too drastically.(NASA, “Panel Review Finds Space Shuttle Safe,” news release 96-257, 13 December 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California’s Mojave Desert. The nine-day mission nearly came to an abrupt halt when Atlantis’s crew had difficulty opening the Shuttle’s cargo bay doors during descent. After considering an emergency landing, NASA controllers directed Atlantis’s crew to open the doors manually. The crew successfully performed this necessary maneuver only to confront dangerous weather that prevented their landing at Kennedy Space Center.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back Safely After Mir Mission,” 1 April 1996. 13)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttle’s appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, “Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans,” 21 October 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour tested new NASA spacesuits in extreme cold. In preparation for work on the ISS, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott stood nearly motionless in space for 35 minutes, in temperatures nearing 100° below 0°F (-73.33°C), to test the suit’s insulating capacity. In completing the exercise, Scott became the second African American man to walk in space. The newly improved suits, produced at a cost of US$10 million each, proved an effective barrier against the cold. The gloves and the boots of the suits contained heating elements. NASA made the thermal improvements to the spacesuits after the astronauts became cold during the February 1995 spacewalk, causing its early termination.(Michael Cabbage, “Staying Warm in Cosmic Cold,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 January 1996; Jet Magazine, “Navy Captain Winston Scott Becomes Second Black To Walk in Space,” 5 February 1996, 24. 11 Kathy Sawyer, “Two Planets Discovered that Might Sustain Life,” Washington Post, 18 January 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttle’s reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rocket’s three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, “Astronaut’s Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks,” New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
NASA and the Italian Space Agency released the investigative report on the failed tethered satellite system (TSS) experiment conducted during Shuttle Columbia’s Mission STS-75 in February 1996. The 358-page report, produced by a board established to investigate the incident, concluded that a breach in the layer of insulation surrounding the tether conductor, possibly the result of contact with debris, led to the failure. According to the report, the breach in insulation allowed an electrical current to jump from a copper wire in the tether to an electrical ground, causing the breakage: “the tether failed as a result of arcing and burning of the tether, leading to a tensile failure after a significant portion of the tether had burned away.” The board noted that NASA scientists had already announced findings regarding tether current and voltage measurements, concluding that the unexpected breakage of Columbia’s tethered satellite did not indicate any fundamental problem with the concept of the TSS. Furthermore, the board recommended that during future experiments, scientists should take greater precautions to ensure that neither debris nor high-voltage arcing compromised the tether’s strength.(NASA, “Tethered Satellite Investigation Report Released,” news release 96-112, 4 June 1996; Reuters, “Damaged Insulation Ruined Test in Space,” 5 June 1996; Associated Press, “Study Finds Metal Debris Punctured Tether Pulled by Satellite,” 5 June 1996.)
The experimental DC-XA flight vehicle completed a successful test flight, flying nearly 2,000 feet (610 meters) above the desert of the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico and landing safely. NASA researchers and administrators hoped that the rocket would one day replace the Space Shuttle as the primary means of space exploration. The reusable, unpiloted rocket, taking off and landing from a vertical position, would cut significantly the costs of delivering payloads into orbit. NASA announced that the vehicle had been renamed Clipper Graham, in honor of Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham. Graham, who died on 31 December 1995, had served as an advisor to President Ronald Reagan and had been an early proponent for the development of reusable rockets. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed optimism that NASA would be able to replace the Shuttle with the DC-XA flight vehicle: “We are going to fly the [S]huttle safely until we can replace it. But, by God, we are going to replace the [S]huttle.”(NASA, “Revolutionary New Launch Vehicle Renamed for Space Pioneer,” news release 96-114, 7 June 1996; Associated Press, “Reusable Rocket Ends Flight,” 7 June 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nation’s oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASA’s Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASA’s final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbia’s launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttle’s mission.(Reuters, “Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly,” 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites,” New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-80—Press Kit,” news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, “Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope,” 20 November 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) at Edwards Air Force Base in California commemorated its 50th anniversary with a celebration called Discovery Through Flight Research. The Center got its start when five aeronautical engineers from Langley Research Center arrived to explore flight beyond the speed of sound, in preparation for the X-1 tests, featuring pilot Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager at the controls. Researchers at DFRC contributed to a wide variety of aeronautical achievements, including breaking the sound barrier and helping launch the Space Shuttle program. At the age of 50, DFRC employed 900 government and civilian contractor employees.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Marks Half-Century of Achievements,” 25 September 1996. 136 Associated Press, “Ancient Spacecraft,” 1 October 1996.)
Hurricane Fran delayed the launch of Shuttle Atlantis. NASA managers decided to move the Shuttle off the launchpad when it became clear that the hurricane’s path lay through the southeast region of the United States. Because of the slow rollback of the vehicle from the launchpad to the assembly building, managers determined that they would not be able to meet the scheduled 14 September departure date.(NASA, “Atlantis Moved to VAB; STS-79 Delayed,” launch advisory 96-181, 4 September 1996.)
Researchers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that tests aimed at improving the efficiency of Space Shuttle engines would likely translate into substantial savings for commercial airlines as well. Researchers had learned that locating an engine’s turbine airfoils in the “optimum position” could cut down the flow of fluttering wakes of gases. When wakes occur, an engine requires additional energy to run and generates higher temperatures. NASA researchers predicted that the findings would have special application for the Boeing 777. Improving efficiency by a half percent would save hundreds of gallons of fuel per flight. The researchers had based the new positioning of the turbines upon the simple principle evident when a bike racer drafts behind a competitor⎯because the first rider takes the full brunt of the wind, the second can travel equally as fast with less exertion. The engineers found that by aligning turbines in the most efficient positions, the engine derived a similar drafting.(NASA, “Applying NASA Shuttle Engine Test Findings May Save Airlines Millions in Fuel Costs,” news release 96-254, 12 December 1996.)
China announced it would participate in an international collaborative space research project for the first time in its history. Chinese scientists planned to assist their colleagues from Russia and the United States in the future Discovery mission. Although China had no plans to send an astronaut on the Shuttle, Chinese aerospace engineers volunteered to construct the sophisticated magnets needed to build a magnetic spectrometer. The project was the first time the usually secretive Chinese space science program had opened itself to outside scrutiny.(United Press International, “China To Assist U.S. Space Program,” 3 October 1996.)
Lockheed Martin won the contract to design and build the X-33 test vehicle, a scaled-down model of the reusable launch vehicle (RLV) that NASA planned as an eventual replacement for the Space Shuttle. NASA set a budget of US$941 million for the project. In announcing the new contract, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed NASA’s high hopes for the project: “We want to develop technologies that will allow industry to build a vehicle that takes days, not months, to turnaround; dozens, not thousands of people to operate; reliability ten times better than anything flying today; and launch costs that are a tenth of what they are now. Our goal is a reusable launch vehicle that will cut the cost of sending a pound of payload to orbit from [US]$10,000 to [US]$1,000.” Lockheed planned to invest US$220 million in the RLV project. The X-33 plan built upon the successful engineering of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA), launched from White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The agreement between NASA and Lockheed Martin split the risk between government and industry. Although NASA passed over Rockwell International for the contract, Rockwell designed the vehicle’s engine.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Selected To Build X-33,” news release 96-128, 2 July 1996; Jeff Cole, “Lockheed Wins $1 Billion Pact for the Shuttle,” Wall Street Journal, 3 July 1996; Curt Suplee and Steven Pearlstein, “Lockheed Martin Gets Spacecraft Project,” Washington Post, 3 July 1996.)
Endeavour’s crew successfully tested a giant inflatable antenna, deploying the structure and gathering data during its orbit. Project Manager Steven Bard, a NASA scientist at JPL, called the successful test a giant step toward developing lightweight, cost-effective equipment for space research. The silver, inflatable antenna, about the size of a tennis court, cost US$14 million to develop. The Shuttle astronauts used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to launch the small satellite carrying the antenna. The crew situated Endeavour about 400 feet (122 meters) immediately above the antenna, to observe its behavior after deployment, but when the antenna made some unexpected tumbling rotations, the astronauts moved the Shuttle to a safer distance. After completing the test, the astronauts set off a series of small explosions to cut loose the antenna. Before the mission began, NASA officials had determined that deflating and recapturing the antenna would be too risky and costly to attempt.(William Harwood, “Inflatable Antenna Passes Test,” Washington Post, 21 May 1996; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Deploys Giant Antenna,” Washington Times, 21 May 1996.)
NASA canceled a spacewalk for the astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia when the astronauts could not open the outer air lock. After communicating for more than 2 hours with Mission Control in Houston, with officials instructing them to “put as much force as you feel comfortable applying to the handle,” Columbia’s crew ended preparations for the spacewalk. During the spacewalk, the astronauts had intended to test a large crane and various power tools planned for the ISS.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Called Off as Air Lock Hatch Won’t Open,” Washington Post, 28 November 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia conducted an overnight experiment on the effects of space travel on the body’s biological clock. Four astronauts slept with special caps equipped with electrodes to monitor their brain and muscle activity. Astronauts in space have no exposure to the once-daily rising and setting Sun, which helps trigger a regular sleep pattern on Earth. In space the Sun rises and sets more than a dozen times each “day.” NASA administrators planned the experiment because they recognized the value of restful sleep for astronauts working in space and were concerned that sleep loss would become a greater disadvantage the longer an astronaut stayed in space. With the ISS on the horizon, NASA researchers considered the possible effects on astronauts of record-setting stays in space a significant issue. “Sleep disruption is something that has to be taken seriously,” said Timothy H. Monk, the lead researcher on the project.(Reuters, “Shuttle Mission Probes Body Clock,” 24 June 1996.)
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASA’s Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as “the first day of a new space program in America.” Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve “very good” safety ratings.(Associated Press, “NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry,” 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, “NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 30 September 1996; United Press International, “NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 1 October 1996.)
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin’s efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldin’s mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, “NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston,” 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin’s Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
Shuttle, allowing it to hover at this distance while the Shuttle maneuvered into position to pick it up.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-75—Press Kit,” news release 96-27, February 1996; William J. Broad, “Shuttle Blasts Off for High-Wire Act To Unfurl 12.5 Miles of Electrical Cable in Space,” New York Times, 23 February 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Mission To Deploy Space Power Ball on 12.5-Mile Tether,” Washington Post, 23 February 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent Shuttle–Mir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-79—Press Kit,” news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Arrives for Astronaut’s Long-Awaited Pickup,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
NASA announced that the tethered satellite experiment had failed. The 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, attaching the 0.5-ton (450-kilogram or 0.45-tonne) satellite to Shuttle Columbia, broke unexpectedly just as the tether had nearly reached its full extension. Before the tether broke, the experiment to use an orbiting satellite to produce electricity had been proceeding smoothly. The astronauts had been in the process of extending the satellite from the Space Shuttle for more than 5 hours, when they noted a decrease in tension and realized that the tether and satellite had broken away. NASA Commander Andrew M. Allen responded to the break immediately, directing the Shuttle away from the satellite to prevent a collision. However, the satellite never came close to the Shuttle; it was more than 18 miles (29 kilometers) away only a few minutes after breaking free. NASA officials could not immediately identify the cause of the break. The astronauts aboard the Shuttle managed to record images of the satellite trailing away from the Shuttle. This footage, a black and white rendering of the tether disappearing into space, reached Flight Command Center in Houston, Texas, shortly after the event. “Those are some tether dynamics we did not want to see,” stated one Mission Control operative. NASA dismissed the idea of attempting to retrieve the satellite, explaining that, although it was technically possible, such a mission would be too dangerous and too costly in consumption of fuel.(NASA, “STS-75 Mission Control Status Report No. 10,” 26 February 1996; Steve Marshall, “Satellite Tether Snaps; Shuttle Safe,” USA Today, 26 February 1996; William Harwood, “Science Satellite Is Lost as Shuttle Tether Breaks,” Washington Post, 26 February 1996.)
In a postflight inspection, NASA engineers discovered that one loose screw had caused the hatch on Shuttle Columbia to jam, preventing the astronauts from taking their scheduled spacewalks. The screw had probably dislodged during takeoff, falling into the gears of the hatch. NASA had decided to cancel the spacewalks, rather than force the hatch open and risk damaging it permanently. With the Shuttle scheduled to launch again in one month, NASA faced the question of whether to remove and replace the gearboxes on all the hatches inside the Shuttle as a precautionary measure.(Associated Press, “Loose Screw Caused Stuck Hatch on Shuttle,” 12 December 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Hatching Up Plan in Case Emergency Spacewalk Is Needed,” 2 December 1996.)
NASA discovered the second of two misplaced hand tools left inside the propulsion system of the recently landed Shuttle Atlantis. Although the Shuttle had experienced no problems during its 10-day flight, NASA formed an investigative panel to determine who had left the tools inside the Shuttle’s engine compartment after completing work. Inspectors had discovered the first missing tool inside the electronic control compartment of the Shuttle’s reusable rocket booster when they retrieved the booster from the Atlantic Ocean shortly after the launch. Workers discovered the second tool during a routine postflight inspection of Atlantis’s rocket engine compartment. Although the tools likely posed no threat to the safety of the Shuttle crew, a NASA representative said that, for safety reasons, NASA intended to find out how workers had made the error and, if possible, to identify the Shuttle contractor responsible.(Mark Carreau, “Another Wrenching Experience for Shuttle,” Houston Chronicle, 3 October 1996.)
Mission STS-75, the 19th mission of Shuttle Columbia, launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral,
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. O’Connor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. O’Connor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, O’Connor had voiced some concerns about NASA’s planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, O’Connor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, O’Connor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. O’Connor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, “O’Connor To Leave NASA,” news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns,” Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
Peter H. Diamandis, President of Angel Technologies Corporation, an aerospace firm located in St. Louis, Missouri, offered a US$10 million prize to the first private aviators to complete a suborbital flight into space. Diamandis stated that the object of the prize was to motivate private companies to invest in space exploration, someday making spaceflights open to the public. “We’re looking to spark a constructive competition,” Diamandis explained. To claim the prize, the privately financed and built aircraft would have to ascend to 62 miles (100 kilometers) high, twice within a period of two weeks, delivering three passengers safely to space and back. Diamandis claimed that creating an entirely reusable Space Shuttle would considerably decrease the cost of going to space, opening the space frontier to people who had not trained as professional astronauts. Diamandis intended to announce the winner of the “X Prize” on 18 May, beneath the St. Louis Gateway Arch. Creator of the Voyager and top contender for the prize Burt Rutan, as well as NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, planned to attend the award ceremony.
NASA commemorated the 10-year anniversary of the Challenger tragedy. In advance of the anniversary, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin reaffirmed NASA’s dual commitments to exploring the frontiers of the universe and to maintaining the highest safety standard possible. According to Goldin, “the best way to honor the memories of the crew of Challenger, and of all the men and women, who have given their lives to explore the frontiers of air and space, is to continue their bold tradition of exploration and innovation.” In the decade following the accident, NASA had instituted multiple safety changes in the Shuttle program, including the nine changes in the program’s structure recommended by the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission). By the end of January 1996, NASA had launched 49 Shuttle missions since the Challenger accident and had successfully deployed the HST. Memorial observances at KSC and JSC took place at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger exploded.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Changes and Accomplishments Since 1986,” news release, January 1996; NASA, “Administrator Goldin Issues Statement on Challenger Observance,” news release 96-2, 16 January 1996.)
The television series Home Improvement aired an episode showing members of Shuttle Columbia’s crew in scenes shot in space. The Shuttle’s crew had captured the film during Mission STS-73 in October 1995. The airing marked the first time that NASA had allowed the filming of operations in space, specifically for a television series. The NASA crew included Kenneth D. Bowersox, Catherine G. Coleman, Frederick W. Leslie, Kathryn C. Thornton, and Albert Sacco Jr. Bowersox, who had appeared previously on Home Improvement, praised the event as a public relations achievement for NASA.(Ann Hodges, “‘Home Improvement’ Project Takes On a New Kind of Space,” Houston Chronicle, 12 February 1996.)
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
scientists had designed to harness new sources of power for the Space Shuttle. An attempt in
Space Shuttle Endeavour’s crew used the spacecraft’s 50-foot (15-meter) robotic arm to snare NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology Flyer (OAST-Flyer) satellite. The OAST- Flyer, valued at US$10 million, weighed 2,600 pounds (1,200 kilograms).(Associated Press, “Shuttle’s Astronauts Grab a 4-Ton Japanese Science Satellite from Its Orbit,” 17 January 1996; Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Dodges Military Satellite on Way To Retrieve Japanese Craft,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 1996; Michael Cabbage, “Satellite Stowed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1996.)
Republican presidential candidate Patrick J. Buchanan announced that he would cancel a controversial political advertisement using images of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Responding to harsh criticism from New Hampshire residents, Buchanan removed the footage of Challenger from the television spot. Buchanan stated that the purpose of the advertisement, his first in the crucial primary state of New Hampshire, was to demonstrate his service to President Ronald Reagan during difficult times. However, in the home state of teacher-astronaut Christa McAuliffe, who had died in the accident, many residents felt that the campaign’s use of the images exploited the event for political gain. The political controversy brought to the foreground the lingering public dismay over the lost Challenger, even as the 10-year anniversary of the tragedy neared.(Howard Kurtz, “Television Ad Backfires on Buchanan,” Washington Post, 12 January 1996; Associated Press, “Buchanan Chastised for Using Challenger Image in TV Ad,” 12 January 1996.)
Former NASA astronaut Robert F. Overmyer died while test piloting the experimental Cirrus VK-30 aircraft near Duluth, Minnesota. Overmyer was performing a series of stalls at an altitude of more than 8,000 feet (2,400 meters) when the aircraft “departed from controlled flight.” Overmyer had served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1959 to 1986, becoming a NASA astronaut in 1969, and piloting Shuttle Mission STS-5 in 1982. After leaving NASA and the Marine Corps in 1986, Overmyer worked for McDonnell Douglas Aerospace.(Edward H. Phillips, “Overmyer Dies in Crash,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 144, no. 14 (1 April 1996): 29.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. “Rich” Clifford and Linda M. Godwin made an historic spacewalk outside the orbiting Mir space station. For the first time, astronauts exited Mir with the Shuttle docked at the station. Clifford and Godwin, wearing jet packs as a precaution, scaled the passageway connecting Shuttle Atlantis with the Mir complex, installing several experiment boxes on the outside of the space station. Some of these boxes were “cosmic dust catchers,” meant to gather samples of the materials that might smash into orbiting space stations. The spacewalk and associated experiments were part of ongoing research in preparation for the construction of the new International Space Station. NASA regarded the spacewalk as more dangerous than usual, because the Shuttle was docked with Mir and, thus, unable to give chase quickly if one of the astronauts broke away from the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Spacewalking Astronauts Venture Outside Atlantis-Mir Complex,” 27 March 1996; Todd Halverson, “Walkers Prepare for Historic Trek Outside Mir Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 March 1996. 50 Houston Chronicle, “United Space Alliance Taps New Top Officers,” 27 March 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The mission, lasting nearly 17 days, set a new space endurance record for the crew. The astronauts had bested their previous record by nearly 7 hours. Columbia had carried into space a torch for the 1996 Olympic relay, and upon landing, two members of the crew joined the Olympic torch relay team in a special ceremony. The astronauts had overcome several small malfunctions to conduct the successful mission and land the Shuttle on time. Less than 2 hours before the Shuttle’s scheduled arrival, the crew had discovered a clogged cooling line, but the astronauts were able to flush ice from the system to clear the line. In addition, the mission brought to light a potential ongoing problem for Columbia. In studying the launch, NASA officials had observed gas and flames issuing from the rocket boosters, probably through the O- ring joints used to connect the booster’s fuel segments. Although Columbia’s crew was not in danger, NASA officials decided that the Shuttle would not launch again until scientists had determined how well the new water-based adhesive would function under extreme heat. NASA had discontinued the adhesive used previously on the rocket boosters, because the adhesive was an ozone-depleting agent.(William Harwood, “Record Shuttle Flight Ends; Problem May Delay Next Launch,” Washington Post, 8 July 1996; Associated Press, “Columbia Ends 17-Day Mission,” 8 July 1996.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely after a successful nine-day mission. The Shuttle crew accomplished its primary task of capturing a Japanese satellite. The early-morning landing, in which the Shuttle returned to Earth under a shroud of darkness, was a rare occurrence.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks,” 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, “Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal,” news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
