NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery, carrying a crew of seven astronauts, launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a mission to service the HST. NASA planned the 10-day Shuttle Mission STS-82 to upgrade significantly the scientific capabilities of HST, as well as to perform standard maintenance on the US$2 billion instrument. The spaceflight was the second servicing mission for HST since its deployment in April 1990 aboard Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-31. The astronauts planned to conduct at least four spacewalks to install new components, such as the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer. A NASA scientist described the improvements as “replacing 1970’s technology with 1990’s technology.” In addition to the work conducted on the HST, Discovery’s crew planned to move the telescope a few miles farther into the atmosphere, improving its chances for a longer operating life. Astronomers hypothesized that the potential gains from refurbishing the HST outweighed the risks of tampering with its already spectacular abilities, justifying the US$800 million cost of the mission. The head of the HarvardSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics speculated that the refurbished HST could lead to “a whole different kind of science.”(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-82—Press Kit,” news release 97-18, February 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Starts Space Telescope Mission,” New York Times, 12 February 1997; Associated Press, “Improved Hubble Telescope To Give Astronomers New View of the Universe,” 8 February 1997.)
NASA researchers, astronauts, and scholars gathered in Washington, DC, for a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, disclosing and discussing details of experiments conducted aboard the Shuttle during two 1996 missions. The event commemorated the one-year anniversaries of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory and the third U.S. Microgravity Payload. Scientists predicted that discoveries made aboard the Shuttle flights in 1996 would eventually lead to technological advances. Research on numerous topics, from the climate of the universe to human biology, could lead to production of cheaper metals and alloys or new synthetic drugs. Highlights from the research presentations included the announcement of the discovery that space-grown crystals are of much higher quality than those grown on Earth; the description of experiments intended to uncover the effect of space on the production of metal and alloys; and the presentation of evidence that the microgravity environment of space had enabled scientists to make more precise measurements of the physical properties of elemental gas.(NASA, “Significant Discoveries from Space Shuttle Experiments To Be Presented at Conference,” news release 97-23, 5 February 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earth’s ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASA’s trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, “one word for our mission would be diversity.” With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, “August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch,” news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study,” USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, “Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 12-day mission devoted to environmental research. The crew hoped that the atmospheric data gathered during the mission would help scientists understand the ozone damage and climate change affecting Earth.(Mark Carreau, “We’re Very, Very Happy, Shuttle Crew Says of Flight,” Houston Chronicle, 20 August 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Discovery successfully tested a new robotic arm, considerably smaller than Discovery’s massive 50-foot (15-meter) crane, intended for tasks of higher precision. Discovery’s crew used the arm to unlock a cargo bay door and lift a small box. NASA had engineered the Japanese-made robotic arm for US$100 million, expecting that it would eventually serve astronauts aboard the ISS. Of the robotic arm’s test performance, astronaut Stephen K. Robinson stated simply, “it operated beautifully.”
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Earth on Mission STS-87 with great fanfare, executing an unusual 180° roll 6 minutes into the 81⁄2-minute flight, a maneuver planned to put the Shuttle in radio contact with communication satellites. The launch itself took place at the “exact moment on the exact day as planned” for the sixth consecutive mission. The six-person crew included Takao Doi, a Japanese astronaut who planned to make his country’s first spacewalk; Kalpana Chawla, the first Indian-born woman to travel into space; Leonid K. Kadenyuk, the first Ukrainian to fly on a U.S. Shuttle; and U.S. astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Steven W. Lindsey, and Winston E. Scott. The crew planned to conduct a spacewalk to test instruments and procedures for the ISS. The Shuttle also carried the U.S. Microgravity Payload-4, which the astronauts planned to use to test the responses to conditions in space of a variety of materials and liquids.(NASA, “Solar and Microgravity Research Highlight Final Shuttle Mission of 1997,” news release J97037, November 1997; William Harwood, “Columbia Corkscrews into Orbit,” Washington Post, 20 November 1997; Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Blasts Off with Multinational Crew,” 19 November 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Executes Flip on Its Way into Orbit,” 16 November 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Columbia, consulting with NASA ground support, decided to cut short their planned 16-day mission because of the potential for an explosion in the Shuttle’s electronic generator. NASA decided to abort the mission after the crew had attempted for two days to fix the balky generator. Despite the fact that the Shuttle’s two other generators could provide enough power for the Shuttle, NASA’s procedure required the Shuttle’s return, to prevent subsequent problems. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway clarified that the astronauts faced no imminent danger and that terminating the mission was a precaution rather than an emergency. “The conservative thing to do is land on Tuesday,” Holloway said at a news conference. Columbia’s early return to Earth in Mission STS-83 was only the third time in the history of the Shuttle program that NASA had ended a mission early. The astronauts had time to complete only a few of the planned 33 experiments on the mission, which cost nearly US$500 million.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Flight Cut Short as Risk Persists,” Washington Post, 7 April 1997; Warren Leary, “Power Problem on Shuttle Forces a Tuesday Landing,” New York Times, 7 April 1997; Associated Press, “Deteriorating Generator Cuts Short Mission,” 6 April 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, less than three days after its liftoff. The mission, planned for 16 days, ended early, and the Shuttle completed the return flight without incident. Columbia weighed more than 236,000 pounds (107,000 kilograms) at landing, the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, because of its load of unused supplies for experiments. Almost immediately after the safe landing, NASA officials began to consider repeating the flight as soon as possible, to allow the Shuttle crew to accomplish its original objectives and to avoid the substantial cost of launching an entirely new mission.(William Harwood, “Columbia Lands After Aborted Mission,” Washington Post, 9 April 1997. 66)
Astronaut F. Story Musgrave retired from NASA after 30 years of service and six Shuttle flights. During his more than 1,200 hours in space, Musgrave had flown on the first voyage of Challenger and had been a member of the first crew to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Flying aboard STS-80 in 1996, Musgrave became the oldest person to fly in space. NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations David C. Leestma said of Musgrave, “throughout the Shuttle program, from its earliest stages to the present, Story has been instrumental in developing the techniques crew members use to perform spacewalks.”(NASA, “Astronaut Story Musgrave Retires from NASA,” news release 97-188, 2 September 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a “once-in-a-career opportunity” for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, “Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94,” news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission,” Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, “Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April,” New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission,” 1 July 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery ended Mission STS-82 with a safe landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The early morning landing occurred later than NASA had planned because of cloudy weather in Florida. NASA praised Discovery’s crew for its work refurbishing the HST.(William Harwood, “Discovery Lands: Shuttle Back from Hubble Repair Mission,” Chicago Sun-Times, 22 February 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to “serve as a bridge to America’s future in space.” In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttle’s launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, “Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83,” news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire,” 5 April 1997.)
John E. Blaha became the first astronaut to leave the U.S. Space Shuttle carried by medical personnel. Blaha was experiencing weakness upon his return to Earth’s gravitational conditions, and NASA’s doctors wanted to gauge immediately the effects of long-term weightlessness on his body. Blaha remarked upon landing that he could hardly move, saying that he was “absolutely stunned” at the difficulty of returning to a gravity-controlled environment. NASA’s doctors focused specifically on Blaha’s dizziness and on his weakened bones and muscles, hoping to learn how to improve health plans for astronauts living aboard the ISS. Blaha had maintained an arduous schedule of exercise aboard Mir, to mitigate the weakening effects of the weightless environment. In addition, he had made the return flight aboard Atlantis lying down in a Shuttle seat, to minimize the crush of gravity.(William Harwood, “Atlantis Astronaut Wobbly on His Return to Gravity,” Washington Post, 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Carried off Shuttle, a First for NASA,” 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Returning Astronaut Sheds Right Stuff Image, Is Carried off Shuttle,” 22 January 1997.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) unveiled its key contribution to the ISS, two satellites named after stars⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi, which Japan planned to launch aboard an H-2 rocket. The satellites would make it easier to perform unpiloted docking experiments on the ISS. Japan’s interest in robotic space research fueled the proposal, which complemented NASDA’s plan to build an unpiloted space shuttle to ferry Japan’s experiments to the ISS.
In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, just after sunrise, returning its seven-person crew to Earth. The landing marked the conclusion of a successful, 16- day mission, during which the astronauts completed 33 laboratory experiments. The low-cost mission was the first reflight in NASA’s history, concluding the research agenda planned for the April 1997 mission that NASA had terminated as a safety precaution. Although the press coverage of events on Mars and Mir had overshadowed the Columbia crew’s efforts, NASA Mission Manager Teresa B. Vanhooser stated confidently that scientific journals would give the mission due respect.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Returns Full of Research Information,” 17 July 1997.)
NASA announced that planned major modifications of Space Shuttle Atlantis, as well as routine inspections, would take place at the Boeing Company’s facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. United Space Alliance, the company contracted for the maintenance and operation of the Shuttle program, had recommended the changes. According to estimates of the U.S. General Accounting Office, completing the renovations in California, rather than in Florida, would cost NASA an additional US$20 million because of higher labor costs. NASA explained that if the engineers had done the work in Florida, the launch schedule at KSC, along with the need for Atlantis to make a prolonged stay for extensive modifications, would have threatened future Shuttle flights. The changes planned, including rerouting the Shuttle’s fuel lines, involved more than routine maintenance. NASA also pointed out that its most experienced engineers worked at the Palmdale facility, and that workers at the facility had already made similar modifications to Shuttles Discovery and Endeavour. Moreover, NASA maintained that permitting KSC to focus on Shuttle launches and missions would be the most efficient use of its resources. Nevertheless, immediately after the announcement, some observers criticized NASA’s continued use of Boeing’s private facility in preference to that of the government-owned KSC. NASA’s previous intimation that the Palmdale facility would be “mothballed” for Shuttle repair and maintenance intensified critics’ reaction to the announcement.(Seth Borenstein, “Despite Boost in Cost, Atlantis To Get Tuneup in California,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 January 1997; NASA, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Modification Work To Be Performed at Palmdale Facility,” news release 97-11, 16 January 1997; Todd Halvorson, “Atlantis Overhaul To Be Done Out West,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 January 1997.)
U.S. Senator D. Robert “Bob” Graham (D-FL) announced a plan to lease room aboard NASA Space Shuttles and the ISS to private entities, to offset the costs of space exploration. Graham announced his plan during a news conference at a new Cape Canaveral, Florida, air station dedicated to commercial launches. Congress had banned the use of the Shuttle for commercial purposes after the Challenger accident. Some space experts believed that Graham’s plan would take advantage of a strong commercial market for the retrieval of satellites from space. Graham’s plan joined a list of other initiatives of the mid-1990s, designed to merge government and private space interests to ease costs for the federal government.(Seth Borenstein, “Graham: Let’s Make Money in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 December 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
NASA announced that it had rescheduled for July 1997 Space Shuttle Columbia’s Microgravity Science Laboratory (MSL) mission, cut short in early April because of a fuel cell problem. The quick repair and relaunch plan used the same crew and set the same objectives as the initial Mission STS-83. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated, “we are now in the position to do everything possible to complete the MSL mission with minimal impact to downstream flights.” He also pointed out that the attempt to complete the MSL mission provided NASA with a “unique opportunity to demonstrate our ability to respond to challenges.” In its decision to insert Columbia’s Mission STS-83 into an already arranged Shuttle docket, NASA acknowledged that it would have to push back slightly other flights, already staffed and planned.(NASA, “Microgravity Science Laboratory Mission Set for July; Remaining 1997 Shuttle Manifest Adjusted Slightly,” news release 97-81, 25 April 1997; Seth Borenstein, “Space Shuttle Columbia Gets Chance To Finish What It Started,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 18 April 1997.)
Crew aboard Shuttle Columbia successfully released and operated the Autonomous Extra- vehicular Robotic Camera Sprint (AERCam Sprint). The 35-pound (16-kilogram), spherical camera propelled itself around the Shuttle after astronaut Winston E. Scott had released it during a spacewalk. The camera used periodic jet thrusts to maneuver, responding to control commands made from inside Columbia. The US$3 million camera transmitted images of Columbia and its crew back to Earth, providing unique vantage points for observation. The astronauts, who retrieved the small robotic device without any complications, concluded that it would be a helpful technology for future Shuttle missions and the ISS.(Seth Borenstein, “Robot Set for 1st Space Walk in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 1997; Associated Press, “Free-Flying Camera Flits High Above Columbia, Sends Down Video,” 3 December 1997.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia lit more than 200 small fires, testing the flammability of dozens of gases and materials. The experiments took place under the direction of Paul D. Ronney, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Southern California. Ronney explained that the experiments had as much application for Earth as for space. According to Ronney, the weaker the flame in space’s weightless environment, the cleaner its fuel would burn on Earth. The astronauts found that, without the effect of gravity, the flames often formed the shape of a ball and heat did not rise. The experiments created some attention for Mission STS- 94, largely overshadowed by the success of the Pathfinder mission to Mars.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests of Tiny Fires Spur Delight,” 9 July 1997; Wayne Tompkins, “Columbia Crew Ready for Hot Time in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 July 1997.)
Flight International published a story claiming that, more than 10 years after the explosion of Challenger, aerospace engineer Ali Abu Taha had discovered new evidence in Time-Life photographs demonstrating that a breach and a fire in Challenger’s right solid rocket booster (SRB) had caused the explosion. One photograph, taken about 20 seconds after liftoff, revealed a 3-meter-long (10-foot-long) flame issuing from an SRB joint, and another clearly showed a white object separating from the same SRB seconds later. The discovery seemed to support Taha’s controversial theory that the booster had caught fire at liftoff and burned continuously until the explosion occurred. In contrast to Taha's findings, which focused on dynamic liftoff loads, the congressionally mandated Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission) had reported that faulty O-rings caused the tragedy. Automatic cameras set up around the Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch site had taken the photographs that Taha used as evidence for his theory, images never released to the public. Taha’s photographic analysis also revealed that the explosion had propelled Challenger’s crew compartment thousands of meters away from the explosion, partially explaining why investigators had taken 40 days to locate the shell. Taha suggested that a shock wave had killed the crew instantly, although NASA had never found evidence of a shock wave. News of the photographs and of Taha’s research kept alive the debate surrounding the decade-old accident.(Tim Furness, “New Evidence Reveals Fire on Doomed Challenger’s Booster,” Flight International, 5−11 February 1997.)
Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger surprised onlookers at KSC when he bounded off Shuttle Atlantis only minutes after its landing. Physicians credited Linenger’s excellent condition after spending more than four months aboard the Mir space station to his regimen of orbital exercise. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was on hand to greet Linenger and the other astronauts returning home on Atlantis. The Shuttle’s safe landing returned Linenger to Earth after 132 days in space⎯the second longest stint by an American.(Los Angeles Times, “Returning Astronaut Surprises Even Himself; Shuttle: Four Months on Mir Sap Less Strength than Traveler Jerry Linenger Expected. He Credits the Exercising He Did in Orbit,” 25 May 1997.)
Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
