Space Shuttle Discovery undocked from Mir, carrying back to Earth Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, the last of seven U.S. astronauts to live aboard the station, and marking the completion of Phase I of the ISS program. Before closing the hatches, Mir Commander Talgat A. Musabayev presented Shuttle Commander Charles J. Precourt with a huge wrench that had been used in spacewalks and would be flown to the future ISS.(Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Discovery Undocks from Mir, Completes Historic Last Linkup,” 8 June 1998.)
A computer failure aboard Mir partially affected the space station’s solar panels, causing the panel to fail to generate sufficient electricity and requiring the crew to use the Soyuz capsule thrusters for steering. To conserve energy, the crew turned off nonessential equipment, including the air conditioner and lights. Although they replaced the computer with a new one, the crew was unable to load the necessary software. The crew feared the failure might delay Space Shuttle Discovery’s launch to Mir, planned for 2 June.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Cosmonauts Replace Mir Computer,” 31 May 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Mir Space Station Has a New Problem—Computer Failure Causes Solar Panels To Turn from Sun,” Seattle Times (WA), 31 May 1998.)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discovery’s drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, “Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery,” Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-95,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
Astronauts and physicians Jay C. Buckey Jr. and Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams performed the first surgeries ever conducted on living specimens while in orbit. The two doctors injected chemical markers into the hind legs of six of the surviving baby rats to determine the role of gravity in the development of muscles. The crew anesthetized the baby rats before injecting them with the pink florescent chemical, the first time scientists had performed such a procedure in zero-gravity conditions. In addition to studying how muscles and nerves develop in space, the crew studied whether anesthesia really works without the help of gravity, whether patients have more difficulty recovering from anesthesia in space, and how wounds heal in space. Two other astronauts successfully completed “the most difficult medical procedure ever attempted on someone in space.” The astronauts guided tiny needles into the nerves behind their knees, in an experiment aimed at understanding and easing the blood pressure problems and dizziness that astronauts suffer after returning to Earth. An estimated 500,000 Americans experience the same symptoms every day when they stand up. The needle enabled the astronauts to “listen” to electrical impulses, as the brain sent messages to the nerve.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Surgeons Hope Rats Will Survive,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 April 1998; Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Crew Performs First Space Surgery,” 29 April 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 April 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Astronauts Listen to Brain-Nerve Chatter,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 1998.)
Astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas was unable to fit into his Russian-made emergency spacesuit before boarding Mir, but after initial orders that Thomas spend the first night in the Space Shuttle, Mission Control granted him permission to board. The suit was necessary only in case of emergency evacuation aboard Soyuz. Once aboard Mir, Thomas altered his spacesuit, adjusting and removing some straps in the armpit and torso areas. After the alterations, the suit fit exactly as it should, ensuring that Thomas would not have to return to Earth with Endeavour on Thursday.(Steve Marshall, “Mir Spacesuit, Astronaut Prove To Be a Poor Fit,” USA Today, 26 January 1998; Washington Post, “Astronaut Moves into Mir Despite Spacesuit Problem,” 26 January 1998; Washington Times, “Thomas Finally Fits in on Mir: Crucial Alterations Made to Space Suit,” 27 January 1998.)
Returning from the Neurolab mission, Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly, despite a malfunctioning hydraulic unit. Most of Columbia’s 1-hour-long descent relied on two hydraulic units, because the cooling system for the third unit had failed. To prevent the third unit from overheating, the crew turned it on just minutes before landing. After the landing, Mission Control congratulated the Neurolab astronauts on “a historic mission that elevated neuroscience research to record heights.” During the 16-day Neurolab flight, the team had accomplished a number of experiments never before performed in space, including the first direct nerve recordings, the first joint recording of sleep and breathing, the first embalming of animals, and the first surgery on animals. Because only the rodents aboard Columbia were accessible during the flight, astronauts and scientists did not immediately know how the other animals, including fish, snails, and crickets, had fared. A quick inspection after landing, however, “revealed that only 25 of 225 baby swordtail fish survived the mission, a much higher mortality rate than expected.” The baby rats also had a higher mortality rate than expected; 52 of the 96 baby rats had died in orbit after their mothers refused to nurse them. NASA veterinarians had expected a dozen deaths from natural causes. Animal rights groups criticized the experiments.(USA Today, “Scientists To Study Effects on Critters,” 4 May 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Mission’s Data Has Scientists Feeling Antsy: Neurolab Analysis Begins Today,” USA Today, 4 May 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
NASA Launch Integration Manager Donald R. McMonagle announced that Space Shuttle Columbia’s tune-up would take place at the Boeing Company’s facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. NASA Launch Integration and Shuttle operator USA advised Boeing officials “to get ready to map out a plan for Columbia’s work in California.” The announcement, following the recent notification about significant job cuts, was more bad news for KSC officials. NASA officials had proposed in 1996 that KSC handle much of the Shuttle’s maintenance and modification but had decided that the facility was “too busy with launches to handle [S]huttle renovation.” Alan Buis, a Boeing representative, suggested that, because Columbia would be getting “a complicated internal glass cockpit, Palmdale is ‘a logical choice’.”(Seth Borenstein, “California Plant Gets Shuttle Work Again,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 January 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
Ending one of NASA’s “most successful and historic missions” with a rare night landing, Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after its weeklong linkup with the new ISS. Before departing the ISS on 13 December, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow flew around the station slowly, while the crew photographed the ISS, permitting ground controllers to see the station for the first time. NASA’s Deputy Station Chief Frank L. Culbertson Jr. remarked that the mission was as historically significant as that of Apollo 8, the first piloted mission to the Moon, and that the hardware of ISS was the foundation of “what will put humanity in space forever.”(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup”; United Press International, “Shuttle Lands in Florida,” 15 December 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-88,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-88.html.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs,” 22 January 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martin–built Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASA’s Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Rocket Explosion,” 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, “Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite,” Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
NASA astronauts presented four employees of Boeing Reusable Space Systems with the Silver Snoopy, one of the most prestigious honors available to people working on NASA’s Space Shuttle program. Mark Brewer of the orbiter electrical-avionics team, Jeffrey Lewis of the mid- module-major assembly team, Michael Argent of the external-tank, umbilical and payload latch- assembly programs, and Larry Echaves of the configuration-management team each received a letter of commendation, a poster, a certificate, and a Silver Snoopy pin that had flown in space.(Romy Jacobson, “Hailing the Right Stuff; NASA Honors Boeing Workers,” Los Angeles Daily News, 20 May 1998.)
The Alabama Engineering Hall of Fame inducted into its roll of honors James B. Odom, an engineer at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) who had served NASA for 33 years in the International Space Station, Space Shuttle, and HST programs. The Hall of Fame also honored Marshall’s X-ray Calibration Facility, which had tested and calibrated x-ray telescopes since the 1970s. MSFC’s X-ray Calibration Facility supported the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility in achieving a resolving power 10 times greater than any previous x-ray telescope.(Huntsville Times (AL), “MSFC Facility, Ex-official To Be Lauded,” 21 February 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery encountered its first malfunction during Mission STS-91, when the KU- band system failed to switch on after Discovery’s crew deployed its antenna upon reaching orbit. The KU-band downlink carries broadcasts with a high rate of data. The system failure prevented the Shuttle crew from sending televised images or high rates of information to Mission Control. This problem had never occurred before. NASA spokesperson James Hartsfield stated that it was unclear whether the trouble originated with the antenna, transmitter, or other associated equipment. Hartsfield also mentioned that the failure would “prevent immediate analysis of data from the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer.” The S-band antennas worked normally, and the crew was able to talk with ground controllers as usual.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91”; Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Shuttle Soars Toward Final Mir Docking, but Antenna Won’t Send TV Signals,” 3 June 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Lightweight Tank Perfect on First Flight; KU-Band a Problem,” 4 June 1998.)
After problems with one of two network-signal processors caused a 24-hour delay, Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-90) blasted off on the Shuttle program’s final Neurolab mission, carrying 26 experiments for basic research in neurosciences to “expand understanding of how the nervous system develops and functions in space.” Test subjects aboard the Shuttle included crew members, rats, mice, crickets, snails, and two kinds of fish. The Neurolab mission was the joint effort of NASA, several U.S. partners, the space agencies of Canada, France, and Germany, the ESA, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan. Crew members included Commander Richard A. Searfoss; Pilot Scott D. Altman; Mission Specialists Richard M. Linnehan, Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams, and Kathryn P. Hire; and Payload Specialists Jay C. Buckey Jr. and James A. Pawelczyk. Mission Specialist Hire was the first KSC employee that NASA had selected as an astronaut candidate. Mission STS-90 was Columbia’s 25th flight.(NASA, “Neurolab Shuttle Mission To Launch April 16,” news release N98-25, 3 April 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-90,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-90.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA planned to reserve an additional US$750 million of federal funds over the next two years, enabling Lockheed Martin to continue work on a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Lockheed Martin and NASA had signed an agreement in 1996 to develop the X-33 suborbital test craft. At that time, the federal government had pledged to dedicate US$900 million to develop the craft and fund 15 suborbital test flights, beginning in the spring of 1999. Goldin explained that if the test program exceeded the original ceiling of US$900 million, the US$750 million funding pool would be available, beginning in the year 2000, to develop the X-33 replacement vehicle.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, "More NASA Money for Shuttle Replacement,” 3 February 1998.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, opened a new Collaborative Engineering Center equipped with virtual reality, teleconferencing, and cutting-edge technology. Using a combination of a joystick and computerized voice commands, engineers could control the three-dimensional, virtual space station, which included a docking Space Shuttle orbiter.(Akweli Parker, “NASA Reshaping the Way It Works,” Virginian-Pilot (Norfolk, VA), 16 January 1998.)
NASA announced the selection of veteran cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev for the crew of Mission STS-88, the first American ISS assembly mission. In December 1998, Krikalev would join aboard Endeavour Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, and James H. Newman. NASA had assigned Mission STS-88 the task of attaching the U.S.-built Unity module to the Russian-built Zarya control module, scheduled to launch in November 1998. Krikalev had been a member of two Mir space station crews and had flown aboard the Space Shuttle as a member of the Mission STS-60 crew in February 1994. During Mission STS-60, Krikalev had operated the robotic arm and supported a variety of experiments in materials science.(NASA, “Future Space Station Resident Joins Assembly Crew,” news release 98-137, 30 July 1998.)
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 41⁄2 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, “NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday,” 3 December 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2 p.m. (EDT), returning the U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, to Earth after four and one- half months in space. Thomas, unlike some of his predecessors, took the medical advice typically given to astronauts returning from a lengthy stay in space and allowed medical personnel to carry him off the Shuttle, rather than attempting to walk on his own.(Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Space Shuttle Returns with Last Mir Astronaut,” 12 June 1998.)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The study’s principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenn’s Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenn’s crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenn’s disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, “Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight,” New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
The contractor operating the Space Shuttle program, United Space Alliance (USA), announced that it would cut 500 jobs at KSC by 30 January, to reduce total workforce by 10 percent. The announcement raised concerns in Congress about Shuttle safety.(Robyn Suriano, “500 KSC Layoffs Jan. 30 Expected: Budget Shortfall Will Reduce Work Force 10 Percent,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1998; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Latest Round of KSC Layoffs Needs Congressional Scrutiny,” 15 January 1998.)
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery attempted, but failed, to fix the spacecraft’s high- speed data-transmission system. NASA believed the source of the problem was in an electronics box in the cargo bay, but stated that only a spacewalk would enable the crew to reach the box. NASA Mission Operations representative Robert E. Castle Jr. remarked that, even with a spacewalk, the astronauts would probably not be able to repair the malfunction. Because of the lack of the high-speed data transmission system, scientists could not view the data that the AMS had collected. Although the Shuttle had stored the data on board, NASA was unable to determine whether the data was useful, or whether the instrument’s adjustment was correct.(Marcia Dunn, “Discover Astronauts Unable To Fix Communications Link,” Buffalo News (NY), 6 June 1998. 505 Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Unable To Spot Mir Hull Breach,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Test Fails To Find Leaks in Mir,” Seattle Times (WA), 7 June 1998.)
Research scientists working on a US$33 million experiment to search for antimatter in space, spoke at a news conference, announcing that the communication-system breakdown on Space Shuttle Discovery had ruined their tests. The astronauts had been unable to repair Discovery’s main antenna system, which had broken shortly after launch, rendering the Shuttle unable to transmit high-speed data or video back to Earth. Scientists working on the project needed continuous, high-speed data to calibrate the AMS, which was searching space for rare subatomic particles known as antimatter. However, using a patchwork system, they had only been able to receive a few minutes of data each hour, which meant that, although they could see that the AMS was working, the spectrometer was not providing them with enough data to fine tune the magnet. According to Project Manager James Bates, the scientists had failed to accomplish their objectives because of the malfunction.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Physics Testing Thwarted; A Glitch Has Undermined an Antimatter Experiment,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 June 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-95 launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr.; Pilot Steven W. Lindsey; Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Stephen K. Robinson, and Pedro Duque; and Payload Specialists Chiaki Mukai and John H. Glenn Jr. The primary objectives of STS-95 included conveying a variety of science experiments inside the SPACEHAB module; deploying and retrieving the Spartan free-flyer payload; performing operations with the HST Orbiting Systems Test; and transporting the International Extreme Ultraviolet Hitchhiker payloads. The historic mission also returned veteran astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. to space. Thirty-six years after Glenn had first orbited Earth, the seventy-seven-year-old astronaut became the oldest person to fly in orbit. As a veteran of NASA’s early Mercury program, Glenn had been the first American to orbit Earth. On 20 February 1962, in a flight lasting 5 hours, Glenn had orbited Earth three times in a tiny capsule. After he had passed a battery of medical tests and participated in astronaut training, NASA had selected U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. as a crew member of STS-95, so that scientists could study “how space travel affects an aging astronaut’s body.”(Bill Sammon, “Senator Upholds Status as Hero with His Return to Orbit,” Washington Times, 30 October 1998; John Noble Wilford, “Pioneer Returns as Crewman in the Shuttle,” New York Times, 29 October 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-95, John Glenn’s Flight; SPACEHAB,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-95.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour Mission STS-89 successfully launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite forecasted thunderstorms. The crew of STS-89 included Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Joe F. Edwards Jr., Payload Commander Bonnie J. Dunbar, and Mission Specialists Michael P. Anderson, James F. Reilly, Salizhan S. Sharipov, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, who would replace David A. Wolf on Mir. This was the eighth Shuttle–Mir docking, but the first for an orbiter other than Atlantis and the first overseen by Launch Director David A. King. NASA had appointed two new rotational launch directors, David A. King and Ralph R. Roe Jr., following the retirement of veteran Launch Director James F. Harrington III.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts,” 23 January 1998; Seth Borenstein, “Weather May Keep Endeavour on Ground,” Huntsville Times (AL), 21 January 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-89,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-89.html (accessed 11 June 2007); NASA Kennedy Space Center, “KSC Launch Director Harrington To Retire; Successors Named,” news release 223-97, 17 December 1997, http://www- pao.ksc.nasa.gov/kscpao/release/1997/223-97.htm (accessed 5 August 2008).)
402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.” Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, “Space Station Accord Signed,” 30 January 1998; Associated Press, “Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station,” 29 January 1998; NASA, “Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington,” news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
Elizabeth H. Moore, Head of the Art and Archaeology Department of the School of Oriental and African Studies, the University of London, and Anthony Freeman, a radar scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), discussed new radar imagery of Angkor, Cambodia, during a press briefing at JPL. The researchers announced that the Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar (AIRSAR), developed by JPL to produce radar maps, had helped them to detect and locate a distribution of prehistoric mounds and undocumented temples to the northwest of Angkor. The three-dimensional maps, created using radar interferometry, revealed evidence of temples and earlier civilization that were absent or incorrectly marked on modern topographic maps and early twentieth-century archaeological reports. These discoveries brought into question long-standing ideas about the urban evolution of Angkor. The 1996 AIRSAR Pacific Rim Deployment on board a NASA DC-8 jet was a follow-up to a 1994 study of Angkor that used Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR) on board Space Shuttle Endeavour during Mission STS-59, producing the radar images used to create the three- dimensional maps. Unlike SIR-C/X-SAR, AIRSAR had P-band with a longer wavelength, able to penetrate the forest canopy. AIRSAR also flew in a mode that allowed it to measure topography and create three-dimensional images of the surface.(NASA, “New Insights into Ancient Angkor by NASA Radar To Be Subject of Press Briefing,” news release N98-11, 5 February 1998; NASA, “NASA Radar Reveals Hidden Remains at Ancient Angkor,” news release 98-28, 12 February 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Unseen Angkor,” 12 February 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery successfully retrieved the Spartan spacecraft, thus completing a priority project of the nine-day mission. The crew had deployed the satellite on 1 November, to record observations of the Sun’s outer atmosphere and the solar wind. Spartan had lagged 40 miles (64 kilometers) behind the Shuttle, in free flight, as it recorded the data. The flight was the last in a series of four flights begun in 1993 to “gather observations at different points in the [S]un’s 11-year cycle of magnetic activity.” NASA had originally scheduled the mission for November 1997, but astronauts had “failed to send a crucial command” before releasing the satellite, so Spartan had gathered no data. The crew had also tested an experimental laser range-finding device mounted in the Shuttle, aiming at targets on Spartan.(Washington Times, “Glenn Reports No Space Sickness as Discovery Releases Sun Gazer,” 2 November 1998; Washington Times, “Astronauts Snag Sun Observer To Complete a Primary Mission: Glenn, 77, Undergoes More Tests of His Response to Space,” 4 November 1998; New York Times, “Shuttle Easily Regains Satellite, and Photos,” 4 November 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
