NASA announced it had completed negotiations on a US$625.6 million contract with Lockheed Martin Michoud Space Systems to purchase the last set of materials required to build 60 new Space Shuttle external fuel tanks. Although it was the sixth and last in a series of purchases of fuel tanks, this was the first purchase NASA had made consisting entirely of super lightweight tanks. The tank’s design was the same as that of the lightweight tank design NASA had previously used, but the new tanks were 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) lighter, and used a new aluminum lithium alloy. NASA and industry partners had developed the lighter alloy, 30 percent stronger than the material used to manufacture the lightweight tank, to enable the Shuttle to deliver ISS components into the proper orbit.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “NASA Completes Purchase of Material for 60 Shuttle External Tanks,” news releases 99-069, 28 April 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-069.html (accessed 5 February 2008).)
NASA’s Inspector General Roberta L. Gross published findings and recommendations on behalf of NASA’s Office of Inspector General, regarding Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr.’s proposed Triana satellite project, named for Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Christopher Columbus’s 1492 voyage who had first spotted North America. The Triana project would call on NASA to provide “continuous, satellite-generated images of the Earth for posting on the Internet.” Gross suggested that it was “ill-advised for the financially strapped [A]gency to fund a new system to collect pictures of Earth when many images” were already widely available. Gross said the Triana project would cost four times as much as the Vice President’s US$50 million estimate, noting that NASA had already spent US$41 million on the project, even though Congress had not yet endorsed it. She criticized NASA for “pressing forward with the project without fully assessing the scientific value of photographing the Earth.” NASA had scheduled the satellite for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in December 2000.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “Assessment of the Triana Mission” (final report no. G-99-013, Washington, DC, 10 September 1999), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-99-013.pdf (accessed 3 March 2008); Steve Lash, “Gore’s Pet Project Not Worth Its Cost, NASA Auditor Says,” Houston Chronicle, 17 September 1999. 784 Greg Schneider, “AlliedSignal Technical Gets a New President; Adamson Is Former Astronaut, Shuttle Executive, Engineer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 21 September 1999; NASA Johnson Space Center, “Biographical Data: James C. Adamson,” http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/adamson-jc.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
NASA announced its decision to ground the entire Space Shuttle fleet while technicians continued detailed inspections of the fleet’s wiring. During the first month of inspections, following the discovery that faulty wiring had caused a short circuit during Columbia’s 23 July launch, technicians had located dozens of nicked or exposed wires. Shuttle managers had decided to extend the inspections to allow technicians to examine additional parts of each Shuttle. Technicians had replaced damaged wiring, encased some wires in plastic tubing, added Teflon wrapping to others, and replaced some connectors, to protect the wiring systems against future damage. Manager of the Space Shuttle Program Ronald D. Dittemore explained that the wiring problems “appeared to have been caused by work-related mechanical damage”⎯from being rubbed or stepped on or from having “heavy objects set down on them.” The age of the wiring, normal wear, or vibrations from Shuttle operations did not appear to have caused the damage.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded by Damage to Wiring,” New York Times, 4 September 1999. 219)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the “spacecraft ground and flight control at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland].” In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASA’s four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a “long-overdue tune-up.” The orbiter’s overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbia’s fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tuneup,” 25 September 1999.)
NASA announced that it had completed negotiations for a contract worth up to US$1.73 billion, to purchase 73 Space Shuttle reusable solid rocket motors from the Thiokol Propulsion company. Each Shuttle flight used two of these motors as the primary component of the Shuttle solid rocket boosters, providing 6.6 million pounds (2.9 million kilograms) of thrust, 71.4 percent of the thrust needed for liftoff. The contract covered the manufacture and delivery of the new motor components through September 2004, as well as postflight review of the last motors flown through 2005.(NASA, “NASA, Thiokol Complete $1.7 Billion Shuttle Motor Agreement,” news release c99-c, 24 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/1999/c99-c.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
Although crosswinds caused a late touchdown, Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely after its eight-day servicing mission to HST. NASA managers had instructed Discovery to fly an extra orbit before landing, while Mission Control monitored the weather on the ground. NASA had shortened the mission to eight days from the scheduled 10 because of numerous launch delays, and because Discovery must return to Earth before New Year’s Eve to avoid potential Y2K computer problems.(Washington Times, “Shuttle Back on Earth after Hubble Repairs,” 28 December 1999; Robyn Suriano, “‘Welcome Back to Earth’, Discovery: Shuttle Astronauts Come in for Late but Safe Landing,” USA Today, 28 December 1999.)
NASA announced that, after Space Shuttle Columbia’s return to Earth on the night of 27 July, engineers had found “three little holes” in its right engine nozzle, confirming that the Shuttle had leaked hydrogen fuel during liftoff. The holes, 0.25 inches (0.64 centimeters) in size, had caused the craft to lose up to 5 pounds (2.3 kilograms) of fuel during each second of its 81⁄2-minute climb to orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Confirms Hydrogen Leak in Columbia Shuttle,” 29 July 1999.)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
Commander Eileen M. Collins became the first woman to “land a spaceship of any kind, anywhere,” when she guided Space Shuttle Columbia to a safe late night landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, the 12th nighttime touchdown in the Shuttle program’s 95-flight history. A few hours after the landing, NASA confirmed that hydrogen fuel had leaked from one of the craft’s main engines during liftoff on 23 July. Columbia’s mission, lasting just five days, was the shortest planned flight in nine years.(Atlanta Journal (GA), “Shuttle Columbia: Woman Commander Kept Cool During Snafus,” 28 July 1999; Los Angeles Times, “1st Shuttle Led by Woman Lands Safely in Florida,” 28 July 1999.)
After two delays, Space Shuttle Columbia launched on Mission STS-93 from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, under the command of Eileen M. Collins, NASA’s first female Shuttle commander in 38 years of human spaceflight. Commander Collins’s crew comprised Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby and Mission Specialists Steven A. Hawley, Catherine G. Coleman, and Michel Tognini. Columbia carried on board the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, previously known as the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as well as secondary payloads and experiments⎯the Southwest Ultraviolet Imaging System to capture ultraviolet imagery of the Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter; plant growth experiments; biological cell-culture studies; and the Treadmill Vibration Information System and High Definition Television System, which the crew planned to test. NASA had scrubbed both of the Shuttle’s earlier launch attempts late in the countdown, halting the 20 July launch 6 seconds before blastoff because of a technical malfunction and the 22 July launch because of stormy weather. The U.S. Air Force and the Boeing Company postponed a commercial launch to permit NASA a third chance to deliver Chandra into orbit. However, the Shuttle continued to have problems. During the 8-minute climb into outer space, a 0.5-second-long short circuit shut down computers controlling two of the Shuttle’s three main engines. Furthermore, Columbia was 4,000 pounds (1,800 kilograms) short of liquid oxygen fuel in its external fuel tank, leaving the craft in orbit 7 miles (11 kilometers) lower than planned. Fuel carried aboard the orbiter made up the shortfall. Seven hours into the flight, the crew deployed Chandra into orbit, accomplishing its primary mission.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts Off with Woman in Command,” 23 July 1999; Brad Liston for Reuters, “Shuttle Roars into History After Launch Problems,” 23 July 1999; Beth Dickey, “After Hiccup at Liftoff, Shuttle Puts Telescope into Space,” New York Times, 25 July 1999; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-93, Chandra X-ray Observatory,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-93.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
New York Governor George E. Pataki awarded NASA astronaut Eileen M. Collins of Elmira, New York, the state’s highest award, the Jackie Robinson Empire State Freedom Medal, for her achievement as the first female Space Shuttle Commander. Collins had been Commander of the historic Mission STS-93. During that mission, she and her crew had deployed the Chandra X- ray Observatory, the heaviest, largest, and most powerful x-ray telescope ever launched into space. Governor Pataki described Collins as “a bold pioneer of the reaches of space” and remarked that “her talent, intelligence and courage set an example that every woman and every man can hope to duplicate in their lives.” Every year New York presents the Empire State Freedom Medal, established in 1997, to “those who best demonstrate the qualities of determination, dignity, fairness, and honor that were exemplified by Jackie Robinson, who broke major league baseball’s color barrier.”(NASA, “First Female Shuttle Commander Eileen Collins Receives Jackie Robinson Medal,” news release 99- 125, 27 October 1999.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, “Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit,” news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, “Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission,” 9 February 1999.)
After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discovery’s crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-François Clervoy.
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, “Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails,” news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Hubble Trouble,” 15 November 1999.)
At the 14th Annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented the George M. Low Award, NASA’s highest honor for quality and technical performance, to four U.S. companies: 1) Barrios Technology Inc. of Houston, Texas, for its small-business product; 2) Kay and Associates of Edwards, California, for small-business service; 3) Raytheon Support Services Company of Annapolis Junction, Maryland, for the large-business service category; and, 4) Thiokol Space Operations of Brigham City, Utah, for the large-business product category. NASA had evaluated the recipients for performance, delivery according to agreed cost and schedule, innovation, management leadership, alignment of organizational goals with NASA’s strategic plans, customer orientation, and adherence to the Total Quality Management philosophy. Thiokol Corporation, which had won the Low Award in 1991 and Marshall Space Flight Center’s Contractor Excellence Award in March 1999, had manufactured the reusable solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, as well as providing launch support and refurbishment services for the motor. Over the past seven years, Thiokol had never delayed its delivery of hardware. Its cost reduction efforts had saved NASA US$152 million.(NASA, “Four Aerospace Firms Win NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release 99-53, 22 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-053.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); Cordant Technologies Inc., “Thiokol Propulsion Wins NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release, 3 May 1999.)
Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts captured the HST using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Discovery had to alter its approach to the space telescope, because the telescope’s failed gyroscopes had “left the telescope a little shaky,” but Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and his crew had prepared for such a scenario. A fully operational HST would have had its aft pointed at the center of Earth; Brown would have carried out a straightforward approach, rising up from below until the robotic arm simply locked on. Without its gyroscopes functioning, the HST slowly rotated at one revolution per hour. Therefore, controllers activated backup gyroscopes to eliminate the rotation as much as possible, permitting Brown to fly around the HST and properly position the Shuttle’s robotic arm. As both spacecraft traveled around the Earth at 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour with Brown at the controls, Discovery moved closer to the HST until French astronaut Jean-François Clervoy had removed the 43-foot (13-meter), 25,000-pound (11,300-kilogram) telescope from orbit and anchored it in the Shuttle cargo bay.(Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Capture Hubble Telescope for Repairs,” Washington Times, 22 December 1999; William Harwood, “Discovery Catches Up with Hubble for a Service Call in Space,” Washington Post, 22 December 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
