NASA announced that it would delay Shuttle Missions STS-104 and STS-105 for several weeks because of a series of computer problems on the ISS. The computer difficulties had limited the control of the new robotic arm delivered to the ISS in April 2001. Despite the efforts of the astronauts aboard the ISS and of hundreds of experts on the ground, the malfunctions had continued to render control of the Canadian-built robotic arm impossible. NASA officials had determined that, until the situation was resolved, NASA would have to delay an Atlantis mission, scheduled for 20 June, and a Discovery mission, scheduled for 12 July, both carrying cargo that the arm must move. The delay also meant that the ISS crewYury V. Usachev, James S. Voss, and Susan J. Helmswould remain aboard ISS longer than originally planned.(Warren E. Leary, “Problems with Space Station’s Robotic Arm Delay Shuttle Visits,” New York Times, 1 June 2001; Mark Carreau, “Glitch Postpones 2 Space Station Missions,” Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2001.)
Lockheed Martin confirmed that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) had decided not to fund the company’s development of the X-33 space plane, a possible replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Since 1996, Lockheed Martin had been developing a pilotless prototype of the X- 33, a reusable spacecraft that would be able to launch without shedding fuel tanks or boosters and to land like an airplane. However, the development of lightweight fuel tanks had taken the project off schedule and over budget, and NASA had decided in March 2001 to forego continued funding for the X-33, although it was, reportedly, 75 percent complete. When Lockheed Martin had subsequently attempted to secure another government sponsor for the project, the U.S. Air Force had expressed interest in the project and submitted to the Pentagon a proposal to fund the space plane. However, the DOD had since determined that the project was too costly to undertake.(Michael Cabbage, “Air Force Decides Not To Revive Lockheed’s X-33 Space Plane,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
NASA announced that it had canceled the X-33 rocket development project, an endeavor that many in the space industry had hoped would produce a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. NASA ended the five-year program after having invested nearly US$1 billion in developing a reusable launching vehicle. The X-33 program, contracted to Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company, had sought to build the world’s most technologically advanced space vehicleshaped like an arrowhead and protected by a heat-resistant metallic covering. Because of its capability to ascend to space without having to drop weight by discarding boosters after launch, the new vehicle would have significantly improved on the Shuttle. NASA officials had hoped that the X- 33 would lead to development of the VentureStar vehicle, for transporting people and cargo into space. Operating at considerably less expense to NASA than the Space Shuttles, the VentureStar would permit more space missions per year. NASA’s decision to cut funding for the X-33 was part of its general effort to reduce its budget. NASA officials in charge of the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) had determined that, although the X-33 program had yielded significant new knowledge, it had not advanced to a point at which NASA engineers could readily implement the new technology. Arthur G. Stephenson, the Director of NASA’s MSFC, which had managed the program, called the decision to deny further funding “a very tough decision.”(NASA, “NASA Reaches Milestone in Space Launch Initiative Program; Also Announces No SLI Funding for X- 33 or X-34,” news release 01-31, 1 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Ends Project on Rocket Meant To Replace Space Shuttle,” New York Times, 2 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Kills $1.3 Billion Space Plane Project,” Washington Post, 2 March 2001; Los Angeles Times, “NASA Ends X-33 Project that Sought To Cut Spaceflight Costs,” 2 March 2001.)
NASA announced the selection of two missions as part of its Discovery Program, which had as its objective low-cost, highly focused scientific missions using innovative methods to enhance scientific understanding of the solar system. One of the missions NASA had selected was Dawn, a spacecraft that would orbit the solar system’s two largest asteroids, Vesta and Ceresto, to help scientists understand early planetary formation in the solar system. The other mission, Kepler, was a space-based telescope that would search for Earth-like planets outside of the solar system, to help scientists learn more about planetary formation and the possibility of life on other planets. NASA had selected the missions―both scheduled to launch in 2006―from a pool of 26 proposals made earlier in 2001.(NASA, “NASA Selects Missions To Explore Two Large Asteroids and Search for Earth-Like Planets,” news release 01-254, 21 December 2001; NASA Discovery Program, “Discovery Mission: Kepler,” http://discovery.nasa.gov/kepler.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
After a one-day delay because of rain, Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-104 landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, having completed its mission successfully. The crew had installed a new hatch, allowing spacewalkers easier access in and out of the ISS. Officially called the ISS Airlock and also known as the Joint Airlock, the new pressurized unit gave ISS spacewalkers a portal that oxygen-nitrogen tanks could quickly pressurize. NASA planned for all future spacewalks on ISS to begin and end at the new site. In addition to installing the airlock, Atlantis’s crew delivered to the ISS the EarthKAM, a new camera that U.S. high school and middle school students could direct from the ground, enabling them to take pictures of some 2,000 points of interest on Earth, thus, participating in ISS research.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573; Washington Post, “Shuttle Lands After Extra Day in Space,” 25 July 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 12:55 p.m. (EST), bringing to an end Mission STS-108. During the mission, Endeavour had transported crew members of Expedition 4 to the ISS to begin their residency on the orbiting space station and had returned to Earth the Expedition 3 crew members, ending their 117-day stay aboard the ISS. In addition, astronauts Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani had completed numerous tasks during a 4-hour spacewalk, including installation of insulation on mechanisms that rotated the station’s main solar arrays. The crews of Endeavour and the ISS had collectively transferred more than 5,000 pounds (2,270 kilograms) of crew provisions, experiments, and other supplies to the ISS from Endeavour’s mid-deck and from the Raffaello MPLM. The mission’s total duration had been 11 days, 19 hours, and 55 minutes.(NASA KSC, “Space Shuttle, Mission Archives: STS-108,” http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-108/UF-1 launched at 5:19 p.m. Eastern Standard Time (EST) from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew members were Commander Dominic L. Gorie, Pilot Mark E. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani; and ISS Expedition 4 crew members, Daniel W. Bursch, Carl E. Walz, and Yuri I. Onufrienko. One of the main objectives of the mission was to transport the Expedition 4 crew to the ISS and return Expedition 3 crew members to Earth. Another mission objective was to transport approximately 3 tons (2.7 tonnes or 2,700 kilograms) of supplies to the ISS. Much of the payload was contained in an Italian-built Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) called Raffaello. In addition, Endeavour carried a host of scientific payloads, including some experiments created by schools and universities in the United States and numerous other countries.(NASA KSC, “STS-108 (107),” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-108/mission-sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008); NASA KSC, “Space Shuttle, Mission Archives: STS-108,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008). 156 NASA, “It’s About TIMED: NASA Spacecraft Will Use Lofty Perch To Study Gateway to Space,” news release 01-226, 19 November 2001; Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, “TIMED: A Mission To Explore One of the Last Frontiers in Earth’s Atmosphere: Mission,” http://www.timed.jhuapl.edu/WWW/mission/mission.php (accessed 6 January 2009).)
John F. Yardley, who had worked at the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation, serving as the Launch Operation Manager for the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft and the Technical Director for the Gemini program before joining NASA in 1974, died at the age of 76. NASA had awarded Yardley its Public Service Medal in 1963 and in 1966 for his work on the Mercury and the Gemini. From 1981 to 1989, Yardley had been President of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Yardley “as responsible as any individual for getting the Space Shuttle Program off the ground.(NASA, “John F. Yardley, Human Space Flight Pioneer, Dies,” news release 01-130, 27 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “John Yardley, 76, Dies; Had Central Role in Space Flight,” New York Times, 28 June 2001.)
Cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS to clear an obstruction that had prevented the pilotless Progress Russian supply ship from docking securely to the space station. The crew believed that the obstruction was a rubber seal from a supply ship that had left the ISS on 22 November. NASA had delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour for five days because of concern that Endeavour’s arrival at the space station could cause the insecurely docked supply ship to wobble, possibly damaging the ISS. However, Dezhurov and Tyurin were able to remove the obstruction during their 3-hour spacewalk, thereby clearing the way for Endeavour to launch on 5 December.(Warren E. Leary, “Endeavour Is Set for Launching After Docking Problem Is Solved,” New York Times, 4 December 2001; Los Angeles Times, “With Space Debris Cleared, Shuttle Launch Set,” 4 December 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canada’s contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISS’s exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crew―Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakov―included astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttle’s fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, “Endeavour’s International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand,” news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, “Endeavour’s Mission Will Extend Space Station’s Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19,” news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, to honor the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks, NASA would carry American flags into space and give the flags to survivors of the attacks and families of the victims. NASA called the memorial to the people who had lost their lives in the events of 11 September “Flags for Heroes and Families.” Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to launch on 29 November 2001, would carry nearly 6,000 flags. NASA would later have the flags mounted on specially designed memorial certificates and would distribute them to survivors and to victims’ families.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Launches ‘Flags for Heroes and Families’ Campaign,” news release 01-195, 11 October 2001.)
Engineers at NASA’s KSC completed the installation of a new main engine for Space Shuttle Atlantis. Modifications of previous engine designs included a new high-pressure fuel turbopump, strengthened and made more durable by a casting process, rather than by welding. During the roughly 81⁄2 minutes that the engines operate during a Shuttle launch, they must perform at temperatures reaching 6,000°F (3,300°C). The improvements continued NASA’s practice of regularly updating the Shuttle’s components.(NASA, “New Main Engine Promises Even Safer Shuttle Ride,” news release 01-79, 26 April 2001.)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the world’s leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the company’s missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Society’s Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, “Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist,” Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, “International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
NASA launched Space Shuttle Discovery STS-105/ISS-7A.1 at 4:10 p.m. Central Daylight Time (CDT). Shuttle crew consisted of Mission Commander Scott J. Horowitz, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, Mission Specialists Daniel T. Barr and Patrick G. Forrester; and Expedition 3 crew members, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., Vladimir N. Dezhurov, and Mikhail Tyurin. One of the main purposes of the mission was to transport the Expedition 3 crew to the ISS, returning Expedition 2 crew members to Earth. Another objective was to use an Italian-built, 9,000-pound (4,100-kilogram) Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) called Leonardo to deliver supplies to the ISS. Leonardo would deliver six resupply stowage racks, four resupply stowage platforms, and two scientific experiment racks for the station’s laboratory. Discovery’s payload also included NASA’s scientific project, the Materials International Space Station Experiments (MISSE).(NASA, “STS-105: A New Crew Arrives at the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts-105/ (accessed 7 November 2008); NASA KSC, “STS-105,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-105/mission-sts-105.html (accessed 7 November 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1―comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richards―launched from NASA’s KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2―Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms―would replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttle’s 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a “moving van” for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, “Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew,” news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station,” New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew,” 8 March 2001; Reuters, “USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission,” 8 March 2001.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space held a hearing on safety and workforce issues related to NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. According to newspaper reports, much of the testimony addressed the effects of budget cuts on the safety improvements for the Space Shuttles. Subcommittee members and witnesses reportedly were critical of the budget cuts and concerned about their possibly detrimental effects on Shuttle safety. Individuals providing testimony at the hearing were NASA Deputy Associate Administrator William F. Readdy, Allen Li of the General Accounting Office (GAO), Michael James McCulley of United Space Alliance, Richard D. Blomberg, chair of the ASAP, and Bryan D. O’Connor, former chair of the NRC’s Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Shuttle Safety, 107th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2001; Tamara Lytle, “Experts Fear for Shuttle Safety as NASA Budget Is Trimmed,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, returning to Earth the crew of Expedition 1―Commander William M. Shepherd, Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, and Soyuz Commander Yuri P. Gidzenko. The Expedition 1 crew had lived and worked aboard the ISS since 31 October 2000. Commander James D. Wetherbee and Pilot James M. Kelly guided Discovery to a smooth night landing, the 17th night landing in the history of the Space Shuttle program and the 12th in the history of KSC.(NASA JSC, “STS-102, Mission Control Center Status Report # 27,” 21 March 2001, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts102/STS-102-27.html (accessed 2 February 2009).)
The government of France named NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin as Officer of the Legion of Honor, the country’s highest award. Napoleon had created the Legion of Honor in 1802 to honor civil and military service to France. The award honored Goldin for his contribution to the cooperation of France and the United States in space endeavors. NASA and the French space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales, had collaborated on Earth observation and Mars exploration, and French astronauts had flown on the Space Shuttle. Ambassador François Bujon de l’Éstang presented the award to Goldin at the residence of the French Ambassador.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Receives French Legion of Honor Award,” news release 01-202, 31 October 2001.)
Crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour and the ISS held a brief ceremony to mark the three-month anniversary of the 11 September terrorist attacks. The tribute included playing both the Russian and U.S. national anthems in the Space Shuttle and at ISS Mission Control Centers at NASA’s JSC in Houston. Moreover, Endeavour carried U.S. flags and Marine Corps flags that had flown at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the Pennsylvania State Capitol; shields and patches worn by New York City police officers; a New York Fire Department flag; and a poster with pictures of the firefighters who had died in the attacks. Also aboard the Shuttle were 6,000 American flags, which Endeavour would return to Earth, and NASA would distribute to the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks and their families.(NASA, “Shuttle, Station Crewmembers To Honor September 11 Victims,” news release N01-74, 10 December 2001.)
NASA announced the selection of crew members for three missions to the ISS scheduled for 2002. Mission STS-112, scheduled for launch in July 2002, would comprise Commander Jeffrey S. Ashby and crew members Sandra H. Magnus, Pamela A. Melroy, Piers J. Sellers, David A. Wolf, and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. The crew for STS-113, scheduled to depart in August 2002, would consist of Commander James D. Wetherbee and crew members John Bennett Herrington, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Christopher J. Loria. The mission would also transport Expedition 6 crew members Valery G. Korzun, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson to the ISS, returning to Earth Expedition 5 crew members Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, and Donald A. Thomas. Finally, the crew of STS-114 would include Commander Eileen M. Collins and crew members James M. Kelly, Soichi Noguchi, and Stephen K. Robinson. STS-114, scheduled to leave for the ISS in November 2002, would transport Expedition 7 crew members Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, and Sergei I. Moschenko.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names 23 Astronauts and Cosmonauts to Shuttle Flights in 2002,” news release H01-167, 17 August 2001.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis accomplished the primary objective of Mission STS- 104, successfully installing the Joint Airlock on the ISS. The crew used the space station’s massive, Canadian-made robotic arm, which had not operated properly for several months, to hoist the enormous entryway out of the Shuttle’s cargo bay and to move it into position for installation. Astronaut Susan J. Helms commanded the robotic arm, while spacewalking astronauts Michael L. Gernhardt and James F. Reilly helped line up the hatch for its final installation. The robotic arm successfully accomplished its first construction task, drawing applause from NASA’s Mission Control, as did the opening of the US$164 million Joint Airlock. Although the ISS Partnership planned improvements and additions to the space station far into the future, the mission marked the end of a major stage of assembly for the ISS.(New York Times, “2nd Entry Installed on Space Station,” 16 July 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California after three days of bad weather had prevented its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew received a congratulatory call from President George W. Bush, praising their successful 13- day mission. By the time that Atlantis and its crew departed the ISS, the Shuttle had significantly boosted the space station’s orbit, leaving the ISS orbiting at about 237 miles (381 kilometers) above Earth. While attached to the space station, Atlantis had used a series of engine bursts to push the ISS approximately 16 miles (26 kilometers) higher than its previous position. Shuttle crew had also unloaded food and supplies, including an enormous Russian carbon-dioxide removal unit, for the use of the three-person ISS crew during their visit.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back on Earth After Dismal Three Days,” 21 February 2001; Associated Press, “Atlantis Leaves Space Station in a Higher Orbit,” 16 February 2001.)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASA’s JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Center’s goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSC’s Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director,” news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98/ISS-5A lifted off from NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the most expensive and crucial component of the ISSthe United States–built Destiny science laboratory. Mark Stephenson of the Boeing Company, which had built the US$1.4 billion research module, called the vessel “the crown jewel” of the ISS. NASA had set high stakes on the Destiny laboratory, which was so expensive and complicated to build, that NASA could not afford to assemble a backup module. Therefore, any problem in the transport and connection of the Destiny module would set back the ISS several years. NASA had delayed Atlantis’s mission for three weeks when engineers discovered evidence that faulty wiring might compromise the Shuttle’s safety. The vital mission brought the ISS closer to becoming the permanent and highly functional research station that NASA and the international space community had long awaited. The Destiny laboratory measured 28 feet (9 meters) long, weighed more than 30,000 pounds (13,600 kilograms), and held 13 computers. NASA expected to control the ISS using the computers and communications equipment built into Destiny. Because of the Space Shuttle’s cargo, some officials speculated that Atlantis’s mission was the most important for NASA’s research agenda ever undertaken. One NASA spokesperson called the Destiny module “the cornerstone for space-based research aboard the orbiting platform.” The STS-98 crew consisted of Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell; Pilot Mark L. Polansky; and Mission Specialists Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Thomas D. Jones, and Marsha S. Ivins.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-98,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-98.html (accessed 2 February 2009); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Shuttle Flight No. 102 Will Transport $1.4 Billion Lab Module,” Washington Post, 8 February 2001; Kelly Young, “Atlantis To Deliver Destiny,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 2001; Associated Press, “Shuttle Totes Space Station’s ‘Crown Jewel’,” 8 February 2001; Associated Press, “Countdown Begins for Launch of NASA Lab,” 5 February 2001; NASA, “Atlantis Set To Deliver International Space Station’s Destiny,” news release 01-16, 5 February 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, when wind and rain caused the diversion of the Shuttle and its seven-person crew from its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. The completed mission had been unique, with NASA deliberately paring down its research goals because of the anticipated arrival during Endeavour’s stay at the ISS of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft carrying space tourist Dennis A. Tito. Shuttle Commander Kent V. Rominger greeted the press upon landing, commenting on the crew’s installation of the ISS’s robotic arm and the computer problems that had plagued the space station during the visit. Rominger explained that he and the other astronauts had worked with 500 computer experts on the ground to achieve partial restoration of the ISS’s hard drives and software applications.(Warren E. Leary, “As Shuttle Returns to Earth, Tourist Adjusts to Space Station,” New York Times, 2 May 2001; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Diverted to California Due to Bad Weather,” 1 May 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lands in Clear California/Cloud Hangs Over Russia Relations,” Houston Chronicle, 2 May 2001.)
NASA announced the first significant group of awards for its Space Launch Initiative (SLI)a program dedicated to finding safer and more cost-effective modes of sending humans into space. NASA’s SLI board had awarded a total of US$767 million in contracts to 22 groups. NASA clarified that the purpose of the contracts was to find a long-term solution to replace the costly Shuttle program. Therefore, NASA intended that grantees focus on conceptual designs rather than on vehicle specifics. NASA had designed the program to facilitate the development of a new space vehicle by the middle of the 21st century. Those receiving the funds had to meet ambitious standards; NASA wanted awardees to design a craft that would be 10 times safer than the Space Shuttle, with 100 times higher rates of crew survival, at a 10th of the cost of the current Shuttle program. The SLI board had consulted more than 100 experts to determine which proposals should receive funding.(Marshall Star (NASA MSFC), “NASA Awards $767 Million in SLI Contracts,” 24 May 2001, 1, 6; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Begins Bid To Improve Its Launchings,” New York Times, 18 May 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-104/ISS7A lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bound for the ISS. Steven W. Lindsay served as Flight Commander, Charles O. Hobaugh piloted the spacecraft, and Mission Specialists Janet L. Kavandi, Michael L. Gernhardt, and James F. Reilly rounded out the crew. The launch was the first using NASA’s upgraded hydrogen turbopumps in the Shuttle’s three main engines. The pump was the last in a series of Shuttle improvements that NASA had made to reduce maintenance and improve safety of the Shuttle.
Astronauts Thomas D. Jones and Robert L. Curbeam Jr. made their third and final spacewalk from Space Shuttle Atlantis, finishing the installation of the ISS’s science laboratory Destiny. The spacewalk was the 100th in the history of U.S. space exploration. Two days earlier, Jones and Curbeam had conducted a spacewalk to install a window shutter for Destiny, allowing the astronauts residing inside the ISS an unparalleled view of Earth. Overall, the mission to install the vital and expensive Destiny module went smoothly. Atlantis’s crew worked quickly to connect the necessary cables, hatches, and wires to equip the new research center. The successful installation also allowed NASA to accept a transfer of leadership from the Russian Space Agency. Using the newly installed computers in the Destiny module, U.S. flight controllers took control of the ISS on 13 February 2001.
The crew of Space Shuttle Atlantis successfully installed the Destiny laboratory on the ISS. Using the Shuttle’s robotic arm, astronaut Marsha S. Ivins moved the module from the Shuttle’s payload area to its place on the side of the ISS. After patching up a small leak from one of the module’s coolant lines, two spacewalking astronauts connected electrical, fluid, and data lines between the ISS and the Destiny laboratory. After carefully completing the installation, astronauts opened a hatch connecting the new module to the rest of the ISS. The additional 3,750 cubic feet (106 cubic meters) of space made the ISS the largest spacecraft ever. Astronaut Kenneth D. Cockrellalong with William M. Shepherd, the first to enter the Destiny modulereported, “The lab looks and feels and smells great, and looks like all the hard work has really paid off. It’s a beautiful piece of hardware in here.”(William Harwood, “Spacewalking Astronauts Attach Lab Module to Space Station,” Washington Post, 11 February 2001; USA Today, “Space Station Module Gives Crew More Space,” 12 February 2001; Washington Post, “Astronauts Open Hatch to Destiny Laboratory; Alpha Now Largest Orbiting Outpost,” 12 February 2001; Associated Press, “Astronauts Install Lab on Station,” 12 February 2001.)
NASA opened a new command and control center that would allow researchers on Earth to participate in scientific research conducted aboard the ISS. The new facility, located at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, featured state-of-the-art communication and research technologies. Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson described the new center as a significant part of NASA’s ongoing plan to make space research more efficient and useful: “From this facility we will manage fundamental scientific research that can only be done in spaceresearch that will lead to knowledge to benefit all humanity here on Earth.” NASA planned to staff the 13,000-square-foot (1,200-square-meter) facility 24 hours per day to support research aboard ISS. In addition to its link to the ISS, the new facility was equipped to monitor payload resources, facilitate data transfer, and communicate with universities and research centers throughout the world. The new command post opened only days before Space Shuttle Atlantis’s scheduled trip into space to carry the Destiny research laboratory module to the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Opens Space Station Command Post,” news release 01-15, 2 February 2001; Shelby G. Spires, “MSFC Opens Science ‘Mission Control’ Today,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 February 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:23 p.m. (CDT), marking the end of Mission STS-105. During the mission, the Shuttle crew had delivered supplies and equipment to the ISS, carried Expedition 3 crew members to the ISS, and transported the Expedition 2 crew back to Earth. In addition, astronauts Daniel T. Barry and Patrick G. Forrester had each performed two spacewalks to attach equipment to the exterior of the ISS, spending a total of 11 hours and 45 minutes outside the space station. STS-105’s total duration was 11 days, 21 hours, and 13 minutes.(NASA, “STS-105: A New Crew Arrives at the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-105/ (accessed 10 November 2008).)
