President George W. Bush released details of NASA’s new Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP) in an amendment to his budget request for FY 2003. The ISTP included a number of changes in NASA’s spaceflight programs that, together, would encompass a comprehensive effort to coordinate NASA’s investments in the ISS, the Space Shuttle program, and the replacement vehicle for the Shuttle. The new plan would provide more resources for completing the assembly of the ISS, as well as an increase in the number of annual Shuttle flights to the ISS. Shuttle flights to the ISS would increase from four to five flights annually, enabling transport of more researchers and more science-based payloads. Moreover, the ISTP would restructure the Space Launch Initiative (SLI), making the program’s immediate objective the development of the Orbital Space Plane (OSP), rather than development of a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. The OSP, which would be smaller than the Shuttle, would function as both the crew transport vehicle and the emergency escape vehicle for the ISS, and NASA would use the Shuttles for heavy cargo delivery. NASA stressed that, although the ISTP would change NASA’s five-year budget plan, the program’s costs would remain within the original FY 2003 budget.(NASA, “NASA’s Integrated Space Transportation Plan Released,” news release 02-220, 13 November 2002; Warren E. Leary, “NASA To Delay Decision on Shuttle Replacement,” New York Times, 14 November 2002.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 lifted off at 4:44 p.m. (EST) from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The object of STS-110/ISS Assembly Flight 8A was to attach to the ISS a 43-foot-long (13-meter-long) truss structure called the Starboard Zero (S Zero or S0). The mission’s payload included several science payloads, the S0 Truss, and the Mobile Transporter (MT). NASA had designed the MT to move the completed truss and to act as a work platform for a mechanical arm, which the crew would install in the future. The crew included Mission Commander Michael J. Bloomfield and astronauts Stephen N. Frick, Lee M. E. Morin, Ellen Ochoa, Jerry L. Ross, Steven L. Smith, and Rex J. Walheim.(NASA, “Framework for Expanding Station Research: STS-110,” press kit, 20 March 2001, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-110/spk-110.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008); William Harwood, “Shuttle on Haul to Space Station,” Washington Post, 9 April 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:58 p.m. (EDT), ending a mission of 13 days, 20 hours, and 35 minutes. During STS-111, the crew had used the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2, to move the MBS from Endeavour to the Mobile Transporter (MT) on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. In addition, crew members Franklin R. Chang- Diaz and Philippe Perrin had performed three EVAs lasting a total of 19 hours and 31 minutes. During the first EVA, the astronauts had installed a Power and Data Grapple Fixture to the ISS’s P6 Truss, the sixth truss segment on the port side of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, and moved six micrometeoroid debris shields from the Shuttle to a portion of the ISS called the PMA-1 (Pressurized Mating Adapter-One) for eventual installation on the Russian-made Zvezda service module. During the second spacewalk, the crew had connected data, power, and video cables between the MT rail car and the MBS; positioned the Payload Orbital Replacement Unit Accommodation (POA) on the MBS; and completed the installation of the MBS platform. In the final EVA, Chang-Diaz and Perrin had performed repairs on the ISS’s Canadarm2, restoring the instrument to full operational status. In addition, STS-111 had returned the members of Expedition 4Daniel E. Bursch, Yuri I. Onufrienko, and Carl W. Walzto Earth.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-111,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-111.html (accessed 18 August 2008); NASA, “Continuing the Human Presence in Space: STS-111,” press kit, 16 May 2001, 24–29, http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/history/shuttle_pk/ pk/Flight_110_STS- 111_Press_Kit.pdf (accessed 2 January 2009).)
The Office of Space Flight at NASA Headquarters decided that Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California would no longer perform major modifications to Space Shuttle orbiters. Instead, NASA’s KSC, already responsible for preparing the Shuttles for launching, would also provide the modifications. The Palmdale facility had served as the manufacturing site for all orbiters since the Space Shuttle program’s inception, as well as providing periodic maintenance and safety upgrades. Based on cost and risk assessments, the Office of Space Flight had determined that maintaining two modification facilities for four Shuttle orbiters was no longer financially feasible, and that performing such work at KSC would minimize associated costs and risks. The change was part of NASA’s effort to absorb President George W. Bush’s proposed budget cuts. Because it overhauled one of the four Shuttle orbiters every two to three years, NASA estimated that transferring this work to KSC would save approximately US$30 million per overhaul.(NASA, “Kennedy Space Center To Perform Shuttle Modifications,” news release 02-22, 5 February 2002; Mark Carreau, “NASA To Overhaul Shuttles in Florida,” Houston Chronicle, 6 February 2002.)
NASA officials stated that NASA had used Web sites such as Yahoo! and eBay to find discontinued electronic equipment. NASA had continued to use electronic components such as 8-inch-floppy-disc drives, circuit boards, and computer chips, not in the Space Shuttles themselves, but in equipment used to service and support the Shuttles. For example, NASA had purchased outdated medical equipment to acquire the increasingly scarce Intel 8086 computer chip, a variant of the chip used in IBM’s first personal computers in 1981. NASA had continued to use the Intel 8086 chip in diagnostic equipment for the Space Shuttle booster rockets, also developed in the early 1980s. Although NASA planned to develop various systems with new hardware, some crucial systems remained dependent on antiquated electronic parts.(William J. Broad, “For Parts, NASA Boldly Goes . . . on Ebay,” New York Times, 12 May 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although O’Keefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
NASA released two reports of an audit conducted by the independent firm Pricewaterhouse- Coopers, noting several problems with NASA’s system of financial management and record keeping. In one report, PricewaterhouseCoopers stated that NASA had not provided auditors with timely and sufficient documentary evidence of its financial transactions. Thus, auditors could not determine the accuracy and completeness of NASA’s reported financial obligations, expenses, and equipment, including those related to the ISS and Space Shuttle programs. The audit did not state that waste or fraud characterized NASA’s financial management; rather, the report concluded that NASA’s incomplete financial records obviated any definitive assessment of its finances. In the second report, the auditors enumerated several problems with NASA’s internal controls over financial reporting, but also stated that they would not provide an opinion on the merit of those internal controls.(Karen Masterson and Mark Carreau, “NASA Bookkeeping in Disarray,” Houston Chronicle, 1 March 2002; PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Report of Independent Accountants” (report, Washington, DC, 22 February 2002), http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oig/hq/igfy01fsaudit.pdf (accessed 5 August 2008); PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Report of Independent Accountants on Internal Control” (report, Washington, DC, 22 February 2002), http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oig/hq/lrreport022602.pdf (accessed 5 August 2008).)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe selected astronaut Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist. In this post, Lucid became responsible for ensuring that NASA’s programs were of scientific merit. At the time of the selection, Lucid was a spacecraft communicator supporting the Space Shuttle and ISS missions. A veteran of five Space Shuttle flights, Lucid had been one of the first six women selected to become an astronaut and the only woman awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor. Lucid replaced Kathie L. Olsen, who had occupied the position since May 1999. Olsen had accepted an appointment as the Associate Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut, Dr. Shannon Lucid, Selected as Chief Scientist,” news release 02-27, 12 February 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:50 p.m. Central Standard Time (CST). The Shuttle’s crew members comprised Commander James D. Wetherbee and astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, John Bennett Herrington, Paul S. Lockhart, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Donald R. Pettit. The primary objective of STS-113, also designated as Station Assembly Flight 11A, was to transport the crew of Expedition 6―Bowersox, Budarin, and Pettit―to the ISS and return the crew of Expedition 5 to Earth. Another major objective was to install the Port 1 (P1) Truss segment on the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. The structure would eventually house the ISS’s solar arrays and would carry power, data, and temperature controls for the station’s electronics. In addition, STS113 would transport several experiments to the ISS, returning to Earth with several experiments that the crew of Expedition 5 had conducted.(NASA, “STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 29 October 2008); NASA, “STS-113 Shuttle Press Kit” press kit, 25 October 2002, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-113/SPK_sts-113.pdf (accessed 29 October 2008).)
The U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space began hearings on legislation to reauthorize NASA programs. Subcommittee chairman Ron Wyden (D–OR) expressed concern about the agency’s financial management, particularly cost overruns for the ISS. He also urged NASA to maintain the excellence of the Shuttle program while research continued on a next-generation space vehicle. Members of the subcommittee heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, who addressed them for the first time, and from William F. Readdy, Deputy Associate Administrator of the NASA Office of Space Flight. The members of the subcommittee questioned O’Keefe about his vision for NASA and his plans to reduce NASA’s budget by ending particular programs. In his prepared statement, O’Keefe discussed the status of the ISS and Space Shuttle programs.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, NASA Reauthorization, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 May 2002; Karen Masterson, “JSC Mission May Hit Detour,” Houston Chronicle, 9 May 2002.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:44 a.m. (CDT), marking the end of STS-112. During the mission, Atlantis’s crew had conducted joint operations with the ISS Expedition 5 crew, including the installation of the S1 Truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Astronauts Piers J. Sellers and David A. Wolf had performed three spacewalks to install the truss. In addition, the Shuttle’s crew members had transferred cargo to the ISS and had used the Shuttle’s thruster jets to raise the station’s orbit. The mission’s total duration was 10 days, 19 hours, and 58 minutes.
NASA’s KSC awarded the Boeing Company the checkout, assembly, and payload-processing services (CAPPS) contract for the Space Shuttle and the EELV. The CAPPS contract had a four- year base period of performance valued at US$332 million. In addition, the contract had two three-year extension options, which could increase the contract’s total value to US$810 million. Under the contract, Boeing would perform payload-processing tasks, such as ensuring that payloads were compatible with launch vehicles and loading payloads into launch vehicles. Boeing had also held KSC’s previous payload-processing agreement, called the payload ground- operations contract.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Wins Major Space Payload Processing Contract,” news release, 29 August 2002. 86)
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
The GAO submitted a report to the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics on NASA’s progress toward developing a reusable launch vehicle (RLV), under the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) program, to replace the Space Shuttle. According to GAO, NASA needed to complete ongoing reassessment of its overall space transportation plans and of the future of the ISS. NASA also needed to determine whether it would develop the SLI program in cooperation with the DOD. To address these concerns, GAO recommended that NASA reassess the schedule for defining the SLI’s requirements and reach a consensus with the DOD on the program’s priorities and objectives. The report also recommended that NASA finalize the SLI’s basic requirements before implementing management controls on the program’s costs and risks. In its response, NASA concurred with GAO’s recommendations and outlined plans to implement them.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Transportation: Challenges Facing NASA’s Space Launch Initiative” (report no. GAO-02-1020, Washington, DC, 17 September 2002), http://www.gao.gov/ new.items/d021020.pdf (accessed 10 October 2008).)
NASA officials announced the delay of the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113, scheduled for 21 July. Engineers had discovered fuel-line cracks, the same problem that had previously led NASA to ground some Space Shuttles. At the time of the announcement, NASA officials remained uncertain of the new date of Endeavour’s launch, suggesting that, although the Shuttle would be ready to fly by September 2002, NASA might delay the launch until at least the end of 2002.(Warren E. Leary, “Delay Likely for Shuttle Mission with Israeli,” New York Times, 20 July 2002.)
NASA announced that it would keep all four Space Shuttles grounded until at least September 2002 because of potentially dangerous fractures discovered in the fuel lines of all four Shuttles. NASA officials also reported that engineers now considered the cracks less of a safety concern than they had feared when NASA first discovered them in June 2002.(William Harwood, “NASA Grounds Space Shuttle Fleet over Fuel Line Cracks,” Washington Post, 13 July 2002.)
NASA awarded a US$1.14 billion contract to the Boeing Company’s Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power division for maintenance and support of the Space Shuttle’s main engine during the ensuing five years. Under the terms of the contract, Rocketdyne was to provide flight and test engineering; engine refurbishment; and manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of three additional Space Shuttle main engines. The contract also required Rocketdyne to provide engineering support for NASA’s main engine facilities at NASA’s KSC and SSC. From 1972 until the company signed the contract, Rocketdyne had assembled 106 main engines for NASA’s Shuttles.(NASA, “NASA Awards $1.14 Billion Space Shuttle Main Engine Contract to Boeing Rocketdyne,” news release c02-h, 3 May 2002.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 attached a 44-foot (13-meter) truss, containing computers, coolant lines, electrical cables, and other components to the ISS. The 27,000-pound (12,250-kilogram) beam, dubbed Starboard Zero or S0, was the first of nine truss segments that would form a 356-foot (110-meter) exterior spine, supporting new solar arrays, heat radiators, and laboratory modules. The installation, involving the first use of the 58-foot (18-meter), Canadian-built robotic arm designed for the station, required two separate spacewalks, performed by two different pairs of astronauts.(Warren E. Leary, “Major Component of Space Station Is Attached,” New York Times, 12 April 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASA’s SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the “One NASA” initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASA’s various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASA’s MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFC’s Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASA’s KSC.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director,” news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Two astronauts from Space Shuttle Endeavour undertook an extravehicular activity (EVA) to repair the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2. American astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz and French astronaut Philippe Perrin replaced one of seven joints on the US$600 million, Canadian- built robotic arm, which was critical to the continued construction of the ISS. To repair Canadarm2, the astronauts first removed its 450-pound (205-kilogram), hand-like, latching-end effector (LEE); loosened six bolts connecting the problematic “wrist roll” joint to the arm; and disconnected power, data, and video lines. They then installed the replacement joint, tightened the bolts to secure the new joint to the arm, restored the power and other lines, and reaffixed the LEE. Subsequent tests of the Canadarm2 confirmed the success of the repairs. The EVA, lasting 7 hours and 17 minutes, was the third for Mission STS-111.(William Harwood, “Spacewalkers Continue Space Station Repairs; Joint on Robotic Arm Is Replaced,” Washington Post, 14 June 2002; NASA JSC, “STS-111, Mission Control Center Status Report no. 18,” 13 June 2002, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts111/STS-111-18.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Scientists from NASA’s JPL announced the release of high-resolution topographic data of the continental United States acquired during the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) on Space Shuttle Endeavour in February 2000. Project scientists planned to process the digital- elevation-model (DEM) data, sampled at an interval of one measurement every 30 meters (98 feet), into the most detailed three-dimensional topographic maps ever made of Earth. The SRTM data would eventually include 1 trillion measurements, representing nearly 80 percent of Earth’s landmass between 60° north and 56° south of the equator, a mapped area in which nearly 95 percent of the world’s population resides. SRTM project scientists anticipated that the maps produced from the mission would provide the most valuable and universally beneficial data produced by any scientific mission. Scientists would be able to use the data in applications ranging from flood control to transportation and urban planning.(NASA, “Pictures from the Real Edge: NASA Posts U.S. Topography Data,” news release 02-15, 22 January 2002.)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearingNASA Workforce and Management Challengesto garner information about NASA’s efforts to address concerns regarding its human capital, competitive sourcing for the Space Shuttle program, and other matters. Committee members heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe; David M. Walker, Comptroller General of the United States; and Mark D. Roth, General Counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees. O’Keefe discussed NASA’s Strategic Human Capital Plan, a systemic method of managing human capital according to NASA’s vision and mission. In addition, O’Keefe announced the termination of the comprehensive Strategic Resources Review initiated during the Clinton administration to create a blueprint for NASA’s future facility, missions, and workforce requirements. Roth argued that, because NASA expected a high number of retirements in the near future, its existing and proposed personnel policies were inadequate to address the resulting loss in human capital. Walker discussed methods NASA could use to strengthen its human capital and to address its difficulties with contract management, as well as the increasing expense of the ISS program and of space exploration.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Workforce and Management Challenges, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 18 July 2002, http://science.house.gov/publications/hearings_markups_details.aspx?NewsID=1424 (accessed 21 August 2008 through Lexis-Nexis Congressional); Larry Wheeler, “O’Keefe Scraps Review of NASA,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 July 2002.)
The Space Shuttle Competitive Source Task Force released its final report on the potential for private-sector operation of the Shuttle program. NASA had commissioned the Task Force to analyze the roles of NASA and its contractors with regard to Space Shuttle operations. More specifically, the Task Force had assessed various scenarios in which NASA would focus primarily on spaceflight research and development, outsourcing to the private sector the operation of the planned replacements of the Shuttles for routine transit to low Earth orbit. The Task Force had concluded that, although NASA faced numerous challenges to competitive sourcing for the Shuttle program, it should pursue some form of this option. Moreover, the panel suggested that the most likely scenario for successful private-sector involvement in the Shuttle program would not involve private operation of the program, but rather a transfer of program assets to private entities at highly deflated prices. Another option would entail the restructuring of existing contracts, perhaps taking steps to expand the pool of program suppliers beyond the existing duopoly of Boeing and Lockheed Martin. In addition, as a first step to privatization, NASA could establish a space authority to operate the Shuttle, as well as future human transportation vehicles.(Space Shuttle Competitive Sourcing Task Force, “Alternative Trajectories: Options for Competitive Sourcing of the Space Shuttle Program” (Final Report, Science and Technology Policy Institute, Rand Corporation, Arlington, VA, December 2002), http://www.rand.org/scitech/stpi/NASA/index.html (accessed 30 December 2009).)
NASA announced that Donald R. Pettit, a backup member of the crew of the Expedition 6 Mission to the ISS, would replace Donald A. Thomas on the mission. NASA had reassigned Thomas, a veteran of four Space Shuttle flights, because of medical issues affecting his qualification for long-duration spaceflight. Pettit, a chemical engineer who had joined the astronaut corps in 1996, had previously served as a staff scientist at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico.(NASA, “Backup Crew Member Assigned to Expedition Six,” news release 02-139, 26 July 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that, after international partners had completed certain portions of the ISS, former schoolteacher Barbara R. Morgan would fly on a Space Shuttle mission to the station. NASA had selected Morgan as a mission specialist in the astronaut class of 1998. She had subsequently worked in ISS Mission Control, relaying instructions between ISS Mission Control and the crew of Expedition 4 aboard the ISS. Morgan had previously served as a backup candidate for the Teacher in Space Program, training with Christa McAuliffe and the STS-51L crew of Space Shuttle Challenger. At the time of O’Keefe’s announcement, Morgan was part of a new Educator Astronaut Program administered by NASA and the Department of Education, designed to attract students to engineering, math, and science.(NASA, “Press Briefing Scheduled with NASA Administrator and Astronaut Barbara Morgan,” news release N02-28, 15 April 2002; William Harwood, “McAuliffe’s Backup Will Go to Space in 2004,” Washington Post, 13 April 2002.)
Crew of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 finished installing several new instruments on the 12- year-old HST and sent the observatory back into orbit. During a series of five spacewalks conducted in as many days, Columbia’s crew had installed a new power-shunting unit, an improved solar panel, and a cooling unit that would restore the Near-Infrared Camera and Multi- Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) to operational status. In addition, Columbia’s crew had installed a new main camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), which NASA had designed to give the telescope unprecedented ability to observe distant galaxies and other objects.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Returning to Mission Able To Peer Deeper Into Space,” New York Times, 10 March 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:37 p.m. (CST), marking the end of Mission STS-113. During the mission, Endeavour’s crew had attached the Port 1 (P1) Truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, in an installation that included three spacewalks by crew members John Bennett Herrington and Michael Lopez- Alegria. Shuttle and Expedition crews had also transferred 4,340 pounds (1,969 kilograms) of cargo between the Shuttle and the ISS. In addition, Endeavour had transported the Expedition 6 crew to the station, returning the crew of Expedition 5 to Earth. The total duration of STS-113 was 13 days, 18 hours, and 47 minutes.
NASA announced that it would delay the selection of designs for the RLV that would replace the Space Shuttle under the US$4.8 billion SLI program. NASA had planned to select a pool of proposed designs in November 2002, eventually limiting the pool to two designs before 2006. However, a NASA official said that NASA had slowed the selection process while awaiting the results of studies on various unresolved issues with the SLI program. The results of those studies could affect the program’s objectives, as well as the design of the RLV that NASA planned.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Taps Brakes on Shuttle Replacement,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 October 2002.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft took its last pictures, images of Io, a planet-sized moon orbiting Jupiter. Galileo had launched in 1989 from Space Shuttle Atlantis and had entered Jupiter’s orbit six years later. The spacecraft had eventually made 33 orbits around Jupiter, capturing nearly 14,000 images of the planet and the objects around it.(NASA, “Farewell, Io; Galileo Paying Last Visit to a Restless Moon,” news release 02-10, 15 January 2002; NASA, “Solar System ExplorationGalileo: Overview,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo/ /index.cfm (accessed 31 July 2008); Andrew Bridges, “NASA Awaits Last Photographs from Jupiter Probe’s Long Trip,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2002.)
Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. became the eighth Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Acting Director Roy S. Estess, who resumed his position as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC). Before assuming the post, Howell had worked for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) administering its safety, reliability, and quality-assurance contract with NASA, to provide safety and mission assurance for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs.(NASA JSC, “Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. Named as Johnson Space Center Director,” news release J02-17, 12 February 2002.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:46 p.m. (CDT). The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Jeffrey S. Ashby, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and crew members Sandra H. Magnus, Piers J. Sellers, David A. Wolf, and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. STS-112’s major objective was to deliver and install the Starboard One (S1) Truss, the second segment of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Astronauts Sellers and Wolf planned to make three spacewalks during the installation missiondesignated ISS Assembly Mission 9Ato install and activate the truss. Other mission objectives included transferring experiments and payloads from Atlantis to the ISS, deploying the station’s second S-Band communications system, and installing external camera systems.(NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008); NASA, “STS-112 Overview,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/mm-sts-112.pdf (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:22 a.m. (EST). Weather, mechanical issues, and other concerns had prompted NASA to postpone Columbia’s launch several times, from its original launch date of 19 November 2001. Officially designated STS-109, the mission’s objective was to service the HST, the fourth such mission (designated Mission SM3B) for the HST. The payload consisted of various technology updates for the HST, including a new camera and solar arrays. In addition, Columbia carried seven crew members: Mission Commander Scott D. Altman and astronauts Duane G. Carey, Nancy J. Currie, John M. Grunsfeld, Richard M. Linnehan, Michael J. Massimino, and James H. Newman.(NASA, “STS-109,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-109/mission-sts-109.html (accessed 10 August 2008); William Harwood, “Cooling Glitch Mars Shuttle’s Hubble Trip,” Washington Post, 2 March 2002. 197 Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; ESA, “Envisat Overview,” http://www.esa.int/esaEO/SEMWYN2VQUD_index_0_m.html (accessed 10 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:27 a.m. (EST). While in orbit, the Shuttle’s crew had performed four spacewalks to connect the S0 Truss to the ISS and to prepare the MTa track-mounted platformfor use. The crew had used the robotic arms of both Atlantis and the ISS to install the truss. STS-110 was the first mission in which the crew had used the ISS’s robotic arm to maneuver crew members around the station as they performed spacewalks. In addition, it was the first mission in which the crew’s base for all of its spacewalks was the ISS’s Quest Airlock. The Shuttle’s crew had also engaged in joint operations with the ISS’s Expedition 4 crew. The total duration of STS-110 was 10 days, 19 hours, and 42 minutes.(NASA, “STS-110 Extravehicular Activities,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-110/eva/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); NASA, “STS-110: A Framework for Station Expansion,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-110/ (accessed 12 August 2002).)
Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 4:32 a.m. (EST). During the 11-day mission, the Shuttle crew had conducted five spacewalks and performed several significant modifications of the HST, including the installation of an ACS and an experimental cryocooler, which had restored the operation of the NICMOS. The mission’s total duration was 10 days, 22 hours, and 11 minutes.(NASA, “STS-109,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-109/mission-sts-109.html (accessed 11 August 2002); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA announced that it had grounded all four Space Shuttles because of newly discovered mechanical problems, postponing indefinitely the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia. Previously, NASA had scheduled Columbia’s launch for 19 July 2002. According to NASA officials, engineers had found small fissures in metal liners within the fuel pipes of the main engines of Shuttles Atlantis and Discovery. If left unrepaired, the cracks could cause pieces of the liners to break off, possibly damaging a Shuttle’s engine while in flight.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded To Fix Cracks,” New York Times, 26 June 2002.)
After several unsuccessful attempts to contact the Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) satellite, NASA and Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory concluded that CONTOUR was lost. The objectives of the CONTOUR mission had been to maneuver to a distance of 60 kilometers (100 miles) from at least two comets, capturing high-resolution images and performing various compositional analyses of the comets’ near-nucleus-environment compositional material. NASA had launched CONTOUR on 3 July 2002 but had lost contact with the satellite on 15 August 2002 after a maneuver intended to shift CONTOUR from Earth orbit to an orbit in which it would encounter the comet Encke.(NASA, “Discovery Mission: CONTOUR,” http://discovery.nasa.gov/contour.html (accessed 31 October 2008). 103)
NASA successfully launched the third replenishment spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleet. The TDRS-J satellite launched aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:42 p.m. (EST). TDRS satellites comprised a communication-signal relay system providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing-Built NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release, 4 December 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021204s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
NASA announced the extension of its existing contract with ATK Thiokol Propulsion for the production and refurbishment of reusable solid rocket motors (RSRM) for the Space Shuttle program. Shuttle launches required two RSRMs and three main engines to provide sufficient thrust for the Shuttle to attain orbit. Under the modified agreement, ATK Thiokol would produce and refurbish 70 RSRMs and three flight-support motors. The US$429 million modification extended to May 2007 the original US$2.4 billion contract, which NASA and ATK Thiokol had agreed on in October 1998. The original contract had been the sixth agreement between ATK Thiokol Propulsion and NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, “NASA Extends Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Contract with ATK Thiokol Through May 2007,” news release c02-q, 1 July 2002.)
NASA named 16 crew members for two Space Shuttle missions to the ISS, scheduled for 2003. Mission STS-115 would carry Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. and crew members Daniel C. Burbank, Christopher J. Ferguson, Steven G. MacLean, Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, and Joseph R. Tanner. Mission STS-116 would carry Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt and the crew―American astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and William A. Oefelein, and Swedish ESA astronaut Christer Fuglesang. NASA planned for STS-115 to deliver a second port truss segment to the ISS. Later, crew would attach the second port truss segment to a third port truss, which STS-116 would deliver. STS-116 would also involve rotation of the crew: the Shuttle would carry ISS Expedition 8 Commander C. Michael Foale, astronaut William S. McArthur, and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev to the ISS, for a long-term stay, and would return ISS Expedition 7 Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and crew members Edward T. Lu and Sergei I. Moschenko to Earth.(NASA, “Astronauts Named to Key Space Station Missions,” news release 02-35, 26 February 2002.)
NASA announced the extension of its existing six-year contract with Lockheed Martin Space Systems to build 35 super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle program. The modified agreement extended the contract to September 2008, adding US$341 million to the original contract of US$1.15 billion, which NASA had awarded to Lockheed Martin in October 2000. Under the contract, Lockheed Martin would construct, test, and deliver the tanks; maintain and operate NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans; and provide services at NASA’s KSC and its MSFC. Furthermore, under the terms of the extension, Lockheed Martin agreed to provide at least six tanks per year, instead of the eight tanks per year stipulated in the original agreement. (NASA, “NASA Extends Shuttle External Tank Contract with Lockheed Martin to September 2008,” news release c02-m, 12 June 2002.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 and the ISS installed the first Starboard truss segment, the S1 Truss, connecting it with the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Installation of the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long) S1 Truss was the mission’s main objective. Astronauts David A. Wolf and Piers J. Sellers accomplished the task during three spacewalks, with astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Sandra H. Magnus operating the ISS’s robotic arm to attach the S1 to the central truss segment, the S0 Truss. The astronauts also installed the Crew and Equipment Translation Aid, a cart that runs on rails along the top of the truss.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Install Girder on Space Station,” New York Times, 11 October 2002; NASA, “ISS Assembly Mission 9A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/structure/ iss_assembly_9a.html (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA announced the release of the first test images from the HST’s recently reactivated Near- Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS). The test images of galaxies in various stages of development included the NGC 4013 and the Cone Nebula galaxies. The NICMOS had remained inactive for three years, until the crew members of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 had installed a new cooling system for the instrument on 3 March 2002 as part of HST Servicing Mission 3B. The new NICMOS Cooling System (NCS) had been a joint project of NASA and the U.S. Air Force; NASA’s GSFC and the Creare Corporation had built the NCS.(NASA, “Hubble’s Infrared Camera Is Back in Business―New Images Released,” news release 02-104, 5 June 2002; NASA, “SM3B,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/missions/sm3b.php (accessed 17 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-111 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 5:22 p.m. (EDT). NASA had originally scheduled the mission to lift off on 30 May but had delayed the launch because of mechanical and weather concerns. The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell and astronauts Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, Valery G. Korzun, Paul S. Lockhart, Philippe Perrin, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson. Korzun, Treschev, and Whitson were also members of ISS Expedition 5, which was to remain at the ISS when Endeavour returned to Earth. STS-111 had several objectives. The Shuttle was transporting to the ISS the Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM), which contained racks for experiments, stowage, and resupply. The crew would also install a component called the Mobile Base System (MBS) to service the ISS’s robotic arm. Both the MPLM and the MBS were part of the payload of the mission, also designated ISS Utilization Flight 2. A further objective of the mission was to transport the crew of Expedition 5 to the ISS and to return the members of Expedition 4 to Earth.(NASA, “STS-111 (110),” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-111/mission-sts-111.html (accessed 17 August 2008); NASA, “STS-111: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-111/ (accessed 17 August 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs’ budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle,” news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post,” 16 May 2002.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
