Russian cosmonaut and ISS crew member Sergei K. Krikalev set a world record of 748 days for total time spent in space. Krikalev had begun his cosmonaut training in 1985 and had first served as a crew member of Russia’s Mir space station in 1988. Krikalev had served on the Mir crew again in 1991 and had later become a member of the first ISS crew comprising both Russian cosmonauts and U.S. astronauts. In addition, he had been the first Russian to travel on a NASA Space Shuttle, achieving that distinction on Shuttle Discovery in 1994. The ISS partners had scheduled Krikalev’s return to Earth for October 2005―by then he would have spent 814 days in space.(Mark Carreau, “Russian Cosmonaut Sets a World Record of 748 Days in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 17 August 2005.)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) announced that it considered the Space Shuttle Discovery safe enough to fly again, even though NASA had not undertaken some steps recommended by the CAIB to ensure the Shuttle’s safe launch. NASA had planned to launch Discovery as the first Shuttle flight since the Columbia accident in 2003 and had established the Task Group to review NASA’s compliance with the CAIB’s critical recommendations. Task Group members stated that, although NASA had not complied with all of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations, the Space Shuttle was ready to resume flight, and NASA was responsible for making the final decision to launch the Shuttle. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin was unclear about how the Task Group’s findings would influence Shuttle launch plans.(Traci Watson, “Safety Panel: NASA Failed To Fix Critical Issues with Shuttle,” USA Today, 28 June 2009. 252)
The Boeing Company announced that it had reached an agreement to sell its Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power business to Pratt & Whitney, a United Technologies Corporation unit, for about US$700 million in cash. Rocketdyne, primarily a rocket engine developer and builder that provided booster engines for the Space Shuttle and the Delta series of expendable launch vehicles, had helped pioneer space exploration in the 1950s and1960s. The sale reflected Boeing’s struggle to make a profit in the space-launch business and marked the company’s latest move toward focusing on large-scale weapons and aerospace systems. United Technologies intended the acquisition to broaden the product line at Pratt & Whitney, which, in recent years, had lost market share in its core business of providing jet engines.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Sell Rocketdyne Propulsion Unit to Pratt & Whitney; news release, 22 February 2005, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2005/q1/nr_050222o.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Los Angeles Times, “Maker of Rocket Engines Is Sold,” 23 February 2005.)
NASA returned Discovery to the Vehicle Assembly Building from its launchpad, to attach a newer fuel tank and booster set to the Space Shuttle. While Discovery was sitting on the launchpad, NASA had determined that ice could break off the outside of its external fuel tank and could prove as lethal as the falling foam insulation that had led to the demise of Columbia. To minimize the risk of such debris striking the orbiter’s fragile heat shield, NASA had decided to install an additional heater on the fuel tank. Ice forms on the external tank when the fuel is extremely cold, and a heater would reduce the amount of ice build-up on the tank.(Irene Mona Klotz, “Shuttle Heads Back to Workshop,” BBC News, 27 May 2005; “Shuttle Rolls Back to Hangar,” Washington Post, 27 May 2005.)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns,” news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, “NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
William W. Parsons replaced Thomas Q. Donaldson as Director of NASA’s SSC. Parsons had served as Director of SSC from August 2002 to May 2003 before leaving SSC to serve as Space Shuttle Program Manager from May 2003 to September 2005. Donaldson had left SSC to serve on a Federal Emergency Management Agency special assignment concerning recovery efforts for areas affected by Hurricane Katrina in August 2005.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 9 July 2009); NASA, “NASA Names New Stennis Center Director,” news release 05-260, 13 September 2005.)
NASA announced that it would once again ground the Space Shuttle fleet, because mission personnel had discovered that Shuttle Discovery had experienced a problem similar to the one that had fatally damaged Columbia. Specifically, analysts had discovered that, during launch, Discovery’s external fuel tank had shed portions of foam insulation. At least one of the pieces of insulation had come from the same area of the tank as the foam that had ended the Columbia mission. Although the problem did not affect Discovery’s launch, the Shuttle’s crew had spent much of their first full day in orbit closely examining the orbiter’s exterior to determine the extent of the problem.
The Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at California’s Edwards Air Force Base at 5:11 a.m. (PDT). The mission―officially designated STS-114―was NASA’s first Shuttle mission since the February 2003 loss of Columbia. The Shuttle’s successful reentry was particularly important, because the Columbia accident had occurred during the reentry phase of its mission. The mission’s primary objectives were to test and evaluate new safety procedures for Shuttle missions and to continue construction and maintenance of the ISS. Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson had performed some of the ISS and Shuttle maintenance tasks during three spacewalks on 30 July, 1 August, and 3 August. The total duration of STS-114 was 13 days, 21 hours, and 32 minutes.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114.” 257)
In the journal Geophysical Research Letters, researchers studying data from the Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) reported their determination that a strange flash over the Indian Ocean, which had occurred on 20 January 2003, was not related to lightning. The researchers named the mysterious reddish glow Transient Ionospheric Glow Emission in Red, or TIGER. Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon, a crew member of the ill-fated STS-107, had recorded the glow while aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, using an infrared video camera. During the Shuttle flight, Ramon had collected data about dust particles in the atmosphere for the MEIDEX Sprite campaign at the Open University in Ra’anana, Israel. Researchers for MEIDEX had analyzed Ramon’s video, including a single frame that showed a mysterious reddish glow 150 kilometers (93.2 miles) above the ocean near Madagascar. Like blue jets and elves, sprites are emissions―transient luminous events (TLEs)―that occur above thunderstorms. Airline pilots had first reported TLEs several decades ago. The TIGER phenomenon contrasted with typical TLEs because of its shape and its lack of any direct relationship to thunderstorm activity.(Maggie McKee, “Columbia Crew Saw New Atmospheric Phenomenon,” New Scientist, 20 January 2005; Michael Schirber, “High-Altitude Mystery Flash Recorded by Space Shuttle,” LiveScience.com, 19 January 2005, http://www.livescience.com/environment/050118_tiger_flash.html (accessed 18 August 2009).)
NASA’s Space Shuttle Program reached another milestone: filling a 154-foot-high (47-meter- high) external tank with fuel and oxygen. The test, intended to assure engineers that all changes to the tank operated as expected, marked the first time since Columbia’s accident that NASA had prepared an external tank for flight. The foam was necessary to keep the liquid fuel cool and to reduce ice build-up on the tank, but NASA and Lockheed Martin had redesigned the tank to reduce the amount of foam debris during launch. Changes to the tank design included removing the foam from the bipod ramp and replacing the foam with heaters. The designers had also added a “drip-lip” to reduce ice accumulation on the joints that permit the adjustment of the tank’s fuel line. In a dress rehearsal for Discovery’s upcoming launch, engineers pumped more than 500,000 gallons of fuel into the tank, monitoring the tank and the Shuttle’s systems down to the T-minus 31-second mark in a mock countdown. N. Wayne Hale Jr., Deputy Manager of the Space Shuttle Program and Chair of NASA’s Mission Management Team, remarked on the outstanding performances of the newly modified external tank, the Shuttle, and the launchpad.(Philip Chien, “NASA Tests Tank on Space Shuttle,” Washington Times, 15 April 2005; William Harwood, “NASA Managers Elated with Shuttle Fueling Test,” Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2005; Kelly Young, “Shuttle’s External Fuel Tank Tested Successfully,” New Scientist, 15 April 2005, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn7270-shuttles-external-fuel-tank-tested-successfully.html (accessed 25 November 2009); Physorg.com, “NASA Puts Space Shuttle External Tank to the Test,” 15 April 2005, http://www.physorg.com/news3738.html (accessed 25 November 2009).)
France and the United States agreed to establish a Space Shuttle landing site in southern France. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and French Ambassador Jean-David Levitte signed the agreement, which covered NASA’s Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the agreement, France would permit Shuttles encountering problems during launch to land at Istres Air Base 125, near Marseilles, and allow the U.S. government to conduct additional support activities for Space Shuttles on French soil, such as weather monitoring and search-and-rescue operations.(NASA, “U.S. and France Agree To Establish NASA Shuttle Landing Site,” news release 05-143, 7 June 2005. 803 Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Safety Issues Unresolved,” Houston Chronicle, 9 June 2005; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Near to Meeting Safety Requirements for Launching in July,” New York Times, 9 June 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts, Stephen K. Robinson of NASA and Soichi Noguchi of JAXA, completed a spacewalk during which they tested new prototype methods to repair heat- resistant tiles on the orbiter’s exterior. Robinson applied an experimental compound inside cracks in damaged panels, and Noguchi applied a thick, dark-colored paint to thermal protection tiles, to replace cracked or missing black surface coatings. NASA had developed the repair techniques in response to recommendations from the Columbia Accident Investigation Board. During the spacewalk, the two astronauts also performed several tasks to upgrade the ISS, such as replacing a broken GPS antenna and installing a bracket designed to hold a toolbox and parts kit for use during future spacewalks.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Test Repair Methods on Heat Tiles,” New York Times, 31 July 2005; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Adds One Day to Shuttle’s Mission,” Washington Post, 31 July 2005.)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) released its final report on NASA’s efforts to meet the CAIB’s recommendations for resuming piloted Shuttle flights. Former NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had established the task group to provide an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations. In the final report, the CAIB concluded that NASA had met or exceeded 12 of the 15 recommendations and had made substantive progress on the remaining three. The task group explained that the final three recommendations were of a type that would be nearly impossible to complete. However, major media highlighted an appendix of the document in which seven of the 28-member task group provided a highly critical assessment of NASA’s management. These seven task force members claimed that some of the same organizational behaviors of NASA managers that had contributed to the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia had also jeopardized the July 2005 Space Shuttle Discovery mission. They stated further that NASA had failed to address the problem of Discovery’s loss of foam insulation from its fuel tank and had failed to take steps to protect the Space Shuttles from the damage caused by such debris.(Return to Flight Task Group, Final Report of the Return to Flight Task Group (Washington, DC, July 2005); John Schwartz, “Minority Report Faults NASA as Compromising Safety,” New York Times, 18 August 2005.)
James D. Wetherbee, the only U.S. astronaut to command five Space Shuttle flights, announced his plans to retire from NASA. Wetherbee had participated in six Space Shuttle missions since becoming an astronaut in 1984, serving as pilot aboard Mission STS-32 in 1990 and commanding STS-52 in 1992, STS-63 in 1995, STS-86 in 1997, STS-102 in 2001, and STS-113 in 2002. His missions had included flights both to the Russian Mir space station, including the first Shuttle–Mir rendezvous, and to the ISS. Just before retiring, Wetherbee had worked as Space Shuttle Lead in the Independent Technical Authority at NASA’s JSC, a group responsible for identifying and analyzing possible hazards and determining launch readiness. Wetherbee had also served for two years as Director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC and for five years as Deputy Director of JSC.(NASA, “Veteran NASA Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” news release 05-017, 11 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/archives/2005-all-archives.html (accessed 13 August 2009); Associated Press, “Veteran Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” 12 January 2005.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had been in his new position for only one month, appeared as the sole witness before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, and Science, to testify regarding NASA’s FY 2006 budget request. Key issues that the panel discussed with Griffin included several related to the Space Shuttle Program: the four-year gap between the planned decommissioning of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and the first scheduled flight of the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) in 2014; the United States’ obligation to complete the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle; and servicing the HST. In his responses, Griffin stated that, in mid-July, he would release a plan for the first flight of the new CEV. He suggested that, if the ISS partners postponed some scheduled on-board scientific research, they could complete the ISS before the Shuttle’s retirement, without cancelling any research programs. Regarding the HST, Griffin stated his opposition to a robotic servicing mission and said that he wished to assess the first two Shuttle flights before making a decision. The panel also discussed recommended cuts in Earth Science research. Griffin responded that NASA had listened to the concerns of the scientific community and was reexamining that area. Griffin clarified that NASA would not cut science programs to fund the spaceflight program.
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi of JAXA and Stephen K. Robinson of NASA performed the second of three scheduled spacewalks for STS-114. The two astronauts conducted tests on materials designed to service the orbiter’s heat-shielding tiles and replaced a 600-pound (272.2-kilogram) gyroscope on the exterior of the ISS. The device was one of four gyroscopes that help maintain the station’s orientation in space.(NASA, “STS-114 MCC Status Report #13,” 1 August 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/ news/STS-114- 13.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery had reached a major milestone, arriving at Launch Pad 39B at NASA’s KSC in preparation for its Return to Flight Mission, scheduled for 15 May. Over more than two years, Discovery had undergone 41 major modifications in response to the Columbia accident, including the addition of the new sensor system at the far end of the orbiter boom; cameras and laser systems to inspect its thermal protection system while in space; sensors in the leading edge of its wings to monitor for debris impacts; and a new digital camera for viewing the external tank during launch.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery at Launch Pad for Return to Flight,” news release 05-095, 7 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05095_Discovery_Roll_Out.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
Former NASA astronaut Michael L. Coats became Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Jefferson D. Howell Jr., who had left to become a visiting professor at the University of Texas in Austin. Coats had begun working at NASA in 1978 and had flown three Space Shuttle missions before retiring from NASA in 1991. Before becoming JSC Director, Coats had worked for Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names Former Astronaut New Johnson Center Director,” news release J05-055, 7 November 2005; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” 14 April 2009, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 21 July 2009).)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) provided an update on NASA’s efforts to comply with the Columbia Accident Investigation Board’s (the CAIB’s) recommended safety and operational practices for Shuttle launches. The Task Group stated that it had approved NASA’s efforts regarding five of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, bringing the total number of CAIB recommendations with which NASA had complied to 12. Among the five recommendations that NASA had implemented were the installation of cameras on the Shuttle to observe critical events and steps to ensure that budgetary issues and other outside pressures would not influence flight schedules in the future. The Task Group stated further that, although NASA had not yet complied with three of the CAIB recommendations, it saw no circumstances that might prevent NASA’s planned launch of Space Shuttle Discovery in July 2005. The three CAIB recommendations that NASA had not yet implemented were establishing in-orbit repair techniques for the orbiter, preventing catastrophic debris from falling off the orbiter’s fuel tank during launch, and fortifying the orbiter against debris impacts.
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
Both crew members of the ISS, NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the first assembly work since the 2003 accident of Space Shuttle Columbia, which had led to the suspension of construction on the station. The two removed broken and disused equipment and installed a new television camera, designed to aid in the assembly of additional truss segments for the ISS. McArthur and Tokarev were performing these tasks to prepare the ISS for the future installation of a new solar power module, planned for 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-051,” status report SS05-052, 8 November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/nov/HQ_SS05052_station_status-html (accessed 19 July 2009); Mark Carreau, “Camera Installed, Despite a Few Snags,” Houston Chronicle, 8 November 2005.)
NASA’s Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASA’s first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, “NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, “STS-114: Return to Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, “Return to Flight: Mission Overview,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, “NASA Grounds Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASA’s workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administration’s 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASA’s efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttle’s retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASA’s failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASA’s ability to accomplish this, such as NASA’s near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the President’s Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement” (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 1–19, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson completed a final spacewalk during which Robinson performed an unprecedented maneuver to complete a critical operation of the orbiter’s thermal protection system. The principle objective of the spacewalk was to remove two pieces of protruding heat shielding―called gap fillers―from the bottom of the orbiter. NASA was concerned that the fillers might add extra heat to the orbiter’s heat- shielding tiles upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere, thereby threatening the mission. Astronauts James M. Kelly and Wendy B. Lawrence used the robotic arms of the Shuttle and those of the ISS to lower Robinson to the underside of Discovery, while Noguchi monitored the operation. Despite concerns that Robinson might lose communication with the other astronauts, the operation was a success. The maneuver was the first time that an astronaut had worked on the underside of an orbiter while in space. During the spacewalk, Noguchi and Robinson also installed an external stowage platform and a new iteration of an experiment to test materials in the environment of space.(NASA, “NASA’s Spacewalking Astronaut Completes Unique Repair,” news release 05-212, 3 August 2005; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-114.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
NASA announced findings from its investigation into the causes of the foam loss on Discovery’s external tank during the Space Shuttle’s launch in July 2005, a problem similar to the one that had caused the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia in February 2003. A team of NASA investigators stated that they had uncovered several possible factors that may have caused a 3- foot (0.9-meter) portion of insulating foam to separate from Discovery during launch. They reported that the most likely cause was inadequate methods of applying and repairing the foam on Discovery’s external tank. The investigators stated that workers might have sprayed the foam in a manner that introduced fissures into it and might have crushed the foam while standing on it in the course of conducting the repairs on Discovery. Although the foam debris had not damaged Discovery, the incident had prompted NASA to suspend Shuttle launches until May 2006, so that engineers could identify the problem and correct it.(Guy Gugliotta, “Discovery Launch Is Still On for May,” Washington Post, 15 October 2005. 264)
