SpaceX announced the successful demonstration of a laser-imaging detection and ranging (LIDAR) sensor called DragonEye, a proximity sensor that had launched aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle Endeavor on 15 July 2009 in Mission STS-127. With the help of NASA’s Commercial Crew and Cargo Program Office, SpaceX had tested DragonEye in proximity with the ISS, in preparation for future visits of SpaceX’s Dragon spacecraft to the ISS. DragonEye would guide the Dragon craft as it approached the space station, providing three-dimensional images based on the amount of time needed for a single laser pulse from the sensor to reach a target and to bounce back. DragonEye had used flight data gathered on board Endeavour to detect the ISS successfully and to track it through various approach and departure maneuvers. Following Endeavour’s return to Earth, DragonEye had returned to SpaceX for evaluation. SpaceX’s Falcon-9 launch vehicle and Dragon were both under contract to NASA to provide cargo resupply to the ISS, following the Space Shuttle’s retirement. The contract included 12 flights between 2010 and 2015, with SpaceX representing the only COTS contender with the ability to return cargo to Earth.(Space Exploration Technologies, “SpaceX’s DragonEye Navigation Sensor Successfully Demonstrated on Space Shuttle,” SpaceX news release 25, September 2009, http://www.spacex.com/press.php?page=20090925 (accessed 19 September 2011); Laser Focus World, “SpaceX Successfully Tests DragonEye LIDAR on Space Shuttle,” 30 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of seven astronauts landed safely at 10:48 a.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC, concluding a 16-day mission to the ISS. The mission had delivered to the ISS the final piece of JAXA’s Kibo laboratory, as well as the new ISS crew member Timothy L. Kopra. Koichi Wakata was returning to Earth with the Endeavour crew after living at the ISS for more than four months. When the seven-member Shuttle crew joined the six-member Expedition 20 in residence at the ISS, the mission featured the largest number of people aboard the ISS to date— and the largest human gathering ever to take place in space. Over the course of five spacewalks, STS-127 crew had transported and assembled the final two sections of the US$1 billion Japanese Kibo laboratory, resupplied the station, and upgraded its power supply.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-179, 31 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_179_Shuttle_landing_success.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Eric Berger, “Endeavour Ends Historic Mission,” Houston Chronicle, 1 August 2009; Scott Powers, “Shuttle Landing: Space Shuttle Endeavour Lands at KSC,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 August 2009.)
Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiment’s purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASA’s LaRC.(Diane Tennant, “NASA Opens Suitcase from Space,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, “MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening,” LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC at 2:28 p.m. (EST) on STS-129, carrying nearly 30,000 pounds of replacement parts for use at the ISS. NASA had packed the spare parts inside two Express Logistics Carriers (ELCs). Astronauts would install the ELCs outside the space station on the central truss during one of the three scheduled spacewalks. Most of the spare parts, which included two steering gyroscopes, a group of tanks, pumps for the ISS cooling system, and a hand for a robotic arm, would remain packed indefinitely until a need for them arose. The STS-129 crew was composed of Commander Charles O. Hobaugh; Pilot Barry E. Wilmore; and Mission Specialists Leland D. Melvin, Michael J. Foreman, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Randolph J. Bresnik.(NASA Space Shuttle Mission Archives, “Mission STS-129: Delivering the Goods,” 4 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/sts129/launch/129_overview.html (accessed 21 November 2011); James Dean, “A ‘Picture-Perfect’ Start: Atlantis Hauls Spare Parts to International Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 November 2009.)
After receiving clearance to return home, astronauts aboard the orbiting Space Shuttle Endeavour successfully deployed two sets of small satellites. Endeavour had undocked from the ISS on 28 July in preparation for the return flight of STS-127. Endeavour’s crew first deployed a pair of small satellites from the Shuttle’s payload bay—the student-built DRAGONSAT (Dual RF Astrodynamic GPS Orbital Navigator Satellite), part of a study to demonstrate autonomous rendezvous and docking technologies, as well as GPS systems. The crew later jettisoned the two 19-inch (48-centimeter) spheres that comprised the Naval Research Laboratory’s ANDE-2 (Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment-2) mission. Although identical in size, each sphere had a different mass. Researchers planned to observe differences in the spheres’ orbits, as part of a study of the density of Earth’s atmosphere.(Tariq Malik, “Shuttle Astronauts Deploy Satellites Ahead of Landing,” Space.com, 30 July 2009, http://www. space.com/7078-shuttle-astronauts-deploy-satellites-landing.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis arrived at the ISS on mission STS-129. With the assistance of a robotic arm, NASA astronauts immediately unloaded one of two ELCs: a 16-foot-by-14-foot (5-meter- by-4-meter) platform, containing pumps, storage tanks, and other equipment weighing hundreds of pounds apiece. All of the equipment was too large to launch aboard any vehicle other than the Shuttle. With only five launches to go before the scheduled 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle program, NASA planned for the Shuttles to carry to the ISS as many spare parts as possible in the time remaining. In addition to spare parts sent to the ISS for storage, Atlantis had also carried thousands of microscopic specimens. NASA intended to use the specimens in experiments studying the effect of gravity on human muscle development and physiology. Upon the docking of Atlantis with the ISS, NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had been on board the ISS for approximately three months, became a member of the Shuttle crew. Stott would return home on board Atlantis at the conclusion of STS-129.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station, Unloads Parts,” 19 November 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Shuttle Atlantis Docks with Space Station,” 19 November 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 5:53 p.m. (PDT), ending a successful 14-day mission to the ISS. Weather prevented the crew from landing at KSC in Florida. STS-128 had delivered to the ISS NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had begun a three-month mission as a resident, replacing Timothy L. Kopra. Kopra had returned home with Discovery’s crew. Discovery had also delivered to the ISS 9 tons (8.16 tonnes, or 8,165 kilograms) of supplies, to sustain the six-person crew and to equip the station for more science experiments. The delivery had included two refrigerator-sized science racks for the station—one for conducting experiments on materials such as metals, glass, and ceramics, and the other for studying how fluids react in microgravity. In addition, Discovery had delivered a freezer for samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air-purification system, and a treadmill named for the comedian Stephen Colbert. The crew had undertaken three spacewalks, to replace experiments outside ESA’s Columbus laboratory and to empty an ammonia-storage tank.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery Returns to Earth After Successful Mission,” news release 09-212, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-212_Discovery_Lands.html (accessed 15 September 2011); James Dean, “Storms Prevent KSC Landing, Divert Discovery to California,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 September 2009; William Harwood, “Shuttle Glides to a California Landing,” New York Times, 12 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at NASA’s KSC at 9:44 a.m. (EST), successfully ending an 11-day mission to the ISS. Atlantis crew delivered and equipped the ISS with nearly 30,000 pounds (13,608 kilograms, or 13.6 tonnes) of critical spare parts. Atlantis crew also conducted three spacewalks in which astronauts completed extra tasks. The Shuttle crew also worked with five U.S., Russian, and European astronauts on board the ISS, to establish power, cooling, and airway connections ahead of the scheduled February arrival of the Tranquility module. The Shuttle and ISS crews also installed new external communications systems to facilitate future maintenance of the space station. Atlantis returned with ISS resident Nicole P. Stott, who had spent 91 days in space. NASA expected that Stott’s return would be the Shuttle’s last rotation of a station crew member.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Crew Returns Home After 11-Day Mission,” news release 09-279, 27 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-279_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Mark Carreau for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Lands Back on Earth,” 30 November 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 11:59 p.m. (EDT) on STS-128, to deliver supplies, equipment, and a new crew member to the ISS. The STS-128 crew comprised Commander Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow; Pilot Kevin A. Ford; and Mission Specialists Patrick G. Forrester, Jose M. Hernandez, John D. “Danny” Olivas, and ESA astronaut A. Christer Fuglesang. Also aboard was Nicole P. Stott, who would begin a three-month mission in residence at the ISS, replacing NASA’s Timothy L. Kopra. Discovery carried in its cargo bay the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module, a pressurized “moving van” that the crew would temporarily install at the ISS. Leonardo would deliver storage racks, materials and fluids science racks, a freezer to store research samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air purification system, and a treadmill named after comedian Stephen Colbert. Colbert had received the most entries in NASA’s online poll to name the station’s Node 3, but NASA had named Node 3 “Tranquility.” As a consolation prize for Colbert, NASA had decided to name the treadmill COLBERT (Combined Operational Load Bearing External Resistance Treadmill).(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Enhance Space Station Science,” news release 09-196, 29 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-196_STS-128_Launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched on STS-127 at 6:03 p.m. (EDT) from NASA’s KSC in Florida, on a 16-day mission to the ISS. The mission would include five spacewalks, deliver the final segment to the JAXA Kibo laboratory, and deliver a new crew member for the ISS. The launch was STS-127’s sixth attempt—NASA had aborted two earlier attempted launches of the mission in June, after poor weather and the discovery of potentially hazardous fuel leaks had caused three scrubs since 11 July. The crew was composed of Commander Mark L. Polansky; Pilot Douglas G. Hurley; and Mission Specialists Christopher J. Cassidy, Thomas H. Marshburn, David A. Wolf, Timothy L. Kopra, and CSA astronaut Julie Payette. Kopra would replace ISS crew member Koichi Wakata, who had been aboard the ISS for more than three months. Kopra would return to Earth with STS-128, which NASA had scheduled to launch in August 2009.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Launches To Complete Japanese Module,” news release 09-160, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-160_STS-127_Launches.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Blasts Off from Cape Canaveral,” 16 July 2009.)
NASA announced the successful completion of a test firing of the igniter designed to start the Ares-I rocket’s first-stage motor. The firing took place at ATK Launch Systems test facilities near Promontory, Utah. The successful test of the igniter, which was an enhanced version of the flight-proven igniter used in Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters, marked a milestone in the continuing development of the Ares-I first stage and paved the way for the first ground test, scheduled to occur later in 2009. Engineers had designed the Ares-I igniter to take advantage of upgraded liner and insulation materials with improved thermal properties. The materials would protect the igniter’s case from the burning solid propellant. The new igniter, approximately 18 inches (45.7 centimeters) in diameter and 36 inches (91.4 centimeters) long, was a small, high- burn-rate solid rocket motor designed to be secured in the forward segment of the five-segment booster. An ignition command would send a flame down the core of the 142-foot (43.3-meter) solid rocket motor, generating more than 3.5 million pounds (1.59 million kilograms) of thrust to trigger liftoff of the rocket.(NASA, “NASA’s Ares I Rocket First Stage Igniter Successfully Tested,” news release 09-055, 10 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09055_ARES_igniter_test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 7:43 p.m. (EDT). STS-119 carried the fourth and final set of solar-array wings, which would complete the ISS’s truss when installed. The schedule for the 13-day mission included three spacewalks to install the S6-truss segment on the starboard side of the ISS and to deploy the solar arrays. The seven-member crew was composed of Commander Lee J. Archambault, Pilot Dominic A. “Tony” Antonelli, and Mission Specialists Joseph M. Acaba, Steven R. Swanson, Richard R. Arnold II, John L. Phillips, and JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata. Wakata would remain at the ISS, replacing Expedition 18 crew member Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the station for more than four months. Acaba and Arnold, former teachers who had become fully trained NASA astronauts, were on their first mission, scheduled to undertake critical spacewalking tasks. STS-119 was one month behind schedule; NASA had delayed the launch four times because of fragile valves inside the Shuttle’s propulsion system. On 11 March, NASA had postponed Discovery’s launch because, during fueling, engineers had detected a leak associated with the gaseous hydrogen venting system. Because of the delays, NASA had shortened the STS-119 mission by one day and had dropped one of the four spacewalks originally scheduled.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Fully Power Space Station,” news release 09-060, 15 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-060_Discovery_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, “Discovery Heads to International Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 March 2009.)
NASA marked the 10-year anniversary of the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory with the release of the first of three new versions of classic Chandra images. NASA planned to release the other two versions over the following three months. The newly released image showed the remnants of the supernova E0102, located 190,000 light-years away from Earth, in the Small Magellanic Cloud. Chandra had made its first observation of E0102 shortly after its 1999 launch. The observatory had created the new image from recent x-ray data showing the supernova’s outer blast wave and its inner ring of cooler material. This x-ray data had provided astronomers with new information about the geometry of the remnant and the nature of the explosion. Chandra had launched in 1999 from aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, deploying on a five-year mission that had ushered in an unprecedented decade of discovery. Among its achievements, Chandra had provided the strongest evidence to date for the existence of dark matter. Chandra had independently confirmed the existence of dark energy, producing spectacular images of the titanic explosions created when matter swirled toward supermassive black holes.(NASA, “NASA Celebrates Chandra X-Ray Observatory’s 10th Anniversary,” news release 09-171, 23 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-171_Chandra_anniversary.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Space.com, “On 10th Birthday, Chandra Spies Stellar Explosion,” 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7039-10th- birthday-chandra-spies-stellar-explosion.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
Astronomer Arthur D. Code died in Madison, Wisconsin, at the age of 85. A designer of space observatories, Code had worked with a team of scientists from NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory in 1968, to send into orbit a bat-shaped satellite—the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO 2). Although the original OAO craft had failed in its 1966 mission, OAO 2 had succeeded, yielding information about the composition of stars, comets, and galactic gases. Intended to last a year, the OAO-2 mission had remained operational until 1973. OAO 2 had sent back data indicating that young stars in the constellations Scorpius and Orion are far hotter than previously thought and, therefore, are likely aging more quickly than astronomers had previously believed. OAO-2 successor craft included OAO 3 and NASA’s HST. Following the OAO-2 mission, Code had taught at the University of Wisconsin, where he had refined his designs and had analyzed data retrieved from subsequent satellites. In 1990 he and a team of students had sent an ultraviolet-detecting telescope to orbit aboard Space Shuttle Columbia; the team had used the device to study polarized ultraviolet light. Code had served as president of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and had been a member of the NAS. NASA had awarded him its Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.(Jeremy Pearce, “Arthur Code, Astronomer and Professor, Dies at 85,” New York Times, 23 March 2009.)
2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Mission’s 3rd and Final Spacewalk,” 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission,” 5 September 2009.)
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASA’s MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttle’s main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicle’s Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSC’s propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFC’s Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, “Lightfoot Named Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
The U.S. Senate confirmed retired U.S. Marine Corps general and former astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. as NASA’s twelfth Administrator, marking the first appointment of an African American as NASA’s Administrator. During his 34-year career with the Marine Corps, Bolden had spent 14 years as a member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, which he had joined in 1980. As an astronaut, he had traveled to orbit four times aboard the Space Shuttle, between 1986 and 1994. On two of those trips he had served as Commander of the Shuttle. His missions had included the deployment of the HST and the first joint U.S.-Russian Shuttle mission. While he was an astronaut, Bolden had fulfilled many technical assignments, serving as Astronaut Office Safety Officer; Technical Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations; Special Assistant to the Director of JSC; Lead Astronaut for vehicle test and checkout at KSC; Chief of the Safety Division at JSC, where he oversaw safety efforts for the return to flight after the 1986 Challenger accident; and Assistant Deputy Administrator at NASA Headquarters. In May 2006, NASA had inducted Bolden into the Astronaut Hall of Fame. The Senate also confirmed Lori B. Garver as NASA’s new Deputy Administrator. Like Bolden, Garver was returning to NASA for a second period of service. Between 1996 and 2001, she had served as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and Senior Policy Analyst for the Office of Policy and Plans, before becoming Associate Administrator of that office.(NASA, “Bolden and Garver Confirmed by U.S. Senate,” news release 09-165, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-165_Bolden_and_Garver.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Bolden Confirmed as NASA Administrator,” 16 July 2009.)
Commander Gennady I. Padalka and Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt, of ISS Expedition 20, landed safely on the steppes of Kazakhstan in the Soyuz TMA-14 spacecraft, following a six- month residency at the space station. During their mission, Padalka and Barratt had presided over the inauguration of the station’s six-person crew, as well as two Space Shuttle assembly and resupply missions. The two missions had included the delivery of new science facilities for expanded research and the arrival of the first Japanese HTV. Also aboard Soyuz TMA-14 was Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté, who had launched on 30 September with the Expedition 21 crew to spend nine days aboard the ISS. Laliberté had hosted a global Web cast from aboard the space station, to promote his One Drop Foundation. The mission of the One Drop Foundation was to preserve the world’s water resources and to provide global access to clean water. With Padalka’s departure, ISS Expedition 21 Commander Frank DeWinne became the first European to take command of the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz Landing Caps Historic Space Station Increment,” news release 09-237, 11 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09_237_Soyuz_Lands.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Douglas Birch for Associated Press, “Russian Spacecraft with Circus Tycoon Lands Safely,” 13 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, “European Takes Command of Space Station, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 October 2009.)
NASA announced the retirement of David A. King, Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. King was retiring from NASA to accept a position in the private sector, effective immediately. NASA appointed Robert M. Lightfoot, MSFC Deputy Director, to serve as Acting Director until the appointment of a successor. King’s departure ended a NASA career that had begun in 1983 at KSC, where he had served as Director of Space Shuttle Processing and Shuttle Launch Director. King had served as Director of MSFC since June 2003.
SpaceX announced that it had conducted its first Dragon spacecraft operations training in October 2009 at its headquarters in Hawthorne, California, for a group of NASA astronauts and personnel. The training had focused on how the crew would interface with the spacecraft as it approached and docked at the ISS. NASA had assigned astronauts Tracy Caldwell Dyson, Shannon Walker, and Douglas H. Wheelock to be on board the ISS when the Dragon made its inaugural visit under the COTS program, scheduled for February 2010. The training had been the first time the NASA astronauts scheduled to interact with the Dragon were actually inside the flight vehicle. This first training session marked a key step toward SpaceX’s provision of the alternative craft that NASA would use to transport cargo to and from the ISS after the Space Shuttle program ended. In the session, SpaceX had briefed the NASA astronauts on all aspects of the Dragon related to cargo transport—how to open the spacecraft’s hatch, how to enter the craft, and how to send commands as the craft approached the station.(Space Exploration Technologies, “SpaceX Hosts Preliminary Training for NASA ISS Astronauts in Preparation for Dragon Spacecraft Rendezvous and Station Berthing,” SpaceX news release, 3 December 2009, http://www. spacex.com/press.php?page=20091203 (accessed 19 December 2011); Robert Block, “SpaceX Trains Its First Batch of NASA Astronauts,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at 8:39 a.m. (PDT) at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending a successful 13-day mission to HST. Weather conditions had prevented Atlantis from landing at KSC. Astronauts had performed five spacewalks to repair, replace, and upgrade the instruments and computers on HST. These repairs and upgrades had not only restored the telescope, but had also expanded its capabilities. NASA considered the unprecedented mission historic, because of the complexity of the repairs and because the mission had been the last time human beings would go to space to repair an orbiting scientific instrument. NASA had placed HST in low Earth orbit at 600 kilometers (373 miles) to facilitate repair missions, but the location was suboptimal for space telescopes. NASA had planned to place HST’s successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) away from Earth, at L2, and, therefore, had designed JWST to function without repairs or upgrades. In addition to making HST repairs, astronauts had performed a commercial drug experiment aimed at finding a vaccine against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and other microbes.(NASA, “NASA’s Space Shuttle Returns to Earth After Hubble Mission,” news release 09-120, 24 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-120_STS-125_Landing_Edwards.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Houston Chronicle, “This Is Why We Fly: Hubble Repair Mission Showcases the Value of the Manned Space Program,” 26 May 2009; Daniel Holz, “The Last Fix,” Discover Magazine, 26 May 2009, http://blogs. discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2009/05/25/the-last-fix/ (accessed 21 July 2011); Frank Morring Jr., “Drug Experiment Performed on Atlantis,” Aviation Week, 20 May 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. Barratt and Kevin A. Ford used a robotic arm to remove the 13.5- ton (12.3-tonne, or 12,247-kilogram) Leonardo cargo module from Space Shuttle Discovery’s cargo bay. An hour later, the astronauts had successfully attached the module to the Harmony module’s Earth-facing port and had begun the process of checking for leaks and pressurizing a vestibule between Harmony and the cargo module.(William Harwood, “Cargo Module Mounted to Space Station for Unloading,” Spaceflight Now, 1 September 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of STS-127 at the ISS, focusing on odd jobs and unfinished tasks, which they completed in 4 hours and 54 minutes. The duo rewired power cables for the ISS’s American- built attitude-control system; secured loose insulation on a Canadian-built maintenance robot; and added to JEF a pair of television cameras, which would provide good views of Japan’s new unpiloted cargo ship, the H-2 Transfer Vehicle, scheduled to make its maiden flight in September 2009. The only task that the astronauts left unfinished was the installation of a cargo attachment system, a task that Mission Control had decided would require too much time. Instead, Mission Control instructed Cassidy and Marshburn to tend to some “get-ahead” tasks—attaching wire ties to external cables and installing new handrails and work-site attachments on the Kibo laboratory. The five spacewalks tied the record for the most EVAs (extravehicular activities) performed on the ISS while a Space Shuttle was docked at the station.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Wrap Up Space Station Service Call,” Space.com, 27 July 2009, http://www.space. com/7059-spacewalkers-wrap-space-station-service-call.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched at 2:10 p.m. (EDT) from NASA’s KSC. The seven-member crew was on the final servicing mission for the HST. STS-125, also known as Servicing Mission 4, comprised Commander Scott D. Altman, Pilot Gregory C. Johnson, and Mission Specialists K. Megan McArthur, John M. Grunsfeld, Michael J. Massimino, Andrew J. Feustel, and Michael T. Good. The mission plan called for the crew to make five spacewalks, to replace gyroscopes and batteries, as well as the Wide Field Camera 2, which had captured most of the images of deep space that had made HST famous. The crew would also attempt repairs of the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) and of a spectroscope that breaks down the light of stars. Because NASA had not designed those instruments with the intention of repairing them, NASA was uncertain that the repairs would succeed. NASA had developed 116 tools specifically for Servicing Mission 4. HST was located in an orbit 375 miles (603.5 kilometers) above Earth, in a region containing large amounts of space junk. NASA had placed Space Shuttle Endeavour on the launchpad in preparation for a rescue mission, in the event Atlantis sustained damage.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis Launches on a Final Mission to Hubble,” news release 09-104, 11 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-104_Atlantis_launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); John Johnson Jr., “Atlantis Blasts Off for Final Hubble Mission,” Los Angeles Times, 12 May 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of Dina E. Contella, Scott Stover, and Edward Van Cise as new flight directors to manage and carry out Shuttle flights and ISS expeditions. John A. McCullough, Chief of the Flight Director Office at JSC, remarked that all three new flight directors were senior flight controllers with lead management experience and an average of 10 years of flight-control experience. McCullough added that this group would help NASA transfer the knowledge and experience from the existing human spaceflight programs into the development and execution of the next-generation exploration program with the new Orion spacecraft. Contella had worked for NASA since 1990, when she had begun working in NASA’s cooperative education program while she completed her bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering. She had served as Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Controller and Astronaut Instructor since 1995, responsible for planning, training for, and executing spacewalks. Since 2008, Stover had supported six Space Shuttle flights for ISS assembly and had led the team that managed the ISS electrical power system. Van Cise had worked with NASA since 2000 in a variety of roles. He had been a member of the Operations Support Officer (OSO) team that coordinated ISS repair, maintenance, and assembly operations; served as Special Assistant to the Director of Mission Operations; led the Mechanisms and Maintenance Training Group, training astronauts and flight controllers in skills and techniques related to the repair, maintenance, and assembly of the space station; served on staff in the Flight Director Program Integration Office; and worked as an ISS Flight Controller for the OSO and for the Telemetry, Information, Transfer, and Attitude Navigation (Titan) groups.(NASA, “NASA Chooses Three New Flight Directors To Lead Mission Control,” news release 09-133, 12 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-133_New_Flight_Directors.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Doug Messier, “NASA Chooses 3 New Flight Directors,” Parabolic Arc, 15 June 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at 3:14 p.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC in Florida, completing its 13-day mission to the ISS. The crew of STS-119 had delivered, installed, and deployed the space station’s final set of solar-array wings, thus completing the station’s truss and supplying full power; replaced a failed unit for a system that converts urine to potable water; and performed important tasks in preparation for future upgrades and additions. STS-119 spacewalkers had failed to deploy fully an external cargo carrier on the Port-3 truss segment but had secured it in place. Mission Control had cancelled the installation of a similar payload attachment system on the starboard side, tasking NASA engineers with evaluating the problem. NASA planned to complete the installation during future spacewalks. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata had remained aboard the ISS, replacing Flight Engineer Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the space station for more than four months.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-072, 28 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09072_STS-119_Landing.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
