Lockheed-Califomia Co. announced it had developed concept for space shuttle vehicle that could be available in 1966. The “space tug” was designed primarily as spacecraft-to-spacecraft cargo transportation system and was result of study sponsored by afsc. (SBD, 4/14/64, 75; Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 59)
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
In speech before New York Society of Security Analysts, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said: “I believe that if we wanted to we could have our space shuttle in operation by 1976. ... To achieve the desired economy, it will be necessary to operate this transportation system in the successful jet transport mode. Our space shuttle will probably take off from major airports with little or no noise. It will not create a sonic boom along the route. It will go into orbit, deposit and take on crew and cargo, and return for a horizontal airport landing.” He foresaw an international demand for reusable space vehicles. (Text)
nasa issued RFPs for design and planning studies of 12-man, earth-orbital space station for 1975 with 10-yr operational life, subject to resupply of expendables and crew rotation with logistics vehicles. Work also would include conceptual design of 50-man space base of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s and comparable to scientific and technical research, development, and operations center on earth. Modified Apollo and Gemini spacecraft would be considered as initial logistics systems if space shuttle did not become available in early phase of space station operations. Data from studies would be available for final design of future space station if program were approved for development. Proposals were due June 9. (nasa Release 69—65)
msfc announced it would manage two recently awarded $300,000 sixmonth contracts, one to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. and one to General Dynamics Corp., for conceptual study of low-cost, manned logistics (space shuttle) system. Similar study contracts awarded to North American Rockwell Corp. and to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. would be managed fiy msc and LaRC. Integral Launch and Reentry Vehicle (ilrv) studies would investigate aspects of reusable transportation system for post-1974 use in support of proposed space stations. msfc also announced $3,288,914 modification to contract with Boeing Co. for continued configuration management support on Saturn V launch vehicle program, including processing of vehicle and ground support equipment configuration changes, configuration accounting, and change integration and tracking, (msfc Releases 69—34, 69—35)
Washington Post reported interview with l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director. Space shuttle was samso’s top priority program. New family of spaceships was being roughed out on drawing boards. “From a military standpoint, we need to be aggressive advocates of the capability to take a look at and deal as necessary with space vehicles of another country.” usaf and NASA were dividing labor on space shuttle program, which would cost estimated $1 billion. Pace of program would depend on progress toward development of reusable rocket engine which would not burn itself out as it hurtled into space, LeRoy E. Day, Chief of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, said. (Wilson, W Post, 10/15/69, A3)
NASA announced establishment of task group on manned space station under Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and of task group on space shuttle under Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Reporting to Dr. Mueller would be LeRoy E. Day, former Director of Apollo Test. His group would develop NASA material for report on space shuttles to President’s Space Task Group by June 15. Frank Borman, former Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc and Apollo 8 commander, would report to Mathews as Field Director for Space Station effort. (NASA Release 69—70)
NASA had put into operation $2.6-million, six-story-high flight simulator for advanced aircraft (fsaa) at arc, arc announced. Largest piloted-aircraft simulator ever built would provide research data on handling characteristics of faster and larger jets to ensure safe control by their pilots. Designed by arc engineers John C. Dusterberry, Maurice D. White, and Shizuo Doiguchi, simulator had motion-generator with 100 ft of lateral motion, 10 ft of vertical motion, and 8 ft of forward and backward motion, combined with pitch, roll, and yaw motions. It was operated by general-purpose, digital-analog computer, which could be programmed with flight characteristics of most aircraft, fsaa could simulate aerodynamics of hypersonic and supersonic flight by reentry vehicle-such as space shuttle, (arc Release 69—13)
Space shuttle was “first step or keystone to the success and growth of future space flight developments for the exploration and exploitation of space,” LeRoy E. Day and B. G. Noblitt of Space Shuttle Task Group, NASA OMSF, said in paper presented at IEEE EASCON Session on Earth Orbiting Manned Space Station in Washington, D.C. “Large experiment modules and unmanned satellites can be placed into low earth orbit and retrieved as desired. Propulsive stages and payloads . . . destined for higher energy orbits can be placed into low earth orbits.” On-orbit reusable shuttles like space tugs and nuclear stages “become economically advantageous once propellants can be inexpensively delivered to earth orbit. . . . On-orbit maintenance services can be provided for malfunctioning or inoperative satellites. . . . short duration special purpose orbital missions can be conducted by the space shuttle itself to augment or complement space station activities. The design and operational characteristics of the space shuttle will also provide a potential capability to conduct space rescue missions—a capability that is not practical with conventional expendable launch systems,” (Text)
In its international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched three foreign satellites—Canadian Isis /, third of series to conduct ionospheric measurement; Boreas (Esro IB) for European Space Research Organization on reimbursable basis; and West German Azur under cooperative project to conduct radiation belt measurements. Agreements for new projects were reached with U.K., Italy, Netherlands, and Canada. U.K. agreement called for 1971 launch of satellite on NASA Scout vehicle to measure ionospheric particles and radio noise and experiment to fly on board NASA’s Nimbus-E in 1972. Italian agreement provided for 1970 launch of San Marco-C satellite on NASA Scout vehicle from Italian San Marco range in Indian Ocean and use of range for launching NASA spacecraft into equatorial orbit. Under Netherlands agreement two Dutch scientists would participate as observers in OAO program. Canadian agreement called for reimbursement launching of Canadian comsat. Project Helios, cooperative endeavor with West German Ministry for Scientific Research to place two solar probes (1974—1975) closer to sun than any other spacecraft, would obtain data on solar processes and earth-sun relationship. Under another agreement with West Germany, Project Aeros, NASA would launch German-developed satellite in 1972 for aeronomy measurements. In agreement with Indian space agency, ATS—F satellite would be made available for experimental educational TV broadcasting directly and by relay to receivers in 5,000 Indian villages. Additional cooperative projects during 1969 included launch of one Italian, two U.K., and two French experiments; continuation of sounding rocket projects with Australia, Brazil, Canada, India, Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Spain, and Sweden; inclusion of Canadian and French experiments on Convair 990 flights to study auroras in northern latitudes; and extension of aeronautical research projects with Canada, France, West Germany, and U.K. Agreement with Spain for NASA Madrid tracking station was extended in June until 1984 and negotiations were begun with Australia for extension of tracking arrangements until same year. Lunar surface material returned by Apollo 11 astronauts was distributed to 39 principal investigators from nine countries—Australia, Belgium, Canada, Finland, West Germany, Japan, South Africa, Switzerland, and U.K. International highlights in 1969 included around-the-world tour of Apollo 11 astronauts to dramatize conviction that successful lunar landing was triumph for all mankind; travels of NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to inform ministerial and space agency officials abroad of U.S. space plans and invite their participation; and participation of foreign experts in NASA conference on space shuttle concepts. Efforts by NASA to develop cooperative programs with U.S.S.R. continued during 1969, but met with limited success. (Pres Rpt 70 [69])
In Washington Post, Victor Cohn said fight for ideas “which once would have been labeled ‘wild’ ” had begun when NASA began congressional committee hearings on its $3.7-billion FY 1970 budget [see March 4]. It had continued with announcement of “dramatic plan for ten more manned expeditions to the moon after the first men land there in July.” Americans had responded to 1 “exciting” Apollo program “with heightened fervor for a man in space.” But new fight for funding would probably be “nasa’s toughest.” Americans were asking, “How about our needs here on earth?” Many scientists felt unmanned instruments could do cheaper and nearly as effective job of space exploration. Congress had been calling nasa’s present spending level “enough.” Still, NASA had succeeded in marshaling “powerful scientific support.” As yet unreleased report of Dr. Charles H. Townes’ space task force appointed by President Nixon urged both vigorous manned space program and development of reusable space shuttle. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, had declared himself for “a really solid, many-faceted program.” NASA officials were optimistic but funds actually appropriated for FY 1970 budget would finance only five more Apollo flights plus first hardware for Apollo Applications program. Public thinking was “just about 50—50 today, and new U.S. consensus has not yet crystallized.” (W Post, 3/16/69, Al)
msc announced appointment of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper as Assistant for Space Shuttle Program in msc’s Flight Crew Operations Directorate. Cooper would be responsible for flight crew training program, astronaut inputs into design and engineering, and directorate’s part in hardware development and testing for Space Shuttle. He would remain on flight status and eligible for space flight, (msc Release 69/67)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, former Assistant Secretary of Defense, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator. He would advise nasa senior officials on scientific and engineering aspects of agency programs and review and advise on work of President’s Space Task Group and nasa— dod cooperation on space shuttle. Before joining NASA Dr. Fubini had been Vice President and Group Executive at ibm. (nasa Release 69-85)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: “During the entire spectrum of our second and third decades in space, manned space flight has not merely been emphasized, but has literally cannibalized any hope for major scientific planetary, interplanetary, communications, meteorological, oceanographic (in cooperation with satellites), earth resources satellite programs, etc.! I must conclude . . . that the only valid justification for early development of the [space] shuttle is to supply the newborn 50—100 crew manned space stations and the manned exploration of Mars.” From 1958 to 1969 U.S. had launched approximately 750 spacecraft, Karth said: usaf, 380; NASA, 241; usn, 91; and joint usaf—USN, 37. (Text)
Christian Science Monitorsditorial said nasa had postponed manned Mars mission because of budget cutback but “it is keeping its space shuttle program pretty much on schedule.” Reusable space vehicle was “guarantee that space progress won’t be wholly shunted aside by budget stringencies.” It would “help to keep alive the interest of the big rocket and airframe contractors, and the enthusiasm of the thousands of researchers and scientists who have hoped to make space exploration their life work.” (CSM, 2/12/70)
NASA announced selection of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. for negotiations leading to eight-month, $250000, fixed-price contract for design study for “versatile upper stage” (vus), high-energy stage that would increase orbital capacity of current launch vehicles and could be used as expendable upper stage with space shuttle. (nasa Release 70-140)
USAF contract awards: Aerojet-General Corp. was being issued $12 100 000 initial increment to $33 409 607 fixed-price-incentive contract for procurement of Titan IIIB, C, and D stage 1 and 2 liquid-rocket engine systems. TRW Inc. was being issued $351 000 initial increment to $4 669 800 contract for advanced development of electronic propulsion system for space satellites. General Dynamics Corp. was receiving $250 000 initial increment to $2 585 000 contract for development, assembly, test, and launch support of integrated unmanned spacecraft for space flight-testing of dod experiments. (dod Release 544-70) During June: Hypersonic aircraft technology and applications were discussed in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy; Richard H. Petersen, Senior Research Scientist in arc Mission Analysis Div.; and Nathaniel B. Cohen, special assistant in NASA policy research program. Because of long-life requirements of its structure, it was unlikely that hypersonic transport would be developed until operational experience was available on some other hypersonic aircraft. Therefore, hypersonic transport would benefit not only from technology developed for space-shuttle vehicle, but very probably from experience gained during shuttle operation. Operating experience with high-temperature structures would help immensely in developing longer life structures for hypersonic transport and gain considerable new knowledge of hypersonic aerodynamics. In contrast to situation in aerodynamics and structures, technology program being planned by NASA to support development of rocket propulsion for shuttle would not contribute significantly to hypersonic airbreathing-propulsion-system technology. Current generalized scramjet research program had amply demonstrated feasibility of such engines. Developing airbreathing propulsion for either hypersonic transport or secondgeneration airbreathing 1st stage for space shuttle would require applied program focused specifically on scramjet. (A&A, 6/70, 30-41)
Meeting at msfc reviewed parallel studies of proposed chemical interorbital space shuttle by North American Rockwell Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Analyses of modifications required to adapt either 2nd or 3rd stage of Saturn V launch vehicle into interorbital shuttle between earth and lunar orbit were to lead to preliminary designs, determine orbital launch operations and procedures, and gather data on preliminary costs, logistics, and facilities. Discussions included results of analyses to date, definition of systems requirements, necessary system and subsystem trade-offs, and selection of preliminary configurations. (MSFC Release 70-262)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced H.R. 15695, $3.333-billion FY 1971 NASA authorization bill. (Text) Design baselines at start of Phase B studies of shuttle included 1.6 million kg (3.5 million lbs) at liftoff and payload compartment volume of 4.6-m (15-ft) dia by 18.3 m (60 ft) long. Pan American World Airways President Najeeb E. Halaby said NASA reusable space shuttle was logical step toward ship for commercial travel to orbit and back and for point-to-point earth transportation. (Mathews Text; upi, W Star, 2/6/70, A10)
MSC announced selection of United Aircraft Corp’s Pratt & Whitney Div. and General Electric Co.’s Direct Energy Conversion Business Section to negotiate parallel cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts for development of fuel-cell technology leading to design, fabrication, and testing of engineering-model fuel-cell system. Contracts, which would run for 13 mos beginning July 1, were valued at $825 000 each. MSC program to provide electrical power for space shuttle was aimed at development of hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell with 5000-hr lifetime, 5000-w power output, and weight of 333 kg (735 lbs) or less. (MSC Release 70-66)
West German government was ready to accept partnership arrangement with U.S. in seven-year space shuttle program, William Hines reported in Washington Sunday Star. Nixon Administration had “gone openly shopping” for foreign assistance in project. There was dispute over how far negotiations had gone, “but the West Germans believe they have been offered a 10 percent piece of the action in exchange for about $570 million in. . .Deutschemarks, payable 300 million marks annually for seven years.” NASA had said discussions had been going on with eight foreign countries. (W Star, 2/15/70)
NASA was placing new emphasis on development of profitable manufacturing facilities orbiting in space and operated by private industry, because of budget cuts, New York Times article said. Industry participation could lead to operation and ownership of facilities by organizations like ComSatCorp—“prototype of such a joint undertaking.” NASA would make available facilities like space shuttle transportation system, space workshops, and station at mutually agreeable price. Some manufacturing might be more economical in space because of high vacuum and zero g, but before program could become practical NASA would have to move into “more highly developed operational stage. . .more applicable to research and development and to manufacturing.” (Tomaszewski, NYT, 2/15/70, Cl)
NASA announced award of $380 000 contract to Ralph M. Parsons Co. for engineering services in development of overall plan for space shuttle ground facilities. (NASA Release 70-165)
NASA successfully launched 134.7-kg (296-lb) ram c-iii (RAM C-C) spacecraft from Wallops Station at 4:06 pm edt by four-stage Scout booster. Spacecraft reached 209.2-km (130-mi) altitude, reentered atmosphere at 7.6 km per sec (25 000 fps), and splashed down in Atlantic 277.8 km (172.6 mi) northeast of Bermuda after eight-mimite flight. Primary objective was to determine relative effectiveness of water and freon in restoring communications during reentry blackout period. Preliminary data, obtained by Langmuir probes on board, indicated all downrange telemetry stations received signals before and after blackout and intermittent signals during blackout. ram c-lll, was third and last mission in NASA’s RAM (Radio Attenuation Measurement) program to study problems of communicating through plasma sheath around reentering spacecraft. Results could be applied to advanced lifting-body vehicles, space shuttle, and other reentering spacecraft, ram c-i had been launched Oct. 19, 1967, and ram c-ll Aug. 22, 1968. (NASA Proj Off; WS Release 70-13)
msfc announced award of $21 029 756 modification to Boeing Co. contract for work on Saturn V 1st stages and extension of contract performance period through March 31,1973. MSFC also issued rfp on preliminary design of Research and Applications Module (ram) that could be used with space station and space shuttle. Proposals were due Jan. 8, 1971. (MSFC releases 70250,70-251)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on NASA FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Manned space expenditures for FY 1971 would be about 25% less than in FY 1970 and about half FY 1966 peak. “We are able to make these rapid changes . . . as the result of two fundamental policies .... One of these policies is that the great bulk of the NASA program is carried out under contracts with industry, university laboratories and other institutions in the private sector of our economy. The other ... is that NASA must maintain a civil service staff sufficient in quality and numbers to properly supervise the work performed under contract .... Essentially all the reductions being implemented in the manned space flight programs in Fiscal Year 1971 are in those efforts carried out urtder contract.” In FY 1971 NASA proposed to complete definition of space shuttle and space station and continue studies of systems, missions, and payloads for further economies in future years. In Apollo program, Myers pointed out, scheduled stretchout of manned lunar landings would “add to operational costs of the lunar exploration program, although not to our costs this year.” In Skylab program, design, development, and ground testing of subsystems and assemblies of Saturn Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and atm were well advanced. Fabrication had begun on first flight articles, with delivery scheduled for late 1971. In space shuttle program, shuttle would be “designed so that it can be maintained in a state of launch readiness for lengthy periods and yet be launched within two hours notice into an orbit of any inclination. In the event of an emergency in space, it would be able to carry engineering or repair specialists to overcome the problem or rescue an endangered crew.” (Testimony)
frc announced NASA had assumed operational control of one of two YF-12 aircraft being flown in joint nasa-usaf program to obtain information from sustained cruise flight at mach 3 and altitudes in 23 000-m (75 000-ft) range for use in development and operation of commercial and military supersonic aircraft and proposed space shuttle. Two nasa flight crews, each consisting of pilot and flight test engineer, had been assigned to program. Pilots, Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Donald L. Mallick, were former XB-70 pilots for nasa. (frc Release 9/10)
Point-to-point second-generation space shuttle was possibility and could be “transportation system of the future as opposed to the hypersonic aircraft,” Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech before Aero Club in Washington, D.C. (Text)
MSFC announced issuance of rfps for study of inflight venting of space shuttle vehicles to identify areas of vehicle requiring venting, establish venting schemes, outline data requirements for venting analyses, and develop test program to analyze shuttle vehicles during launch and reentry. Proposals were due July 17. (MSFC Release 70-126)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), for himself, Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.), Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and Sen. Jacob K.	Javits (R-N.Y.), submitted amendment to H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill which would reduce NASA R&D appropriation by $110 million—amount requested by NASA for design and definition of space shuttle and station. Sen. Mondale said: “This project represents NASA’s next major effort in manned space flight. The $110 million.. .is only the beginning of the story. NASA’s preliminary cost estimates for development of the space shuttle/station total almost $14 billion, and the ultimate cost may run much higher. Furthermore, the shuttle and station are the first essential steps toward a manned Mars landing.. .which could cost anywhere between $50 to $100 billion. I have seen no persuasive justification for embarking upon a project of such staggering costs at a time when many of our citizens are malnourished, when our rivers and lakes are polluted, and when our cities and rural areas are decaying.” (CR, 6/29/70, S10057-8)
NASA announced that Charles J. Donlan, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical), would also become Acting Director of Space Shuttle Task Force, replacing Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Appointment was effective immediately. (NASA Ann, 11/18/70)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Grumman Aerospace Corp., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and Chrysler Corp. for 11-mo Phase A (feasibility) contracts to study space shuttle concepts. Boeing Co. would be major subcontractor to Grumman on $4-million contract for three shuttle concepts: stage-and-a-half shuttle of reusable manned spacecraft with onboard propulsion system and droppable tanks for supplementary propellants; reusable orbiter with expendable booster; and reusable 1st stage using existing J-2S engine technology, solid-propellant auxiliary boosters, and reusable 2nd-stage orbital shuttle with J-2 engine. Lockheed’s $l-million fixed-price contract would define alternate stage-and-a-half shuttle system including high and low cross-range designs. Chrysler Corp. would study reusable vehicle capable of placing payload into earth orbit with single stage, under $750 000 contract. (nasa Release 70-97)
msfc announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. and TRW Inc. for final negotiations leading to four contracts (two per company) totaling $1.2 million for space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system definition, (msfc Release 70-103)
NASA's HL-JO lifting body ('above right.) reached a lifting-body speed record of tnach 1.S6 and an altitude of 1980(1 meters (65 000 feet) during powered night after air launch from a B-52 aircraft. Experimental vehicles in the joint nasa-usaf Lifting Body Flight Research Program to develop the design of future space shuttle craft also included the X-24A (above left), which made its first supersonic flight Oct. 14, and the M2-F3 (center), which made its first glide flight June 2. research was still too flimsy to risk two-year manned Mars flight. (Krimsky, Long Beach [Calif] Independent, 2/19/70)
msfc announced award of separate $150 000 three-month contracts to three firms to study possible conversion of 12 existing rocket engine test stands for captive firings of propulsion system for new space shuttle engine. New engine, not yet under development, would be used in clusters to power reusable space shuttle which could be flown up to 100 times. Four test positions at msfc would be studied by Aerojet-General Corp.; four at NASA Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif., by nar Rocketdyne Div.; and four at mtf, by United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. (msfc Release 70-27)
NASA selected McDonnell Douglas Corp. and NR Space Division to negotiate 11-mo, $8-million, fixed-price contracts for parallel definition and preliminary design studies of two-stage reusable space shuttle vehicle to transport crew, passengers, and cargo between earth and near space, msfc would manage McDonnell Douglas work and msc would manage NR work. (NASA Release 70-68)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines advocated abandonment of sst program “and substitution of a longer range objective: a hypersonic transport airplane (hst) to become operational around 1990.” R&D for 500-passenger, 8000-km-per-hr (5000-mph) global-range hst was “going to be bought and paid for anyway” as part of NASA’s space shuttle program. This would be a classic case of ‘spinoff’—a byproduct of the space program useful to the civilian economy.” There seemed little doubt “that an aerospace-plane capable of shuttling Earth-to-orbit could be adapted to serve long-range world markets as a pure airplane if travel demands could be shown to justify its construction.” sst was “not a spinoff but a drainoff.” Its “most dubious aspect” was “direct federal subsidy of r&d, which in effect amounts to a $1.5 billion loan to private enterprise at zero interest,” Hines said. (W Star, 1/18/70, C4) During Week of January 18: India successfully test-fired four Rohini rockets at Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station. Additional launches would be conducted following week. (AP, W Post, 1/23/ 70, A21)
Oran W. Nicks, NASA Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings: Jet aircraft noise-reduction goals of NASA’s acoustically treated nacelle program had been achieved. McDonnell Douglas design modifying nacelles of DC-8 had reduced noise by 10.5 epndb with estimated 4.2% direct-operating-cost increase. Boeing design for 707 aircraft had reduced noise by 15.5 epndb with estimated 9.2% direct-operating-cost increase. Long-range approach to reducing jet transport noise was under way in quiet engine program, with quietness as design requirement for first time in aviation history. Quiet engine incorporating high bypass ratio, low-noise fan design, and sound attenuating ducts would be built by General Electric Co. Three lifting-body vehicles—USAF X-24A, NASA M2-F3, and NASA HL-10—were investigating low-speed flight problems to be encountered by space shuttle orbiter and booster in future and providing information on subsonic and transonic flying qualities. In human factors program, NASA was preparing life support systems for extended space missions. “Continuous testing of candidate sub-systems integrated into functional life support systems has been accomplished for up to 60 days. The space vehicle simulation.cham-bers employed. . .have accommodated four-man teams. A 90-day test with the four-man simulator will be conducted this year.” Test would include onboard oxygen recovery system with water electrolysis unit—major component in subsystem for oxygen recovery from carbon dioxide. During 90-day run, advanced subsystems for water recovery employing vacuum distillation and vapor pyrolysis with isotope power source and water vapor electrolysis unit for humidity control would be validated. (Testimony) Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified on communications satellites before Committee: “NASA has recently completed negotiations and signed an agreement with the Communications Satellite Corporation (Comsat) for a continuation of satellite services. .. . New contracts have been negotiated for continuing this service with Cable and Wireless, Ltd., England; Australian Overseas Telecommunications Commission; and Compania Telefonica Nacional de Espana, Spain.” (Testimony)
MSFC awarded McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. $2-million, oneyear modification to space shuttle study contract. Under new agreement McDonnell Douglas would recommend program to test all structural components of proposed space shuttle’s booster and orbi-ter craft, including verification of design and advanced state-of-the-art testing of materials, wing leading edges, and propellant tanks. MSC, which had companion space shuttle study under way, was negotiating similar amendment with NR. (msfc Release 70-239)
U.S. space program problems were described in Washington Post by Thomas O’Toole: U.S. needed to begin development of space shuttle “now, which in a way is the worst possible time for it.” Country was “weary of big new space projects, particularly while the spectacular Apollo project is -still unfolding. . . . Also, the space agency is without an appointed administrator, which means that NASA cannot exercise its full role with Congress or the White House.” NASA managers “go on sailing a skipperless ship. But what they find more disturbing is the feeling that nobody at headquarters cares whether the ship gets a captain or not.” It was no secret that “men who run the space program are deeply disappointed in the Nixon Administration.” They felt “that the White House neither understands nor cares to understand what the space program means or what it can do for the country.” There was feeling Congress had ceased to care, too. House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight had canceled hearings on Apollo future because, “outside of Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, none of the subcommittee members was concerned enough. . . .to agree to the urgency of the hearings.” (WPost, 9/27/70, Bl) September 28:	Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying American Science & Engineering, Inc., experiment to study x-ray spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on President’s space goal message: “President Nixon’s ‘low profile’ space program represents a realistic appraisal of the American temper at this time. Without the Russians nipping at our heels, apparently, there is little public pressure to keep space exploration and development going at better than a jog. It’s worth noting, however, that although Mr. Nixon has accepted implicit funding limitations reflecting both his own anti-inflation drive and public opinion, he hasn’t really slammed any doors.” (P Bull, 3/14/70) The Economist commented: “Nasa’s future plans may not brighten the back of cereal boxes but they are solid, varied and balanced. The dangers from now-on are not likely to be financial but technical: the space shuttle will be hard to make.” (Economist. 3/14/70,53)
msc announced establishment of Space Shuttle Program Office and appointment of Robert F. Thompson as Manager. Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Manager for Command and Service Modules, would succeed Thompson as Manager of Apollo Applications Program Office. Clifford E. Charlesworth, a flight director, was appointed to new position of Apollo Applications Program Deputy Manager. (MSC Release 70-25)
msc announced it was negotiating with Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. on $699 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for 18-mo study of space shuttle cryogenic systems. (MSC Release 70-110)
NASA issued RFPs for preliminary definition and planning studies for main propulsion system of reusable space shuttle. Preliminary concepts called for cluster of throttleable engines with 1780-kilonewton (400000-lb) thrust each at sea level, nr Rocketdyne Div., United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., Aerojet-General Corp., TRW Inc., Bell Aerospace Systems, and Marquardt Corp. would submit proposals by March 20. Three firms would be awarded fixed-price contracts for 11-mo parallel studies, (nasa Release 70-26)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at NASA Hq. news conference on future plans he was directing portions of space program to bring operations in line with FY 1971 budget. “We recognize the many important needs and urgent problems we face here on earth. America’s space achievements in the 1960’s have rightly raised hopes that this country and all mankind can do more to overcome pressing problems of society. The space program should inspire bolder solutions and suggest new approaches. It has already provided many direct and indirect benefits and is creating new wealth and capabilities.” Strong space program continued as one of Nation’s major priorities. “However, we recognize that under current fiscal restraints NASA must find new ways to stretch out current programs and reduce our present operational base.” NASA would “press forward in 1971 at a reduced level, but in the right direction with the basic ingredients we need for major achievements in the 1970s and beyond. .. .we will not dissipate the strong teams that sent men to explore the moon and automated spacecraft to observe the planets.” NASA would suspend Saturn V production indefinitely after Saturn V 515 completion, stretch Apollo lunar missions to six-month launch intervals, defer lunar expeditions during aap space station flights in 1972, and postpone Viking/Mars 1973 unmanned lander launch to next Mars opportunity in 1975. Number of employees in nasa program was expected to decline from 190 000 at end of FY 1970 to 140 000 at close of FY 1971. Positive aspects of space program for 1970s included Apollo missions through Apollo 19, use of one Saturn V to launch first experimental aap space station into earth orbit in 1972, Mars orbit by two unmanned spacecraft in 1971, launch of first Jupiter probe in 1972, launch of spacecraft past Venus to Mercury in 1973, and continuation of scientific satellite launches. Design of reusable space shuttle would be started and first experimental space station would be launched, as planned, in 1972. FY 1971 budget would permit proceeding with design of advanced space station as permanent base in earth orbit, continued work on nasa-aec nerva project, practical earth applications of space technology, and advances in applications of space technology in fields such as meteorology and communications. Although “austere,” space program for 1971 was “forward looking” and contained “basic ingredients needed for an effective space program in the 1970s.” It would “extend our space capabilities, expand our scientific knowledge, and make available new applications of benefit to people here on earth.” In response to question, Dr. Paine said he foresaw no shutdown of ksc and had no plans for closing other centers. Intended actions “represent a decision to proceed through the year 1971 and see what our studies turn up. I think it is important to realize these are very advanced, perhaps, and we have a lot to learn about the technological feasibility, the cost, schedules—and I wouldn’t want to say we now have a complete free road into the future. We don’t.” Asked if he thought NASA was close to point where “team started falling to pieces,” Dr. Paine said that “you can carry out space programs for the United States at a large number of different levels. I think the level we have now is a level we can take great pride in and I think the country in the 1970’s will be very proud of the achievements NASA will turn in.” (Transcript)
At NASA Hq. press briefing, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and program officers gave status of programs, plans for 1970s, and studies leading into 1980s. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, announced selection of Hadley-Apennine site for lunar landing of Apollo 15, scheduled for launch July 25, 1971. Site, cut by large gorge along base of mountains, was 3° east of moon’s center and 25° north of lunar equator on edge of Sea of Rains. Apollo 15 crew would collect material from base of Apennine Mountains, examine Hadley Rille area, sample fresh-looking mare and volcanic-like features, and deploy ALSEP. Apollo 16 would be launched in January 1972 and Apollo 17, in June 1972. High-priority landing sites were Copernicus, Davy, Descartes, and Marius Hills. To improve CSM return capability in emergencies after landing on moon, an LM descent battery and third tank would be added to Apollo 14 SM. Additional potable water would be generated and stored on way.tomoon. Douglas R. Lord, Deputy Director of Space Station Task Force, described plans for 12-man space station weighing 49 985-54 400 kg (110 000-120 000 lbs) that could remain in earth orbit for up to 10 yrs. Richard J. Allen of Space Shuttle Task Force said NASA was developing plans for shuttle with 100-mission reusable capability. Myers said dod was “very much involved” with shuttle activities. “We have a joint committee operating with the Air Force. . .for continuous communication and review of requirements.” He saw “possibility of international cooperation on certain flights and [U.S.] military use of the vehicle on others.” Myers said he had discussed with European officials possibility of participation in space shuttle program on three levels: orbit-to-orbit space tug, “cleanly separable and easily interfaced piece of equipment” that would probably be managed by European consortium and financed with European dollars; subcontracts from American companies to European contractors without transfer of American money ; and use of technological contributions from European national space activities and national aircraft establishments. (Transcript; NASA Release 70162)
At NASA Hq. industry briefing on space program for 1970s and beyond, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “I think that when we talk about reducing the overall aerospace program by 12 percent, we have to look at the other side of the point too.. .we will still be spending $3.3 billion in the 71 budget, and I think by any possible measure that puts the space program very, very high in the nation’s priorities.” Major reduction would be in manned spaceflight “from a little over $2 billion in FY 70 to $1,474,000,000 in 71.” With “the manned lunar landing behind us, with almost all the initial buy of 15 vehicles now completed, we are able to take a major reduction in the Apollo account as that program reaches a logical termination. We had hoped to continue the Saturn V at limited production of several a year. The decision was made under these austere conditions that we would terminate that production and take the savings.” Peak NASA expenditure of $6 billion in 1965 included outlay for buildup of total NASA base. Fact “that we are now down between the three and four billion mark by no means means that we will be operating at a substantially lower space activity than we had at the peak. It reflects more the fact that the base is now completed; we can put a much higher percentage of our expenditures into program.” However, FY 1971 budget would delay Apollo Applications flight until end of 1972; stretch Apollo lunar flights to two a year, with Apollo 16 occurring before aa program launch in 1972-1973 and Apollo 17 and 18 after aa program missions; delay ATS-F and ats-G by one year, and Viking-Mars lander from 1973 to 1975; and reduce NASA operational base by shutting down erc and possibly mothballing Mississippi Test Facility. Dr. Paine said NASA aeronautics effort would increase. “We feel that much of the work that will be going forward in the shuttle program will probably have some spin-off into the aeronautics area.” Emphasis would be placed on v/STOL and quiet engines. Orbiting Solar Observatory launch recommended by Space Task Group for 1975 would be delayed to 1976. Interplanetary Monitoring Probes originally scheduled for 1971 and 1972 would be launched in 1972 and 1973 and ISIS would be moved from 1970 and 1972 to 1971 and 1973. Synchronous Meteorological Satellites each would slip one year, to 1972 and 1973, and Applications Technology Satellites, one year, to 1973 and 1975. lunar roving vehicle would be carried on Apollo 16,17, 18, and 19. Decision on whether to fund two or three space shuttle definition studies would be made after proposals were received. In space station area experimental requirements would be emphasized. Two Phase-B definition studies were under way. Summer study of utilization of space stations would be international conference “with, we hope, strong participation from the European space research organization.” nerva studies would continue. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told conference that “with the technology we already have in hand” antipollution program could be initiated “to produce a space reflector—maybe it will have to be a mile [1.6 km] in diameter—that can direct the sun’s energy to create holes over our cities which would act as chimneys to evacuate smog.” (Transcript)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
NASA announced selection of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co., NR Rocketdyne Div., and United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. for final negotiations of $6-million, fixed-price contracts for 11-mo parallel studies for design definition of space shuttle main propulsion system. Contracts would be managed by msfc. (NASA Release 70-64)
msc awarded ltv Aerospace Corp. Missiles and Space Div. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. $215 000, fixed-price contracts to conduct six-month parallel development studies of radiative nonmetallics for high-temperature heat protection on space shuttle, (msc Release 70-95)
Senate passed, by vote of 69 to 15, H.R. 16516, $3.316-billion NASA FY 1971 authorization, after rejecting amendment by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to delete $110 million for definition and design of space shuttle and space station. Senate requested conference with House. (CR, 5/6/70, S6768-817)
Three of nine USAF volunteers began test at msc to determine man’s physiological tolerance to reentry loads expected on space shuttle missions. Subjects, whose reactions to shuttle reentry profile had been measured after 24 hrs rest Sept. 9-11 would rest in bed seven days before riding centrifuge in “eye balls down” reentry configurations at 2.5-g to 4.5-g levels for up to 6 min 10 secs to determine what effect prolonged “eye balls down” reentry acceleration would have on space shuttle crew members and passengers after long periods of weightlessness. Normal space shuttle reentry mode of MSC straightwing shuttle produced downward through-the-head acceleration as opposed to “eyeballsin” acceleration through the chest. (msc Release 70-94)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified before Subcommittee on Economy in Government of Joint Economic Committee on changing national priorities: “If we eliminate the space shuttle and the space station, then the NASA budget can be trimmed to a level below $3 billion per year throughout the rest of this decade. Such a decision will shift NASA’s priorities from sensational manned space ventures to space science and its applications. If the U.S. space program is restructured to this new pattern and the Apollo manned lunar program is allowed to run out, it should be possible to effect further economies in the NASA budget___” When nasa shifted to science base “it would be desirable that the scientific community give some expression of its sense of priorities for space science with respect to the rest of science. The quest for new knowledge of the solar system must be reckoned as pure or basic or fundamental research. As such, it should be related to the federal support of all other basic research.” (Testimony)
msc and NR Space Div. announced selection of MesserschmittBoelkow-Blohm of Munich, West Germany, and bac of Bristol, England, to conduct subsystems studies for NASA’s space shuttle. In major step toward international cooperation in space. Messer-schmitt would study attitude-control system and bac would study structures, aerodynamics and flight-test instrumentation, and data handling under contracts financed by their governments. Work would be performed in Downey, Calif, (msc Release 70-98; NR Release NS-59)
Senate passed H.R. 19830, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill, which contained $3.269-billion NASA appropriation. As budgeted by NASA, appropriation allocated $678.7 million for research and program management, $25 million for construction of facilities, and $2,565 billion for R&D. Amendment proposed by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to eliminate funds for space shuttle and station was rejected. Bill was cleared for President’s signature. (CR, 12/7/70, S19521-59; Conf Rpt 91-1345)
NASA decision to search nationwide for suitable site for launching $6billion space shuttle had stirred “anguished complaints from Florida politicians and other proponents of Cape Kennedy,” Wall Street Journal said. But NASA experts had insisted shuttle’s unique characteristics and estimated $200-million to $400-million cost of complex ground equipment made search essential. While Cape Kennedy was “leading launch-site candidate,” other possibilities included FRC, wsmr, and Dugway Proving Ground in Utah. Essential requirement was flat area for landing shuttle, with several alternate landing locations in case of emergency. Cape Kennedy was not equipped for shuttle landings and lacked facilities to support plane-like flight through atmosphere. (Spivak, WSJ, 12/3/70, 36)
William J. Normyle commented on July 15-17 Conference on Space Shuttle Technology at LeRC in Aviation Week & Space Technology: “Problems facing the development of the system were far more evident than solutions.” Lack of resolution had led to decision to hold another conference in nine months, by which time NASA “will have produced some key solutions.” It was clear at meeting “that experts in a number of fields differ with their colleagues on selection of such basics as thermal protection, design configuration, materials, integrated avionics, operations and crew systems.” (Av Wk, 7/27/70, 17)	.	.
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Wall Street Journal editorial said Congressmen were “squabbling” over location of future NASA space shuttle base: “There’s a lot to be learned from the space shuttle, we have no doubt. The scientific results will be greatest, though, if NASA manages to locate the project where it can be managed most efficiently—and not merely where local Congressmen are most adept at gathering spoils.” (WSJ, 12/8/70)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Key Biscayne press conference following release of President’s space message outlined NASA plans for “Grand Tour” missions in 1970s and space developments for next decade: “A strong effort in exploration, in science and in the practical application of space for the benefit of man here on Earth is laid out, with increasing emphasis on international cooperation.” Space shuttle and space station proposals contained reduction in cost of space activities and increase in man’s capability to travel back and forth and to work in space for long periods. Space shuttle would take off vertically; at 64-km (40-mi) altitude and 11 300 km per hr (7000 mph), 2nd stage would separate and carry 22.5-metric-ton (25-short-ton) payload of men, equipment, and supplies into earth orbit, with 1st stage returning to earth for horizontal landing. After mission of up to two weeks, 2nd stage would reenter atmosphere and land horizontally for reuse. President’s program of planetary exploration would “provide man with a closehand look of every planet in the solar system.” Administration placed “great emphasis. . .on the practical applications of space techniques, not only in communication satellites and weather satellites, but in new areas such as Earth resources satellites.” Dr. Paine saw as “most statesmanlike portion” of President’s statement “increasing recognition of the international participation of other nations in both the exploration and the utilization of space.” It was too early to report specific results of Dr. Paine’s visit to world’s space capitals but “there certainly is a very substantial interest overseas in utilizing more fully the American program as a means of closing the technology gap on the part of other nations and, at the same time, allowing them to participate in both the exploration and the utilization of space in the decades to come.” (Transcript)
FRC announced tests had demonstrated that unpowered approaches and landing maneuvers of space shuttle could be made safely and readily by qualified professional pilots and did not require highly trained test pilots. United Air Line's captains Donald C. McBain and James V. Mitchell had flown landing approaches of four-engine jet transport configured to simulate space shuttle during NASA study of energy-management techniques for proposed shuttle orbiter. (frc Release 18-70)
msfc Advanced Systems Analysis Office was investigating possible uses of space tug, multipurpose vehicle to be developed simultaneously with larger space shuttle, msfc announced. Only space vehicle that would work with and connect all existing and future vehicles and systems, tug would first be used as link between space shuttle and space station to taxi cargo and passengers in earth orbit. Both msfc and msc were working to develop space tug plans, (msfc Release 70-102)
samso, Aerospace Corp., and NR Space Div. had completed study of solution to in-space emergencies involving near-orbiting spacecraft and space shuttle vehicles, AFSC announced. Study was based on requirements that space escape vehicle (sev) must perform all functions required for crew safety from decision to abandon spacecraft until successful recovery. In delayed return, ground station would supply data to aid selection of recovery site; sufficient oxygen and water to last 24 hrs after departure from spacecraft would be available. In “quick return,” life support would be provided for only six hours, sev would become autonomous following issue of “May Day” signal and would splash down without ground-based advice. Crew would plot recovery course using wristwatches and information indicating orbital paths for 24 hrs. Study recommended three kinds of escape vehicle: spherical heat shield, rigid vehicle thermally protected by ablative heat shield; rib-stiffened expandable vehicle which would function like umbrella; and two-man conical reentry vehicle like rubber raft, inflatable and made of double-wall fabric connected by woven drop threads, (afsc Release 137.70)
Status of space shuttle technology was described by MSFC propulsion engineer Gerald M. Thompson during aiaa/sae Seventh Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference at Salt Lake City, Utah. Because “shuttle propulsion technology has been vigorously pursued in a totally organized approach for several years,” no major technology work remained to be done before shuttle main engine development phase began. Designs with strong technical bases were ready to proceed. However, if hydrogen propulsion was selected for air-breathing engines that would return shuttle stages to landing fields on mission completion, additional technology development would add about one year to schedule. Main engine development was to begin in 1971, with flight certification targeted for March 1978. (msfc Release 71-103)
It was “open secret” that USAF saw space shuttle as “broad highway that will lead to manned military space operations by the United States,” Universal Science News, Inc., said in Dallas Morning News. While “effort to keep NASA’s civilian image seemed so important at one time that the military were allowed to start their own manned orbiting laboratory program, even though NASA has a similar project,” recent budget squeeze had “forced NASA and the Air Force closer together in certain areas.” (Dallas Morning News, 11/22/71)
MSC announced award of four, four-month, fixed-price extensions to contracts for space shuttle preliminary design. McDonnell Douglas Corp,, North American Rockwell Corp., and General Dynamics Corp. would each receive $2 800 000, and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. would receive $1 400 000. (msc Release 71—46)
Immediate report from nasa on role of Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. was requested by Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Conn.). In statement to press, Rep. Cotter said Myers “as co-chairman of the joint NASA-Pentagon space transportation system committee, may have been instrumental in cutting off Air Force funding of Pratt & Whitney’s space shuttle research under the XLR—129 program.” Cotter said Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. had based its contention of superior “technical knowhow” on shuttle engine development [see Aug. 3] on its 10-yr XLR-129 research. Myers had been a Rocketdyne Vice President before coming to nasa in 1970. (Text; Warden, C Trib, 8/27/71,22)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko signed two nuclear control agreements in formal ceremony at State Dept. Agreements called for improved “hotline” communication between Washington and Moscow via comsats and immediate notification of any unexplained incident involving possible detonation of nuclear weapon which could cause outbreak of nuclear war. (Smith, NYT, 10/1/71, 1) During September: Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in interview published by Air Force Magazine that nasa planned to let hardware contracts for space shuttle by spring 1972, contingent on White House approval. NASA had decided in summer to extend preliminary design contracts by four months to “look more intensively at alternative configurations,” examining phased approach for building reusable upper stage first and testing and using it with interim expendable booster, instead of developing reusable booster at same time. Reevaluation of design concepts was stirred by need for additional analyses and research and by need to trim expenditures “in a given year.” nasa’s viewpoint on space in this decade was “to bring the program down to earth, both figuratively and literally. We must ask ourselves the question: Is what we are doing useful in alleviating our problems on the ground?” Crucial criteria of each prospective space program were “whether it will pay for itself by doing useful work; whether it can be expected to produce valuable scientific knowledge that can only be obtained from space; whether it is important to national security; and whether it will catalyze valuable new technologies or lead' to other practical results.” For shuttle “answers to all these questions is 100 percent affirmative.” (AF Mag, 9/71, 53-61)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said strong technology base was “absolutely vital” to U.S., in speech before 14th Annual Aerospace Luncheon of Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce. Indications from critics of lack of confidence in advancement of “greatest technological evolution in the history of mankind” was reminder that “we must do a better job of convincing the man-on-the-street of the [space] program’s merits.” Public needed information “to put its priorities in proper perspective.” There was “something seriously wrong” when “as a nation we pay people more not to work and more in farm subsidies than we do on space research, a program which impacts our national economy and vitally affects our national security. ... I am convinced that further erosion of our technological leadership will start us on a downhill course from which it will be difficult to recover.” But, “in our zeal to forge ahead in technical and scientific fields, it is possible to lose sight of the debt we owe to the great American public that so steadfastly sustained us during the early years.” Average American had his priorities. “But he needs to be informed if he is to arrive at an intelligent decision about how to rank his priorities.” Burden of convincing public of necessity for “continuing well-balanced space program for the 1970’s and beyond” lay with those in program. Dr. Fletcher also said: “We want cooperation with the Soviets as well as with other nations throughout the world. We are ready to do our part to get it, but if we have learned the lessons of history, we should know that the Soviets will not be eager to cooperate with a second-rate power. . . . And that is what we will become if we do not proceed with the space shuttle in this decade. We cannot create the environment needed for space cooperation, or an era of enduring peace, by handing over a monopoly in the realm of orbital flight to the Soviet Union or anyone else.” (Text)
Msc announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to receive $380 000, 10-mo, firm-price extension to contract for design study of space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system (aps). McDonnell Douglas would define oxygen-hydrogen system compatible for both booster and orbiter vehicles, (msc Release 71-47)
President Nixon approved H.R. 9382, FY 1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill that contained $3.298-billion NASA FY 1972 appropriation and $619 million nsf appropriation. Bill became P.L. 92—78. NASA total included $2,523 billion for r&d, $52.7 million for construction of facilities, and $722.6 million for research and program management. Bill appropriated $39 million for NERVA program, $13 million for space shuttle main engine test facilities, and $5.5 million for space shuttle thermal-protection facilities. President also signed H.R. 9667, $2.9-billion dot FY 1972 appropriations bill that included $58.5 million to repay airlines for money they invested in sst but eliminated funding for sst program. Bill became P.L. 92-96. (PD, 8/16/71, 1157; NASA Budget Off; H Rpt 92-377)
Decisions on nasa’s space shuttle program might be politically timed, Aviation Week & Space Technology said. Four contractors would complete study contracts in spring 1972. “At this point, President Nixon— in the midst of his re-election campaign—might publicly state his support for the project.” Selection of winners “of the biggest plum in space” would not be announced until after the November election, magazine said. (Av Wk, 10/25/71, 11)
National Urban Coalition released Counterbudget—A Blueprint for Changing National Priorities, 1971-1976. Report noted diminishing public support for science and technology and recommended 4% increase in r&d funding to prevent deterioration of Government’s role in science and technology in national affairs. Space program should be kept at funding level just over $3 billion, rather than $5.9-billion level reached in 1966. Space shuttle and station programs should be continued but on stretched schedule. Mars mission should be undertaken only when it could be done internationally. Value of space program as whole lay in its scientific yield, practical results, and national leadership. (CR, 5/21/71, E4836-98; nuc pio)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, testified before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science in support of nasa FY 1972 budget request: “We have recently settled on a single set of performance characteristics for the preliminary design of the two-stage fully reusable [space] shuttle. Alternate approaches are also still under study. We expect to be in a position to make decisions this summer on how we will proceed with airframe design or development in FY 1972. The $100 million recommended in the FY 1972 budget will support, in addition to the engine development, either continued intensive design studies and related efforts or the initiation of airframe development.” Dr. Low noted “tremendous interest in exploration during Apollo 11, when an estimated 107 million people in the U.S. watched our first manned lunar landing mission; and we saw it again last month, when 104 million watched Apollo 14.” (Text)
Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Conn.) said in release to press that preliminary Gao audit of NR Rocketdyne Div. $24-million Saturn contract had shown “as much as $5 million . . . was diverted to underwrite crucial research on Rocketdyne’s winning design in the $500 million space shuttle main engine contract [awarded Sept. 1].” Cotter said audit, performed at his request, showed “that work performed under the Saturn contract influenced NASA’s Source Selection Board, the group which evaluated the space shuttle designs submitted by Rocketdyne, Pratt & Whitney and Aerojet General.” NASA Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization Daniel J. Harnett later told press NASA audit of space shuttle engine contract had shown “no unfair competition advantage was given to Rocketdyne.” (Text; AP, W Star, 12/19/71, E3)
NASA leaders were “realistic enough to sense that their case for the [space] shuttle must be built on more than chauvinistic appeal to national prestige, which sold the Apollo in the early 1970s,” Jonathan Spivak said in Wall Street Journal. They were “working hard to trim the shuttle’s prospective costs, demonstrate its economic payoff and convince the scientific community that it offers attractive new opportunities for research.” But NASA’s “primary problem” was “convincing the public and the politicians that it still makes sense to go into space at all. The moon is no longer a glamorous goal; Mars is too far distant and expensive, and orbiting space stations to date have made few influential converts.” (WSJ, 6/30/71, 10) During June: Skylab was described in article by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “By far the largest manned spacecraft we have ever built, Skylab will be the forerunner of permanent stations in space. In orbit 435 km [270 mi] above Earth, the Skylab cluster will be 36 meters [118 ft] long and will weigh 82 238 kilograms [181304 lbs]. One of its major components will be a workshop with 362 cubic meters [474 cu yds] of work area. Other parts will include a Multiple Docking Adapter, Airlock Module, Apollo Command and Service Module, and an Apollo Telescope Mount, the last of these a full-fledged solar observatory capable of observing, monitoring, and recording phenomena on the Sun’s surface that cannot be seen from Earth.” Skylab would carry from earth orbit “about 50 scientific, medical, applications, and solar-astronomy experiments. Twenty of these will be in the life sciences, to determine how man performs and adjusts under conditions of prolonged space flight. The study of materials and manufacturing will be another area of interest. By means of an electron-beam generating device and an electric furnace, metals will be melted, molded, and welded, and other metallurgy and crystal tests performed in a work chamber exposed to zero-gravity and the vacuum of space.” (A&A, 6/71, 20-1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced retirement of Director of Program Management Lee B. James, effective May 31. James, who would return to academic community, would be replaced in acting capacity by James T. Shepherd, Deputy Director (Technical), Program Management. (msfc Release 71—77) During April: nasa issued Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific and Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1970—1972: Annual Report to The National Science Foundation. In FY 1972 budget, NASA was seeking authorization of $3,271 billion. Effect on programs would be: Funds for basic research would remain at FY 1970 level in FY 1971 and rise in FY 1972, reflecting increased funding for Viking and initiation of outer planets Grand Tour project. In applied research, estimates for FY 1971 reflected 10% increase over 1970 and slight increase in FY 1972, primarily for earth resources surveys and space station. Budget authority for development activities would decline in 1971 and 1972, primarily as result of completion of Apollo program and reduction in nasa—aec nerva program effort, r&d funds were requested in FY 1972 for space shuttle technology and engine development facilities. (Text)
rand Corp. report The Space Shuttle as an Element in the National Space Program (RM 6244-1PR) completed in October 1970—study that questioned economic feasibility of nasa’s reusable space shuttle program—was entered in Congressional Record by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) Study, undertaken for usaf, concluded “total space funding requirements over the next 20 years are not significantly different for plans that use the shuttle and those that accomplish the same missions without the shuttle.” Results indicated “that criteria other than cost should be used to evaluate the desirability of the space transport system.” {CR, 5/26/71, S7823-9)
Oklahoma Governor Dewey H. Bartlett told state legislature in Oklahoma City there was good possibility that Oklahoma could become launch site for NASA space shuttle. “Based on the launch azimuth and the orbital inclinations . . . Oklahoma provides both a desirable launch and recovery location.” (Daily Oklahoman, 1/6/71, 1)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from esrange, Kiruna, Sweden, to sample noctilucent clouds and particulate matter in upper atmosphere. First payload was launched to altitude of 114 km (70.8 mi) and recovered within 2 hrs 15 min after launch in good condition. Mission was considered 100% successful. Second payload attained 106 km (65.9 mi) and was recovered within 2 hrs of launch. Two of eight collector doors opened prematurely and caused slightly reduced apogee, but experiment results were not affected and mission was judged 100% successful. (NASA Rpts srl) During July: Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) praised U.S. space shuttle program in Aerospace article: “Logic dictates that we should move ahead with the shuttle program. Experience tells us that the aerospace industry can respond to even seemingly impossible challenges— and that nations that reject the major challenges of their times do not remain major powers. And a hard fact of international economics is that the United States can remain prosperous in this world only by maintaining and utilizing its advanced technology.” (Aerospace, 7/71, 3-7)
NASA announced award of $2-million, one-year, fixed-price contract to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. for definition and preliminary design of Research and Applications Module (ram) that could be attached to space shuttle, (nasa Release 71-67)
Management plans for omsf space shuttle program were announced by NASA: OMSF Hq. in Washington, D.C., would be responsible for overall management, including assignment of responsibilities, basic performance requirements, control of major milestones, and funding allocations to nasa centers. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, had assigned responsibility for program control, overall systems engineering and systems integration, and overall responsibility for definition of elements of total system that interacted with other elements to MSC, which also would be responsible for shuttle’s orbiter stage. MSFC would be responsible for booster stage and shuttle’s main engines. ICSC would be responsible for design of launch and recovery facilities. All three centers would station personnel at MSC for systems engineering and integration activity, (nasa Release 71—104)
Rising volume in aerospace industry production was predicted by David A. Loehwing in Barrons magazine: “nasa is readying some new programs, notably the space shuttle. . . . Airline revenues are climbing, and some pick-up in orders for transports is anticipated.” dod procurement policies “which nearly threw a few companies into bankruptcy” had been revised. “Most important there is a growing awareness that the Soviet arms buildup poses a real threat to U.S. security, which new weapons must be developed to counter.” Persuasive but “cynical” argument for lift in aerospace business in 1972 was political expediency. “Over half-a-million people have been laid off in the industry since 1968, some 200,000 in California,” state with largest number of electoral votes. Barrons quoted political observer as saying, “Starting pretty early next spring, you’re going to see a massive injection of funds into aerospace.” (Barrons, 12/27/71)
nasa announced six-month delay in development of space shuttle to give contractors more time to study in detail alternatives resulting from current studies. Under new schedule, North American Rockwell Corp., McDonnell Douglas Co., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., and Grumman Aerospace Corp. would study designs until April 30, 1972, rather than concluding at end of October. Selection of sites for shuttle development and operational flights would be deferred until overall system characteristics were defined, (nasa Release 71—199)
Results to date of study to determine minimum cockpit visibility required by space shuttle pilot to make safe horizontal ground landings were announced by FRC. Tests, begun in July with instrumented T—33 jet aircraft with radar system to judge accurate altitude to within two feet (0.6 meters), had shown pilots could land aircraft with greater visibility restrictions than expected. Visibility restriction of 5° had been extended to 75° on either side, or total of 150° in 225 approaches flown. Restrictions would be increased in future to 160°. (frc Release 26-71)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched NATO’s Natosat 2 military comsat for usaf and NATO, Eole Cooperative Applications Satellite for France, Isis 2 cooperative U.S.-Canada ionospheric satellite, and Ariel 4 ionospheric satellite for U.K. Italian crew trained by NASA launched NASA’s Explorer 45 Small Scientific Satellite and Italy’s San Marco 3 from Italian platform off coast of Kenya. Joint NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings on compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking system progressed to discussion of possible joint test missions. Data obtained by NASA’s Mariner 9 and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 probes were exchanged under agreement that covered broad range of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space science and applications. Agreement on future exchanges of medical and biological manned space flight data called for meetings between U.S. and Soviet experts at least annually. U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged Apollo 11 and 12 and Soviet Luna 16 lunar samples and Soviet scientists were among 750 experts attending Second Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in Houston. First U.S.-U.S.S.R. Conference on Communications with Extraterrestrial Intelligence was held in Soviet Armenia. Joint meeting of NASA and European Space Conference (esc) identified candidate areas for possible European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space programs, including design and development of space shuttle subsystems. International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey at Univ. of Michigan was cosponsored by NASA, Dept, of State, usn, and aid to inform representatives of 51 countries and international organizations of latest techniques for interpreting earth resources data acquired by aircraft and satellite remote sensing systems. nasa’s C-130 aircraft equipped with remote-sensing devices participated in U.S. survey of Jamaica’s natural resources undertaken at request of U.N. and Jamaican government. NASA signed agreement with West Germany for series of barium-ion-cloud (bic) probe launches, and new sounding rocket agreement was signed with France. Under sounding rocket agreement, 20 French Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets would be launched from Kourou Center, French Guiana, in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project. By end of year NASA had entered into cooperative agreements with 39 countries, including agreements on lunar samples, tracking and data acquisition, and geodetic satellite program. Scientists of 87 countries besides U.S. were participating in cooperative ground-based programs and personnel exchanges and 62 countries were exchanging scientific and technical information. Since the beginning of 1962, NASA had launched 21 satellites under international agreements, in addition to flying 21 international experiments on NASA satellites. Since the beginning of the sounding rocket program, 683 cooperative rockets had been launched for research, (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Int Aff; “Selected Statistics on Int’l Affairs,” 2/17/72; A&A, 1971)
Calibration had been completed at msfc on new tube wind tunnel capable of test speeds up to twice speed of sound, Marshall Star reported. Tube was 130 cm (52 in) in diameter and was 119 m (390 ft) long. It would be used in wind-tunnel test program for space shuttle. (Marshall Star, 1/13/71,1)
Selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for negotiations leading to award of 8500-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for development and delivery of 35 space shuttle engines by 1978 was announced by nasa. Selection followed 12-mo competition during which nasa had accepted proposals from three firms on April 21. Program would be managed by msfc and would support space shuttle orbital flights beginning in 1978. (nasa Release 71-131)
NASA released Jan. 28 briefing on FY 1972 budget request, in which Dr. George M. Low, NASA Acting Administrator, said: “For the past several years we have reported ... a further decrease in budget authority. This year we can report a clear halt in this trend: the budget authority for FY 1972 is at the same level as the funds appropriated for FY 1971. The exact figure for FY 1972 is $3,271 billion. NASA would complete Apollo program with four previously planned missions but would delay Apollo 17 five months to ensure that mission carried experiments originally scheduled for canceled Apollo 18 and 19. Skylab missions would be delayed about four months, to follow as soon as practical after last Apollo flight. Plans for unmanned planetary exploration included two Mars orbiters in 1971, Jupiter flybys in 1972 and 1973, launch in 1973 for Venus-Mercury flyby in 1974, and two Viking launches in 1975 to land on Mars in 1976. Dr. Low said NASA had asked for $190 million for space shuttle in FY 1972. “We have included in our budget $100 million. This reduction means essentially that we will move out with the engine development exactly as we had planned; that we are still in a position to make a decision after we have completed the studies on the air frame development, whether to continue with additional design or whether to proceed with the development of the air frames.” Near-earth science programs included Orbiting Solar Observatories in 1971, 1973, 1974, and 1975 and last orbiting Astronomical Observatory in 1972. Space applications program would progress as planned, including two erts, two Nimbus experimental weather satellites, two Synchronous Weather Satellites, and two advanced communications experiments with ATS—F and ATS—G. New FY 1972 projects would include start of work on High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and program for exploration of outer planets. “To do this we will develop a versatile new spacecraft, and we will plan Grand Tour missions to Jupiter, Saturn, and Pluto in 1976-1977; and to Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune, in 1979.” NASA also would study mission to orbit Jupiter as alternative to first Grand Tour. Major new initiative in aeronautics in FY 1972 would be development of experimental stol aircraft. Downward trend in aerospace industry employment on NASA programs would be halted during FY 1972. “Although aerospace jobs will continue to decline in FY 1971, we expect employment to start increasing by the middle of FY 1972, with the end-of-year level being about equal to that at the beginning of the year.” NASA would reduce civil service work force by 1500 positions by end of FY 1972, bringing total decrease to 6800 since July 1967. Work on NERVA nuclear rocket engine would be limited to “essentially long-lead time items,” preserving ability “to move forward . . . when the need arises,” without large expenditures in FY 1972. Program included “no plans at this time for a manned Mars landing mission.” (Transcript)
nasa published Mariner-Venus 1967, Final Project Report (nasa SP—190). In foreword, Project Manager Glenn A. Reiff said Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967, toward Oct. 19, 1967, flyby of planet Venus), apart from significant contributions to knowledge of deep space, had achieved secondary objective, “to gain engineering experience by converting a spare Mariner-Mars 1964 spacecraft into one that could be flown to Venus,” with substantial savings. Cost of mission had been 10% less than anticipated. (Text) During 1971: U.S. orbited 51 spacecraft in 29 launches—including Apollo 14 and 15 csms Kitty Hawk and Endeavor with lms Antares and Falcon and their S—IVB stages intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 97 payloads in 83 launches; Japan, 2; U.K., 1; France, 1; Italy, 2 (1 for U.S. on U.S. booster); and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 33 orbited by DOD in 17 launches and 19 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for USAF on behalf of NATO, 1 for France, and 1 for U.K. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launches of Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 manned lunar landing missions. Mobile equipment transporter, used for first time on Apollo 14 to carry equipment and samples, allowed astronauts to explore 3.5 km (2.2 mi) of lunar surface and collect 43 kg (94.8 lbs) of samples. On Apollo 15, astronauts traveled 28 km (17.4 mi) over lunar surface on four-wheeled, battery-powered lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover and collected 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples, including one white anorthosite rock about 4 billion yrs old. Unmanned program was highlighted by Mariner 9 Mars probe, which traveled 400 million km (248 million mi) to Mars and began transmitting photos of major Mars dust storm and, later, of details of Martian surface and moons Deimos and Phobos. Mariner 8 launch vehicle malfunctioned at launch. Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory—rescued from initially incorrect orbit by ground command—made first x-ray observations of beginning solar flare and revealed that sun had “polar caps.” Other unmanned missions included lntelsat-IV F-2 and Intelsat-IV F—3 for ComSatCorp and Explorer 43, Explorer 44, and Explorer 45 (the last launched for NASA by Italy). Launched as secondary payloads were Subsatellite on Apollo 15 and Tetr 3 on Oso 7. All elements of Skylab flight system reached final manufacturing and checkout in preparation for 1973 launch and intensive engineering studies on Space Shuttle were conducted throughout year. In joint NASA—usaf lifting-body program, M2—F3 and X—24A lifting bodies made 17 flights, including first supersonic flight by M2-F3. X-24A reached 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) before completing program and beginning modification for new flight program as X—24B. In aeronautics NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing - made 27 successful flights. USN F-14 fighter aircraft successfully demonstrated first automatically programmable variable sweep wing. USA CH—54B helicopter set new world altitude record of 5120 m (16 798 ft) while carrying 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) payload. New v/stol Wind Tunnel at LaRC became operational, providing greatly improved testing capability for scaled models. GE quiet experimental engine successfully completed initial tests in NASA program to reduce jet engine noise, and NASA let competitive design contracts for development of quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) transport U.S.-U.S.S.R. Space Activity, 1957-1971 Successful Launches to Earth Orbit or Beyond aircraft, sst program ended, with Congress voting to terminate program. In sounding rocket program, 126 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations and to make astronomical observations in x-ray, uv, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum. DOD’s 33 payloads included orbiting of 2 Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs-2) military comsats, 2 ov—i scientific satellites, and Cannonball 2 and Mmketball. U.S.S.R.’s 83 launches set an all-time record in number of flights. The 97 payloads included 81 Cosmos satellites, 2 Luna, 2 Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 2 Mars, 1 Intercosmos, 4 Meteor, 2 Molniya I, 1 Molniya II, and Oreol (launched for France). Soyuz 11, carrying three-man crew, Summary of Soviet and United States Space Payloads by Mission Category Soviet Union						United States 1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total		1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total Earth orbital science			 5	10	3	9	7	59	12	16	14	4	11	137 Earth orbital engineering								6	1	5	1	10	50 Communications				...... 4	4	2	5	3	23	19	11	6	6	6	83 Navigation/ferret			6	6	16	27	84	3	1		1 .		25 1	1	1	1 .		17 Military observation: Low orbit recoverable			 22	29	32	29	28	202	19	16	12	9	7	198 Low orbit nonrecover 		..... 8	10	12	12	12	67	7	7	11	4	6	77 4 .						10 Synchronous or higher 								2	1	3	5	1	18 Q	2	1	2	1	17 . 9	5	2	4	8	25 . Earth orbit man-related 			 3	4		i	2	20	1 .		1 .			11 Earth orbit manned			1	5	i	3	19 .						14 Lunar man-related			3	1	2 .		8	1	2 ,		1	3	13 Moon-unmanned programs			1	3	3	2	25	8	1 ,				21 Venus 		...... 2 .		2	2 .		17	1 .					2 5	10 .			2 .		1	5 Subtotal 				77	71	91	102	602	87	64	66	39	53	764 Orbital launch platforms			 6	8	6	10	7	59 . From Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Staff Report, Soviet Space Programs, 1971, 92d Cong., 2d Sess., April 1972, p. 5. ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971	During 1971 successfully rendezvoused and docked with unmanned Salyut 1 to form first orbital scientific station, but cosmonauts died during earth reentry because of improperly sealed hatch. Mars 2 and Mars 3 dropped instrumented capsules on Mars surface. Mars 2 capsule crashlanded and Mars 3 capsule transmitted 20 sec. Lunokhod 1 lunar rover carried to moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, continued to explore lunar surface until October 1971, when isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night. Japan launched two satellites—Tansei and Shinsei. China launched Chicom 2, France launched Tournesol, U.K. launched Prospero, and Italy launched San Marco 3. (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Lifting Body Off; GSFC Sounding Rocket Br; NASA Exec Secretariat; Sheldon, United States and Soviet Progress in Space, Library of Cong, 1/22/72) • NASA’s scientific and societal achievements advanced national goal of alleviating environmental problems and expanding basic research on behalf of humanity, as public pressed for immediate, usable returns from research in all fields. Apollo manned missions swelled storehouse of lunar information. Unmanned astronomical missions gathered unique data, including new clues to Martian atmosphere. NASA-developed inventions saw increased use beyond space exploration—in environmental sciences, communications, medicine, industry, and agriculture. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space meetings set stage for future joint space missions. And balanced program of space and ^aeronautics, despite low funding level, continued to raise U.S. prestige as aerospace pioneer while it worked to improve man’s future. Some observers, however, warned of higher rate of technological advances abroad than in U.S. and of ever-growing U.S.S.R. space program and technological capability. Soviet expenditures on space were estimated at level about double U.S. peak expenditure of l°/o of GNP when combined nasa-dod space program was at highest level and four times present level. Dr. James C. Fletcher was nominated new nasa Administrator by President Nixon. President of Univ. of Utah and former aerospace executive, Dr. Fletcher took office April 27. He succeeded NASA’s third Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, who had resigned Sept. 15, 1970, to return to industry. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, had served as Acting NASA Administrator in the interim. Operating at lowest budget level since 1962, nasa in 1971 continued phase-out of Apollo program with successful completion of Apollo 14 and 15. Man’s fourth landing on moon, in Apollo 15 mission, proved to many that man had an effective scientific role in space. At year’s end, Apollo 16 had been scheduled for March 1972, with Apollo 17 to complete program later in year. Reduced funding forced additional reduction of personnel as well as program cutbacks, stretching out remaining Apollo missions, delaying first Skylab flight, and slowing studies of space shuttle, nerva nuclear rocket engine program was reduced to holding action. Bioscience funding was eliminated. Aerospace employment in industry throughout nation also fell, reflecting cuts in DOD spending as well as in NASA’s. During year, however, Skylab hardware manufacture neared completion and space shuttle work continued. Shuttle preliminary design contracts were extended so that nasa could examine alternative configurations, contingent on Administration approval of shuttle development. In erts program, aircraft tested remote sensing devices for gathering earth resources data and first satellite for global monitoring of resources was scheduled for 1972. During 1971, instrumented aircraft measured air pollution, investigated corn blight infestation, and sought hidden natural resources. Pioneer-F spacecraft for planned 1972 launch and December 1973 Jupiter flyby went into final manufacturer’s tests. Increased emphasis on aeronautics included research into aircraft noise reduction, increased air transport efficiency with use of supercritical wing, and STOL aircraft for transportation. To emphasize practical goals of space science, NASA established new Office of Applications, increased technology utilization budget from $1 million to $5 million, and issued request for proposals for additional uses of space-developed technology to solve problems of society. Among NASA projects were nsf contract to investigate use of solar cells to electrify homes and buildings and hud contract to study application of space technology to sewage recycling. Joint nasa-dot study resulted in recommendations for civil aviation R&d policy (card). Research achievements at NASA centers included ARC discovery of amino acids—building blocks of life—in second meteorite. Discovery strengthened case for chemical evolution of life elsewhere in universe. NASA FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion was $27 million more than requested $3,271 billion and $29 million above FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion—halting downward trend but far below 1965 peak of $5,250 billion. (A&A 1971; O’Toole, W Post, 1/2/72, Al; Sheldon, Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70, Senate Doc 92-51)
Lowell K. Zoller, Chief of Program Control Group in msfc Office of Program Development, had been appointed manager of task team for research and applications modules (ram) by msfc Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msfc announced, ram was proposed family of space payload carrier modules to be delivered to earth orbit by space shuttle, (msfc Release 71—122)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on hud, Space, and Science during hearings on NASA FY 1972 appropriations bill. He urged that “strong program in space and aeronautics is essential to our longterm national well-being. Our capabilities as a Nation to deal with domestic problems of high priority—poverty, cities, the environment . . . and indeed, our pursuit of happiness and cultural advance—ultimately depend on whether we can maintain a strong economy with continually increasing productivity. Increasing productivity, in turn, depends primarily on technological advance, which, in turn, results primarily from the large scale focussed technological efforts like our major space programs.” In addition were both long-term and near-term direct benefits, many already realized. “When 50,000 lives were saved as a result of satellite advance warning at the time of hurricane Camille, the space program probably paid for itself.. . . “I believe that the space program is a value in itself to the nation and to the whole world. With our everyday preoccupation, necessarily, with the many serious and often depressing problems we face . . . there is, I believe, a human hunger for positive elevating goals to work for at the same time as we do what needs to be done in all these other difficult areas. I believe the strong attraction that the landing of the first man on the moon had on people everywhere, and much of the underlying basis of support in the country for the space program, stems from the fact that the space program provides such goals. The space program gives us goals seemingly beyond human capability, goals which transcend earthly boundaries.” Space shuttle had tremendous impact for future because it not only reduced cost by being reusable itself, but it also gave options of reusing payloads. “You do not have to throw them away once you put them up there. . . . There are many more application satellites we can use with this kind of an arrangement, because we will be able to reuse them.” Skylab, “first and only NASA experimental space station,” due to fly in 1973, would be “larger but 2 years later than the Soviet Salyut now in orbit.” U.S.S.R. probably would be able to “do things in space, laboratories, 2 years earlier than we ... to know what the earth is like, to know what the clouds are like, to understand more about the earth’s resources. . . . Another aspect, which I am uncertain about, is what they plan to do in a military way. . . . they will have the potential of doing military things on this same vehicle. We do not plan to do this on the Skylab. We also must consider the scientific value of Salyut, which I think is important, but not as important to us as the applications and the military aspects of it.” Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified that “models” of anticipated further reduction of 1500 civil service positions in fall “indicate that we have reached a point in which really good people of considerable experience will be going out the door. Certain parts of our operations will be closed. This means that we have come to a place where reductions in force are eating into our capability to do the job.” (Transcript)
Senate-House conferees on H.R. 7109, FY 1972 nasa Authorization bill, filed H Rpt 92—368 proposing compromise bill authorizing $3,355 billion. Report authorized $702.7 million for space flight operations, $30 million above nasa request of $672.7 million, and recommended $15 million be spent on Skylab rescue capability and $15 million on space shuttle. (H Rpt 92-368)
Safety problems of space shuttle were discussed by Director I. Irving Pinkel of LeRC Aerospace Safety Research and Data Institute, in Astronautics & Aeronautics article. “The rocket engine must have an airplane-like endurance of 10 years (100 missions). The airplane systems must operate where rockets do, subject to space vacuum, space radiation, and reentry heating, and still carry a fan engine with high cycle temperature.” (A&A, 12/71, 28-35)
President Nixon sent $229.2-billion FY 1972 budget request to Congress, including total science r&d budget of $16.7 billion. Total request for NASA new obligation^ authority (noa) of $3,271 billion (1.4% of total U.S. budget) was $27 million less than FY 1971 noa of $3,298 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $216.5 million against decline of $486.4 million in FY 1971. Reduction to $3,152 billion placed proposed NASA FY 1972 funding at lowest level since 1962. Of budget request, $2,518 billion would go for r&d, $56.3 million for construction, of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $302.2 million, to $612.2 million— reflecting cancellation of Apollo 18 and 19—would be partially offset by increase from $515.2 million in FY 1971 to $672.8 million in FY 1972 for manned space flight operations. Manned space flight operations would include $535.4 million for Skylab, $100.0 million for space shuttle, and $37.4 million for orbited systems and experiments. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,286 billion, down $144.6 million from FY 1971. Funding for space science and applications programs would increase $184.7 million, from $565.7 million in FY 1971 to $740.4 million in FY 1972. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for solar observatory ($19 million in FY 1972), High Energy Astronomical Observatory ($13.4 million), and space telescope study ($500 000). Funding for lunar and planetary exploration would increase $166.6 million, to $311.5 million, with $38.3 million going toward Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, $180.4 million toward Viking project, and $18.8 million toward supporting research and technology advanced studies. Funding for Pioneer program of planetary exploration would decrease from $35.5 million in FY 1971 to $17.6 million. Funding for bioscience program, including Biosatellites, was eliminated from NASA budget for FY 1972. Increase of $15.5 million in space applications programs, to $182.5 million in FY 1972, included $48.5 million for Earth Resources Survey, $13 million for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, and $60.3 million for ATS. Total for advanced research and technology programs decreased from $264.2 million in FY 1971 to $212.8 million, stol technology program would receive $15 million, against $1.9 million in FY 1971. nerva rocket funding would decrease from $32 million in FY 1971 to $9.9 million. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $26 million, to $264 million. dod’s FY 1972 budget of $76 billion for outlays included $1.55-billion space funding, $500 000 less than previous year [see April 2]. Budget also included $370 million for B-l intercontinental bomber, up from $75 million in FY 1971; $39 million for lamps antisubmarine-warfare helicopter, up from $4 million, $145 million for air defense aircraft system (awacs), up from $87 million, $47 million for usaf AX close-support aircraft, up from $28 million, $409 million for Poseidon missile system, and $926 million for Minuteman III program, up from $720 million in FY 1971. aec funding for nerva and space electric power would decrease from $84 million in FY 1971 to $39.7 million. Increase of $437 million in total dot FY 1972 budget of $7.8 billion would go mostly to expanded aviation and urban mass transit spending, dot funding for reduction of aircraft noise and study of environmental effects of SST would increase from $27 million in FY 1971 to $54 million. These funds also would he used for pollution reduction from Coast Guard installations, noa of $235 million was requested for sst prototype program, up from $210 million in FY 1971. (US Budget for FY 1972; bob Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; aiaa release 71—2; CR, 1/29/71, H265; ddr&e Dir Foster Testimony, 4/2/71)
msc announced issuance of rfps for technological development of new surface materials that could stand environmental extremes expected to be experienced by space shuttle, msc would award fixed-price contract to company that designed and developed best ceramic insulator, (msc Release 71-36)
NASA announced availability of new publications: Space Shuttle Technologies, FY 1971 Programs, compilation of 110 projects making up NASA shuttle technology program, described projects and listed FY 1971 funding for each. Significant NASA Inventions Available for Licensing in Foreign Countries listed abstracts of inventions in which NASA owned principal or exclusive rights and which were available for patent licensing in various countries, (nasa Special Release; NASA Release 71-83)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, enumerated major factors relevant to nasa FY 1973 budget request in speech before aiaa National Capital Section: 1. “Program continuity must be maintained.” NASA could not “shut down major programs for several years and then start them up again efficiently.” 2. NASA programs had helped stabilize U.S. aerospace industry. “This is a very significant reason for maintaining NASA programs up to or near current levels at this time.” 3. NASA would reach minimum “institutional base” requirement for efficient management of approved programs in current fiscal year. “I will strongly resist any further reductions.” 4. Space shuttle was “next logical step to develop our national capabilities for using space more economically and more effectively with manned and unmanned spacecraft, for both civilian and defense purposes.” 5. U.S. was lagging behind in development of new technology for commercial and military aviation. “We killed the sst while Britain and France went ahead to build the Concorde, and the Soviet Union built a competing version. The Europeans—and our Canadian neighbors—are ahead of us in Short Take Off and Landing Aircraft. The question must be asked, how long can we, as a great nation, afford to be mere spectators while others move ahead in aircraft technology?” nasa did not intend “to shift the gears of our space program into the ‘park’ position; we are geared up for continued steady and impressive progress in those areas of space activity which we consider most rewarding scientifically or most important to our national security.” Within few years “there will be no time of day or night, year in and year out, when men are not working in orbit above the earth. And it is up to us, in decisions to be made this year in this capital, whether these men in orbit will include Americans.” (Text)
MSC announced issuance of RFPs on $400 000 design study of space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system. Study would define oxygen-hydrogen system compatible for use in both booster and orbital vehicles, (msc Release 71—35)
International aspects of U.S. space program were discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in luncheon speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: Cooperation with Western nations in past decade had included 70 countries, 250 specific agreements, and more than 24 joint satellite projects at run-out cost in excess of $400 million. More than 50% of total had been funded by other nations. In 1970s, “opportunities exist for cooperation on a significantly larger scale.” U.S. wished “to build a foundation for important benefit- and cost-sharing in the major space programs of the future.” Canada, Japan, and Australia—“countries having the most obvious potential for post-Apollo work-sharing”—had been given “every chance to become fully acquainted with our plans and studies” to enable them to decide whether they wished to commit their own resources. European Space Conference had put several million dollars into studies of post-Apollo program possibilities and some member countries had invested still larger amounts. British, French, and West German firms were working with NASA prime contractors on space shuttle design studies. Europe would have to choose between significant participation in shuttle funding and funding independent European rocket program. Decision would be necessary “even if Europe funds only 10 per cent of the shuttle’s price tab.” U.S. had said it would “sell launch services for projects consistent with peaceful purposes and existing international agreements . . . [and] that general technical access to the entire program would be available, but that technology at the level of commercial know-how would be transferred in either direction only where one side required it to complete its commitments to the other.” Since Europe was talking of only 10% share of shuttle program, “we said that we would retain decision-making responsibility except where European costs were directly affected, in which case decisions would be joint.” In U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space, “it is particularly important that we give clear recognition to both . . . competition and cooperation.” U.S. was competing with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, strategically, economically, and politically.” U.S. was cooperating with U.S.S.R. “because we both live in a vast universe that must be explored, where important new knowledge is to be gained, for the benefit of all men, everywhere.” While U.S. retained demonstrated lead over U.S.S.R., “it will not be an enduring lead without major new initiatives on our part— initiatives like the space shuttle and the exploration of the outer planets. . . .” In Jan. 18—21 Moscow talks with Soviet Academy of Sciences, “we specifically agreed, initially, to exchange three grams [0.11 oz] of sample obtained from Luna 16, for three grams each from Apollo 11 and 12. These relatively small amounts are sufficient for detailed scientific examination of a comparative nature.” Additional meetings on compatible docking arrangements had not been held because “docking discussions are well underway, and the planned exchange of information is taking place.” On visit to Soviet cosmonaut training area at Star City, “we were welcomed by Cosmonauts Beregovoy, Nikolayev, Leonov, Shatalov, and Valentina Tereshkova. We were shown the Soyuz mission trainer, and were invited to attempt to dock two Soyuz spacecraft in their docking trainer. While there, I also presented a plaque in memory of Yuri Gagarin [first man in space] from the U.S. astronauts.” (Text) • President Nixon announced appointments of members of President’s Science Advisory Committee for terms expiring Dec. 31, 1974: Dr. Lee A.	DuBridge, former Presidential Science Adviser; Dr. Herbert Friedman of nrl; Dr. Daniel P. Moynahan, former Counsellor to the President; Kenneth H. Olsen, President of Digital Equipment Corp.; and Dr. John G. Truxal of Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute. {PD, 2/1/71,
NASA announced it had authorized MSFC to extend for one month the level-of-effort contract with NR Rocketdyne Div. for design of Space Shuttle main engine. Action had been taken pending completion of gao review of United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div.’s protest of contract award to Rocketdyne [see Aug. 3]. (nasa Release 71—249)
Sen. Lawton Chiles (D-Fla.) inserted House Memorial 780 from Florida Legislature in Congressional Record “to request that Kennedy Space Center be the site for construction of the space shuttle.” (CR, 5/25/71, S7680) .......
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, presented nasa FY 1972 budget request to House Committee on Science and Astronautics: FY 1972 projects—including Apollo 15 and 16, two Mariner spacecraft, first erts satellite, and continuing work toward future flights of Apollo 17, Skylab, earth resources and ats satellites, and Viking probes —represented “the fulfillment of enterprises of the 1960’s, the tailing off to completion of work in progress for many years. By 1974 the number of nasa space launches per year will have declined from 26 in 1966 to eight. After the Skylab missions in 1973, we face at least 4 years in which there will be no United States manned space flight. “Five years ago there were over 390 000 people in industry employed on nasa work. By the end of fiscal year 1971 that figure will be about 108 000. The decline will continue for a few more months, but we expect it to start increasing by the middle of fiscal year 1972, with the end-of-the-year total being about equal to that at the beginning.” U.S. was “running a serious risk of losing too much of the aerospace capability that is an essential ingredient of our long term national strength and security.” There was every indication U.S. would lose leadership in space “unless we move forward now with our space programs for the 1970’s. In 1970 the Soviets launched 88 payloads into space compared to . . . 36 for the United States. Their r&d budget is continuing to increase. They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars while we have many gaps in our planetary program. We would expect them to use automated vehicles and sample return spacecraft from the planets, while we have no such program. Finally the Soviets have a systematic continuing manned space flight program and have stated that they expect to fly a space station before we do.” U.S. should continue to compete with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, strategically, economically, and politically.” Dr. Low believed U.S. could cooperate with U.S.S.R. “in the areas we have under discussion without prejudicing any of our vital national interests.” nasa was reexamining procurement policies and practices and “beginning a serious critical appraisal of the proper size, composition, and organization of NASA’s institutional base.” Position reduction of 1500 in FY 1972 budget was in anticipation that “reduction of this magnitude would be found possible without unduly impairing our ability to carry out the program. Our budget justifications show this reduction as a flat percentage cut—about 5.1%—in all of our major activities. The actual adjustments . . . will be refined as our study of the nasa institutional base proceeds.” nasa program was 1.4% of U.S. budget, contrasting with 53% for domestic programs related to human and physical resources, yet U.S. stood to gain “tremendous benefits now and in the future” from exploration and applications of space science and technology. And whole future “as a nation and as mankind” depended on space science. “For in order to survive in the changing environment on our planet Earth, we must understand the processes that govern our universe.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said purpose of nasa Meteorology Program was to “develop and demonstrate sensors and spacecraft for making those meteorological measurements that will enable a continued improvement in weather forecasting throughout the world with an ultimate view to a limited degree of weather modification and control of severe weather systems. Projections indicate that by about 1980 it should be possible to reach a global capability to acquire information throughout the atmosphere and to develop comprehensive weather models. Once developed, these models can be used to make 14-day weather forecasts and long-range climate estimates.” Ability to develop weather models would permit basic experimenting in weather control. Space shuttle was key nasa development believed essential in 1970s, Dr. von Braun said, presenting U.S. with its greatest technology challenge for space in this decade. “Preliminary analysis indicates that if the shuttle is used in lieu of current expendable systems, the transportation costs will be reduced by at least a factor of ten. . . . Only by an investment now will we be able to have operational an economical transportation system by the end of the 1970’s to support a vigorous and balanced space flight program.” (Transcript)
Future of U.S. space program was subject of articles in America Illustrated, usia publication distributed in U.S.S.R. Jay Holmes described plans for next two decades in space including planetary exploration and Grand Tours of outer space, practical applications of space technology, and international cooperation in space. Technical advancements directly traceable to U.S. space program were described by James J. Haggerty, who forecast additional space benefits in future. Reusable space shuttle and earth-orbiting stations, continued lunar exploration, and manned voyages to Mars were discussed in article on earth, moon, and Mars. (Am III, 2/71)
Msc announced issuance of rfps for development of human waste collection and storage system for space shuttle orbiter stage. Contractor would receive $90 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract under which firm would fabricate for testing one fully functional unit that could be used individually during week-long test by team of three men and one woman, (msc Release 71-23)
Three aerospace teams, including seven European firms interested in support roles, submitted proposals to msfc on preliminary design of research and applications module (ram) proposed for space shuttle and space station. Proposals were submitted by McDonnell Douglas Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and General Electric Co. Team headed by General Dynamics would include matra of France, erno of Germany, SAAB of Sweden, Hawker Siddeley of U.K., and Fiat of Italy. General Electric team would include Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm of Germany and Thompson-CSF of France, (msfc Release 71—10)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), on behalf of himself, Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-NJ.), Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R-N.Y.), and Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), called up his amendment to H.R. 7109, FY 1972 NASA authorization bill, which would delete from bill $138 million for space shuttle development. (CR, 6/28/71, S10061-80; 10084-112)
Msc announced it had issued RFPs to 10 firms for $150 000 firmfixedprice R&D contract to study space walking requirements in space shuttle program. Proposal called for investigation of emergency, contingency, and normal extravehicular and intravehicular activities (eva/ IVA) while outside earth’s atmosphere and study of protective equipment needed to perform eva/iva. Proposals were due Dec. 6. (msc Release 71-83)	\
Newsweek commented on “shrinking space shuttle.” U.S. space program had been “hit with another budgetary broadside.” Space shuttle to service planned space station “will get no more than a third of the money its designers insist they need to build it.” Original request for $300 million had been cut by NASA to $225 million. “Now White House budgeteers have shrunk it to $105 million—and it has yet to face the anti-technology faction in Congress.” (Newsweek, 1/25/71)
nasa award of two contracts for feasibility studies of pressure-fed engine for water-recoverable space shuttle booster was announced by msfc. trw Inc. would receive $400 000 and Aerojet-General Corp. $367 595, for studies ending Feb. 29, 1972. (msfc Release 71-230)
President Nixon approved H.R. 7109, $3.384-billion NASA FY 1972 authorization bill that became P.L. 92-68. Total authorization was $84 million above budget request of $3,300 billion and $86 million above FY 1971 new obligational authority (noa) of $3,298 billion. Bill authorized for R&D $2,603 billion, increase of $85.5 million over budget request of $2,518 billion and decrease of $90 million from FY 1971 authorization of $2,693 billion; for construction of facilities, $58.4 million, up $2.1 million from budget request of $56.3 million and $24 million above FY 1971 authorization of $34.5 million; and for research and program management, $723 million, down $4 million from budget request of $727 million but $40 million above $683.3 million authorized in FY 1971. Bill included $29.3-million budget amendment to cover Federal pay increases. It added $30 million to budget request for Skylab and Space Shuttle programs, $43 million for nuclear power and propulsion, $2.5 million for earth resources survey, and $12.5 million for aeronautical research and technology. It reduced requested authorization for lunar and planetary exploration by $10 million. (PD, 8/9/71, 1136; NASA Budget Off; A&A 1970)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 7109, $3.281-billion nasa FY 1972 authorization bill—$152 million less than $3,433 billion approved by House June 3 and almost $10 million above nasa request of $3,271 billion. Committee deleted $45 million increase voted by House for Skylab and additional $25 million House had voted for space shuttle. Committee version of bill would provide $2,543 billion for R&D, $55.3 million for construction of facilities, and $681.3 million for research and program management. Total of $3,281 billion was lowest total recommended by Senate Committee since FY 1962 and was $35.1 million less than total Committee recommended in FY 1971. (S Rpt 92-146)
Joint group of NASA and European Space Conference technical experts completed four-day meeting at NASA Hq. to identify candidate areas for possible European participation in post-Apollo space programs. NASA announced Dec. 6 that areas identified included space shuttle subsystems, major responsibility for orbit-to-orbit space tug, early development of major payload elements like sortie cans and research and applications modules, and support studies in related technology. Group’s report would be studied by U.S. and European authorities. Group had proposed February 1972 meeting for further technical definition and consideration of programmatic, financial, and management implications, (nasa Release 71-241)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) on Senate floor questioned need for space shuttle and space station: “I have written to NASA on a number of occasions to ask whether . . . there is a need for the space shuttle-space station. All nasa has told me in reply is that first, the shuttle would enable us to continue to have an active space program, and second, it would reduce the costs of the space program. But why do we actually need it? What would it help us to accomplish that we could not otherwise accomplish? NASA seemingly has no answer to these questions.” (CR, 5/26/71, S7811—2)
NASA announced availability of Shuttle Technology Program—Fiscal Year 1972, compilation of projects making up NASA FY 1972 Space Shuttle Technology Program, (nasa Release 71—183)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had selected msfc to integrate two proposed earth orbital projects, space station and research and applications modules (ram), by supervising definition, design, and verification of design concepts, msfc announced. Development of space station would follow development of space shuttle, ram was family of space payload carrier modules to be delivered to earth orbit by shuttle, (msfc Release 71—118)
MSFC announced award of $250 000, 10-mo, “phase A” contract to NR Space Div. to study feasibility of developing low-cost, reusable, chemical-propulsion stage that could be launched from earth on space shuttle booster and refueled in space for up to 10 missions. Vehicle could be used for high-lift capability to low earth orbit, for placing large payloads in geosynchronous orbit, and for lunar and unmanned planetary missions, (msfc Release 71—120)
House, by vote of 302 to 64, passed H.R. 7109, $3,433 billion FY 1972 NASA authorization bill, after agreeing by voice vote to amendment deleting $500 000 for feasibility studies of offshore airports. House rejected amendment that would have eliminated $125 million for space shuttle system. (CR, 6/3/71, H4588-628)
Editorial in Aviation Week & Space Technology commented on rejection by Government of further sst funding: “The fate of the sst should serve notice . . . that the aerospace industry can no longer survive with its political naivete and aloofness from the fray.” It was “sad day when a deliberate national decision is made to abandon a major frontier of technological advance. But it will be even sadder when the victors in this significant debate gird for their next assault on the space shuttle program.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 3/29/71, 9)
NASA was looking at air bases in the Carolinas, south Florida, and the Bahamas as possible landing site for space shuttle rocket launched from KSC, UPI said in Philadelphia Inquirer. NASA engineers also were considering refueling shuttle booster’s 1st stage in flight so that it could return to launch site for landing, like aircraft. (P lnq,
Senate, by vote of 82 to 5, passed H.R. 7109, $3.281-billion FY 1972 NASA authorization bill, after rejecting by vote of 64 to 22 Mondale amendment No. 233 that would have deleted from bill $138 million for space shuttle program. Senate also passed by voice vote H.J.R. 742, making continuing appropriations for FY 1972, after rejecting by vote of 63 to 24 modified Proxmire amendment limiting ceiling for defense expenditures to $68 billion. (CR, 6/29/71, S10126-62, S10177, S10272-98)
msfc had signed level-of-effort contract with NR Rocketdyne Div. for design of Space Shuttle main engine, NASA announced. The interim contract—for four months at $1 million per month—had been signed pending gao review of protest by United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. of the contract award [see Aug. 3]. (nasa Release 71-165)
NASA announced selection of Mississippi Test Facility near New Orleans, La., as site for sea-level testing of space shuttle rocket engines. Testing under simulated altitude conditions would be done at usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn. Test program would include some 1200 development and acceptance tests from 1973 through 1979, with 45 to 50 sustaining engineering tests per year afterward, and some 100 development tests under simulated altitude conditions from 1974 through 1976. Site Evaluation Board had selected sites after surveying existing Government-owned or controlled properties. Space shuttle engine would be reusable, high-performance, high-chamber-pressure engine using liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. First stage would be larger than J-2 engine in Saturn V, with 249 500kg (550000-lb) thrust. Orbiter stage engine would have extendable nozzle skirt for use in space, (nasa Release 71—30)
MSC issued rfps to develop and test polymer seal materials for space shuttle propulsion systems. Proposals, for fixed-price R&D contract, were due Dec. 3, with work to be concluded 12 mos after contract award, (msc Release 71-82)
msfc issued RFPs to Aerojet-General Liquid Rocket Co., United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and NR Rocketdyne Div. on development of main engines for two-stage reusable launch vehicle (space shuttle). Companies had been performing preliminary design and definition studies of shuttle under independent, $ 6-million, parallel contracts since June 1970. In June 1971 one company would be chosen to develop engine, (msfc Release 71-37)
Senate Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 9382, FY 1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill that contained $3,325-billion NASA appropriation. Committee added $24 million for NERVA to nasa request of $2,518 billion for r&d, making total of $2,542 billion, and rejected House recommendations for cuts in construction of facilities appropriation, including $20 million for space shuttle funding. (CR, 7/15/71, D703; SBD, 7/16/71, 70)
msfc announced award of $1081 343 contract to Research, Inc., to design, fabricate, install, and check out electrical heating devices for space shuttle prototype heat protection systems. Device would be installed in an existing structural test facility at msfc and would heat up to 1600 K (2500°F) on lower surface and 1300 K (1800°F) on top surface of test articles. Work on device would be funded in increments, beginning with $100 000 for preliminary design phase, (msfc Release 71-67)
NASA received design patents No. 220 980 through 220 985 for early conceptual designs of space shuttle. Inventors were employees of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. (Jones, NYT, 6/26/71; Patent Off pio)
MSC announced award of three seven-month, firm, fixed-price contracts for development of new surface materials for space shuttle orbiter stage. McDonnell Douglas Corp. would receive $325 000; GE Aerospace Group, $319 200; and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $322 500. (msc Release 71—50)
Najeeb E. Halaby, Pan American World Airways President and Chairman, discussed space shuttle at Symposium of Society of Experimental Test Pilots in Los Angeles: “nasa has already shown that it appreciates the contributions airlines can make to the program, by having airlines participate with space contractors in the development of the space shuttle” to “make the eventual space shuttle work more like a standard airliner than a quarterly experiment.” Since it took less energy to orbit objects than to fly them across U.S., “there’s no reason why the cost of Space Shuttle operations should not become as low or lower than that of jets.” Pan Am’s “most glamorous vision” was “Space Shuttle as an air transport, carrying passengers from New York to Tokyo—or Peking—in 45 minutes, or from Los Angeles to Rome in 40.” “We can visualize a rocket-powered vehicle with 100 passengers . . . launched vertically in a suborbital trajectory at the precise azimuth for its intended destination, re-entering the atmosphere without excess g-forces, gliding unpowered to an altitude where its conventional jet engines will be started, then landing on a runway like a conventional airliner.” (Text)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion FY 1972 nasa authorization bill. Bill added $163 million to Administration’s requested $3,271 billion, including additional $45 million for Skylab and $25 million for space shuttle, $39.9 million for nerva engine, and $25 million for aeronautical research and technology. Bill provided $2,668 billion for r&d, increase of $150 million over requested $2,518 billion; $58.6 million for construction of facilities, up $2.3 million from $56.3-million request; and $706.9 million for research and program management, increase of $9.5 million over requested $697.4 million. (H Rpt 92—143)
McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. began 14-mo, $350 000 study continuation for system definition of reusable nuclear stage (rns) for multipurpose space missions. Previous studies had determined that RNS could he launched by either Saturn or space shuttle booster. New study would focus on RNS concepts to be launched by space shuttle, but would consider two-stage, fully reusable shuttle, shuttle booster with expendable 2nd stage, and launch of RNS as complete unit or with components to be assembled in space. Study also would support nerva program, (msfc Release 71-174)
NASA manned space flight officials proposed four-launch program to place astronauts in earth orbit to map U.S., study earth resources, and study pollution, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D.	Myers said in AP-reported interview that program was in preliminary stages and would require additional funding from Congress. MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said project would keep U.S. in maimed space flight business during period when U.S.S.R. would probably be very active in the field. Project would fill four-year gap between Skylab and manned space shuttle tests. It would also directly benefit mankind, Kraft explained: “The two-man crews will fly at a higher inclination than we’ve ever flown before in earth orbit. Using photographic and other sensing equipment developed in the space program, they could accurately map the entire United States, including Alaska. The astronauts also could make earth resources and environmental measurements.” (AP, W Star,	A16)
gao investigation of NASA selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for prime contract for final design and manufacture of reusable space shuttle [see July 13] was requested by Bruce N. Torell, President of Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp., in telegram to Elmer B. Staats, U.S. Comptroller General. Bases for protest were that source selection had disregarded objective of the rfp, nasa had failed to conduct “written or oral discussions” on proposals, Pratt & Whitney felt its proposal was “clearly entitled to a superior technical evaluation to the technical proposal of Rocketdyne,” and NASA had failed to give proper consideration to “Pratt & Whitney’s test-proven flight weight design and greater experience.” In letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, nine senators requested that no award of space shuttle engine contract be made until gao investigation had been completed. (CR, 8/6/71, S13789)
U.K. government agreed to finance half of bac’s contribution to NR’s Phase B space shuttle study for nasa. Total financing was about $550 000. (SF, 4/71, 121)
usn participation in space shuttle program was urged by L/Cdr Preston E.	Beck (usn, Ret.), in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, usn experience had shown close parallel between life support criteria and fuel management for nuclear submarines and that required for space shuttle. usn Office of Naval Research (onr) and usn Systems Command should determine feasibility of using air entrainment, hydroskis, skids, and hydrofoils to permit sea-level landing point for shuttle spacecraft with one or more engine inoperable after reentry. Sea transport and barge storage of fuels and oxidizers for shuttle spacecraft would ensure safety of flight personnel and minimize interference with commercial air traffic. Space shuttle orbiter and booster structures could be moved only by flyout or by sea because of size. “The obvious answer is final assembly at the launch site using a seaborne logistic system.” Naval Air and Material Center had facilities for development of space shuttle materials, testing of components and subassemblies, and supporting engineering. It seemed pertinent “that the Navy take the initiative in starting to support the space shuttle program. The key to many of the problems now being subjected to resolution is the sea.” (U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, 8/71, 103—5)
Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. filed formal protest against nasa award of $500-million space shuttle main engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. and asked Federal Government to reverse award. In letter to Gao, Pratt & Whitney charged selection of Rocketdyne was “illegal, arbitrary and capricious, and based on unsound decisions” and reiterated complaints cited Aug. 3 to gao. (W Post, 8/19/71, C12; SBD, 8/19/71, 230)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified on aerospace unemployment before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 authorization hearings: From number of studies of unemployment of scientists and engineers, estimated 30 000 to 40 000 were out of work at end of 1970. “The majority of these came from aerospace-related industries. Projections indicate that this number could more than double by June 1972, which means that as many as 30 percent of the Nation’s aerospace scientists and engineers will be unemployed. The effect of this national trend—in terms of an individual scientist or engineer being reemployed—is magnified by the concentration of this unemployment, geographically and by training and experience. . . . This not only causes great personal hardship but . . . represents the loss of a tremendous national resource.” NASA-sponsored survey by Battelle Memorial Institute of persons laid off by group of nasa contractors from June 1968 to September 1970 had made preliminary findings: only 31% had found permanent jobs, 32% had found temporary jobs, 32% were still unemployed, and 5% had left work-force. Average person was unemployed 31 weeks. Of those who had found permanent jobs, only 18% returned to aerospace. Of those permanently employed outside of aerospace, only 12% reported having positions highly related to aerospace skills and 50% reported new positions unrelated to aerospace. Unemployment rate of those over 50 was 48%. Of those who had found permanent work outside, 31% said they would not return to aerospace if given opportunity; 16% said they would. Preliminary results of survey indicated “we are losing much of the aerospace capability that is an indispensable ingredient of our long term economic strength and national security.” In closing, Dr. Low made point that there was “no either/or choice between technological advances and social advances. Without technology, we cannot maintain the capability to deal effectively with any national problem.” Dr. Low was questioned on his testimony that U.S.S.R. was spending more on R&D than U.S. was spending in total science and technology area. He answered that Soviet space program, with apparent Soviet policy of steadily increasing r&d investment, would soon match and then surpass U.S. program in size and accomplishment. “For this comparison, I am dealing with the combined civil and military space programs of both nations; to try to differentiate between civil and military activities of the U.S.S.R. would be speculative at best. The most difficult comparison to try to make between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. economies or programs is in terms of absolute costs: each national economy is geared and motivated to produce a different, nonparallel mix of goods and services.” (CR, 7/31/71, E8611—2) Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed future of Apollo program: “We can now move with confidence to the final phase. ... In these last missions, we will expand the capability of the system very dramatically. Design changes in the spacecraft and supporting equipment will allow the two astronauts in the lunar module to remain on the moon up to 67 hours, as compared with 34 hours on Apollo 14. The scientific payload landed on the moon will be doubled to above 1200 lbs [544 kg]. Changes in the command and service modules will permit up to 10 days total flight time and major increases in orbital scientific activities. During the Apollo 15 and 16 missions small subsatellites will be placed in lunar orbit and will continue to make scientific measurements long after the astronauts return to earth.” In Skylab program, “three separate three-man Skylab flight crews will be selected during the coming year. Scientist astronauts will be included. . . . They plan to perform about 50 experiments in various disciplines. Twenty of these are in the life sciences, to determine how human beings adjust and perform under the conditions of prolonged space flight, up to 2 months’ duration. “They will also operate the Skylab Earth Resources Experiment Package in the second space flight phase of NASA’s earth resources program. These observations will be in conjunction with [and] complementary to those [of] the automated earth resources test technology erts, to be launched in 1972.” FY 1972 request for space shuttle of $100 million would provide for broad spectrum of studies, including analysis of new alloys and promising external materials for thermal protection; test demonstrations of design concepts for structures; wind-tunnel tests to define aerodynamic heating, launch aerodynamics, etc.; design of long-leadtime hardware, subsystems, and test devices; initiation of scaled model for flight tests; dynamics testing; electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing; and integration of upgraded fuel-cell electrical power subsystem with other components for proof-of-concept testing. (Transcript) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, testified on dod applications of space transportation system and dod-nasa teamwork on space shuttle: “Present dod satellite communications program consists of two major systems: The long distance point to point or strategic system and the local-area multiple-user or tactical system. . . . We are pursuing a new system called Defense Satellite Communications System, Phase II, which can provide many voice channels to selected limited areas of the earth. These present and proposed systems give us the flexibility for voice and teletype communications from our forces overseas and allow rapid transmission of photographic images from operational theaters to the United States.” In conjunction with NASA studies, usaf was analyzing defense applications of space shuttle to provide better insight into utility of concept for dod. usaf was providing NASA with data to help ensure that configuration was of maximum utility to dod. nasa and usaf had worked jointly on engine development. Air Force “has supported advanced development efforts on liquid rocket engines in the past, and more recently concluded a hydrogen/oxygen high performance engine demonstration program.” Engine, XLR-129, had “provided the basis for selection of the reusable high pressure rocket engine concept for the shuttle. It also provided design data for a 250 000-pound [1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which supports the current shuttle engine design concepts.” In operational testing area, “usaf and NASA recently conducted unpowered approach and landing demonstrations with F—Ills and B-52s. . . . These demonstrations investigated terminal area energy management for maneuvering reentry vehicles and have a relationship to the Space Shuttle operational concepts.” (Transcript)
Msc engineers were studying use of liquid oxygen and propane as fuel combination for recoverable ballistic booster that was possible vehicle for space shuttle transportation system, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. (Av Wk, 10/25/71,12)
Dr. Vasily V. Parin—Soviet physiologist, former President of Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, and member of Soviet Academy of Sciences—died at age 68 of liver ailment. Dr. Parin had been known primarily for his work during 1960s on human physiological problems during space flight and had authored studies on effect of weightlessness on functioning of heart and circulatory system. He had received Order of Lenin, U.S.S.R’s highest award, in 1963 for his work in developing Soviet medical science. (AP, NYT, 5/Yl/ll, 42) Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified June 15 on nasa policy on backup spacecraft and Centaur reliability: “In the manned program, all possible steps are taken to assure the safety of the astronauts. Single point failures are reduced to an absolute minimum. Missions are planned to build upon the previous missions so as to reduce the number of unknowns.” Within missions, “plateaus are established so that all systems can be checked out in real time prior to committing to the next plateau. Vigorous testing procedures coupled with redundancy and in many cases dual redundancy are adopted before a system is ‘man-rated.’ ” In Skylab “we are building a back-up workshop which will be brought right up to the point of actual checkout. This will permit us to proceed with the program even in the event that the first workshop would not be successfully launched. Similarly, we will have a single back-up Command and Service Module-Saturn IB capability for the three manned visits to the workshop.” Capability was built into program and was “key to the plan for a rescue capability in Skylab which we recently adopted.” In earth-orbital automated programs “we generally plan a series of related missions, using identical or similar hardware. If we have a mission failure, decisions will then be made, based on all available factors, whether we will (1) prepare and fly a specific back-up to the mission which failed, (2) modify succeeding flights ... to achieve the objectives, or (3) defer achieving the mission objectives to future years.” In planetary programs, with launch opportunities at only discrete intervals, NASA usually had provided for two identical launches. Each launch in dual mission was planned to complement its twin, while at same time serving as backup if twin were lost. This year Manner 9 was backup, flying hybrid mission. Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle had history of 3 failures out of 16 operational vehicles, without apparent relationship between failures, giving probability of success of 80% if based solely on past experience. Launch vehicles for automated missions—such as Scout, Delta, and Atlas-Centaur—were “complex systems without much redundancy, and cannot be expected to achieve reliabilities much greater than about 90% without very major and costly changes. They certainly cannot be considered ‘man-rated’ vehicles.” Addition of redundant systems would be investigated again but was not complete solution. Redundancy added weight, reduced payload capability, and was expensive. For launch vehicles of size of Titan-Centaur, which would carry Viking and Grand Tour payloads, additional redundancy might be practicable and desirable and would be actively studied. Major increase in reliability of achieving orbit would be one of important attributes of space shuttle. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on June 16 continued testimony on backup philosophy, expanding on application in ossa: “We do not schedule backup missions for observatory spacecraft. We always buy, and intend to fly, at least two flight units of a new series of observatory-class spacecraft. When we have a failure or a malfunction in a spacecraft or a launch vehicle we will always do everything possible to thoroughly understand and correct all other future missions which could conceivably be subject to a similar malfunction. When we have a failure we will always review the effect of the loss on the program, determine the alternative recovery plans by which we can attain the objectives of the lost mission, assess the cost and any other impact of those alternatives on the program and then decide which alternative to choose.” Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified June 17: “In the basic considerations which establish the philosophical approach to reliability of unmanned space vehicles, the over-riding necessity for protection of the lives of human passengers is absent. The result is an approach to reliability in which cost and simplicity play a much larger part. We have not imposed a requirement for total elimination of single point failure modes, but have concentrated upon reducing the probability of failure by careful design, parts application, major quality and reliability efforts, and, most importantly, tender loving care. Our launch vehicles . . . are characterized as simplex systems, implying lack of the complexity characteristic of redundancy.” (Testimony; Subcom Rpt, 10/71)
Dale D. Myers, Nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on nasa FY 1972 authorization bill: “With the Apollo 14 scientific instruments operating properly, we now have begun to develop the networks of instrumentation at different locations on the lunar surface which will allow us to use normal triangulation procedures to establish the details of the moon’s structure. We have two passive seismometers and two suprathermal ion detectors in operation, one each at the Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 sites, about 115 miles [185 km] apart. Last week severed moonquakes were reported . . . when the moon reached its perigee. Our instruments pinpointed the location of these events . . . close to the Fra Mauro crater area. “We also have a laser ranging retroflector at the Apollo 11 Tranquility Base and another at Fra Mauro—750 miles [1200 km] apart. The laser ranging team at the MacDonald Observatory in Texas has reported high-quality returns from the Apollo 14 reflector. As the world’s observatories refine their ability to use these instruments, we hope that they will be able to detect random wobbles of the earth’s rotational axis. If so, this may contribute to the ability to predict major earthquakes.” During past year, design and essentially all phases of development testing had been completed for Skylab and flight hardware was in fabrication. Definition of space shuttle was nearing completion. To develop limited capability to rescue Skylab astronauts from space, NASA had initiated design action on modification kit to give Skylab CM capacity to carry two men up to orbit and five men back to earth. Stranded astronauts could use Skylab cluster as shelter while modification kit was installed and Apollo-Saturn IB launch vehicle assigned to next revisit was made ready for launch. (Transcript)
msfc announced selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for 16-mo, $1.1-million contract to develop turbopump assemblies for hydrogen and oxygen space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system (aps) technology program. Six-phase contract included exploratory study; design for tubopump components; fabrication of turbopump system; testing, refurbishing, acceptance testing, and delivery to NASA; and engineering support. (msfc Release 71-110)
AP quoted Fairchild Hiller Corp. spokesman as saying firm was serving as clearinghouse for proposals for SST funding. “Sketchy and tentative plans” existed, AP said, to finance sst through public stock issue backed up by $1 billion in bank loans. (AP, B Sun, 4/7/71, A6) April 6-7: Space Shuttle Technology conference at msfc discussed space vehicle propulsion systems with operational life requirements of 100 flight missions, (msfc Release 71—59; msfc pao)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified on space shuttle economics before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Following testimony by Dr. Oskar Morgen-stern, Chairman of Board of Mathematica, Inc., and Dr. Klaus P. Heiss of Mathematica, on corporation’s study of space shuttle economics [see Jan. 31], Dr. Lapp criticized calculations and said entire issue of launch vehicle choices for future should be restudied. He said shuttle payloads would average “10 times more expensive than their weight in solid gold.” Cost would be $5100 per 0,5 kg (1 lb) for launches 1979-1990. Cost projection prepared for NASA had indicated $7-billion saving for shuttle launches in program that would cost $42 billion using current methods, Dr. Lapp said. He added that no such $42-billion program had been authorized for the 1980s. U.S. taxpayers could save $19 billion by not building space shuttle and by using existing rockets for space program. (Transcript)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of 10-mo, $98 000 contract extension to Martin Marietta Corp. Denver Div. for continued design of crew compartment configured for space shuttle, which would be tested in neutral buoyancy t&nk. Extension brought total value of contract to $173 670. (msc Release 72-161)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of requests for proposals to 13 aerospace firms to study, design, and test polymer seal materials for storing space shuttle propellants. Firm selected would receive $100 000, firm-fixed-price contract, (msc Release 72-43)
Signing of $125 000 firm-fixed-price contract with Florida Operations of Honeywell, Inc., St. Petersburg, for study of inertial measurement unit program for space shuttle orbiter was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Honeywell would develop alternative approaches to allow NASA to assess feasibility of adapting existing units for space shuttle. (msc Release 72—132)	.
NASA Space Shuttle Technology Conference was held in San Antonio, Tex., in conjunction with 13th Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and Society of Automotive Engineers. Topics discussed included aeroelasticity and loads, structure and liquid interactions, vehicle dynamics test and analysis, thermal protection systems, and structural design. Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was member of panel for high school students that discussed benefits to be derived in space shuttle use. (aiaa Release)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Aerojet-General Corp., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Co., and United Technology Center to receive separate, two-month, $150 000 study contracts to analyze possible use of solid-fuel motors with 305- and 396-cm (120- and 156-in) diameters to power space shuttle booster. (msfc Release 72-4)
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)
Flight Research Center began test series to evaluate method of simulating space shuttle orbiter in flight at subsonic speeds. Tests would be conducted on FRc’s general-purpose airborne simulator (gpas)—converted subsonic jet transport equipped with electronic variable stability and control system. Flights would determine aircraft’s ability to match orbiter’s final approach path in steep descent from 9 km (5.6 mi) down to landing, (frc Release 21-72; frc pao)
West German government was preparing blueprint for aerospace development for remainder of decade, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Basic document for government financing and support would establish priorities in military and civil aerospace development and provide government and industry with “idea of how much room remains for maneuver in regard to implementing new projects.” Theme would be “multi-national cooperation.” (Av Wk, 4/24/72, 32-41) April 24-25: American Physical Society held annual spring meeting in New York. Team of Columbia Univ. scientists reported observations made with 1971 rocket experiment to study x-rays from Crab Nebula had supported view that pulsars were hurling high-energy particles, or cosmic rays, into space constantly at close to speed of sound. Experiment had shown that rays were polarized. X-rays from space could not penetrate atmosphere. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/72, 11) project, membership would receive unclassified resume explaining proposed study. If 10 or more members from at least 2 scientific institutions considered project inappropriate, they could present case to NAs’s governing body. Resolution on foreign policy asked President Nixon and . Congress to develop and apply science and technology in industry, agriculture, and health for furtherance of human welfare and called for de-emphasis on reliance on military force, direct or indirect. nas James Craig Watson Medal of Science was presented to Dr. Andre Deprit, NRC postdoctoral resident research associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Citation was for “adaptation of modern computing machinery to algebraic rather than arithmetical operations.” Award consisted of gold medal and $2000 honorarium. (Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/27/72, 27; W Star, 4/23/72, D3) April 25:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved H.R. 14070, $3.420-billion FY 1973 nasa authorization bill after inserting amendment that decreased by $9 million authorization of $3,429 billion passed by House April 20. As approved by Senate Committee, authorization was $41 million above original NASA budget request of $3,379 billion and $12.5 million above amended budget request of $3,420 billion. Bill, reported to Senate May 3, allocated $2,613 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $729.5 million for research and program management. House recommendation of $211.9 million for aeronautical research and technology was reduced to NASA request level of $163.4 million. In Senate report, Committee praised increase in aeronautical R&D motivated by 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation, but said it doubted additional funding of $48.5 million approved by House could profitably be spent during FY 1973. Committee disapproved cancellation of development of 333 600-newton (75 000-lb)-thrust rocket engine in Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (nerva) program and recommended new authorization of $8.5 million as requested by NASA, plus allocation of $16.5 million in unused FY 1972 funds, for engine’s development in FY 1973. Senate bill restored $4 million deleted by House from funds for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and allocated total of $156.6 million—NASA-requested level—for Physics and Astronomy program. Bill added $12.5 million to NASA request of $194.7 million for space applications and stipulated $5 million out of total of $207.2 million be used for small applications technology satellite project. But it disapproved $4 million House had added for Earth Observatory Satellite project. Committee recommended that NASA present space shuttle as separate program item on FY 1973 budget request, restructure manned space flight budget for “better visibility of total effort,” and formulate vigorous program to study development of terrestrial uses of solar energy. (S Rpt 92—779; Com Off)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of 18-mo, $238 000, costplus-fixed-fee contract to United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. to design and build prototype waste collection system—usable by both males and females—for space shuttle orbiter. (msc Release 72168) During July:	U.S.S.R. launched Salyut spacecraft which failed to achieve orbit, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Magazine said spacecraft penetrated atmosphere, where it was detected by over-the-horizon radars. One of two 2nd-stage engines stopped firing early; second stopped at end of programmed firing time with fuel remaining. (Av Week, 4/9/73, 21)	_
Selection of Kennedy Space Center in Florida and Vandenberg Air Force Base in California as launch and landing sites for space shuttle was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in Washington, D.C. ksc site would be used for research and development launches, to begin in 1978, and for all operational flights into easterly orbits. NASA would provide facilities for shuttle users at ksc by modification of existing facilities. Vandenberg afb site would be phased in toward end of decade for shuttle flights requiring high-inclination orbits. Dept, of Defense would provide basic shuttle facilities. NASA Site Review Board studies had shown Kennedy-Vandenberg combination had cost, operational, and safety advantages over all other U.S. sites. Cost of establishing facilities at ksc was estimated at $150 million; at Vandenberg, $500 million. Decision to use KSC was “most gratifying to NASA’s launch organization” and ensured “continued utilization of this base and the supporting Eastern Test Range,” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, said in statement read at KSC press briefing following announcement of shuttle site selection. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, explained at ksc briefing why site construction at Vandenberg AFB would cost more than at ksc : “At Kennedv we can make full use of the Saturn V launch complex—Complex 39. The Shuttle will be brought back in there after flight, . . . refurbished there, . . . mated with its booster ... in the vab [Vehicle Assembly Building], taken on the trawler transporter to the existing launch pad and launched.” ksc modifications would be minor but at Vandenberg “launch facilities . . . are not yet as well suited to the shuttle.” Larger modifications would be required, “and this is where the cost is.” Selection between KSC and Vandenberg for a particular launch would depend on required launch azimuth, Dr. Low said. “If we launched something toward the east . . . then it makes sense to launch it from the east coast, whether it is for the Department of Defense or for NASA or for civilian users. When you launch into a polar orbit, or a high-inclination orbit, then it makes more sense to launch from the west coast so you don’t overfly land.” In response to question, Dr. Low said NASA did not plan to mate Air Force-supplied booster with shuttle, “nasa will develop, or have developed under NASA contract by industry, the full shuttle including the orbiter, its large tanks, and the solid rocket motor.” NASA did have “clear understanding” with dod that it would use shuttle when it became available and if it met requirements. (NASA Release 72-81; Transcript)
NASA issued requests for proposals to industry for development of orbiter vehicle and systems integration for space shuttle orbiter’s external propellant tank, solid-fueled rocket booster, orbiter main engine, and orbiter air-breathing engine [see March 15]. (nasa Space Shuttle Fact Sheet, 5/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract activity: trw Systems Group had received two study contracts totaling $134 160, one for safety criteria study for space shuttle sortie payload and one for payload systems compatibility criteria study, both to be concluded by May 18, 1973. Grumman Aerospace Corp. had received $248 500 contract to study and develop test samples of closed pore insulation for possible thermal use on space shuttle orbiter. (msc Releases 72-124, 72-125)
Houston Post editorial commented on international aspects of space program: “The history of the world has provided few efforts more conducive to worldwide participation than space exploration. Its benefits are mutual. The space shuttle is emerging as a practical, selfsupporting project and needs wider participation. Meanwhile, space investigations need to be continued. An international space agency would seem to be a practical way to perpetuate what the U.S. and Russia have started.” (H Post, 12/8/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $92 800 firm-fixed-price contract to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. to study effect jet thrusters would have on aerodynamics of space shuttle orbiter during reentry. Study would help in determining best configuration for orbiter’s reaction control system, (msc Release 72—173)
Role of Vandenberg Air Force Base in space shuttle program was doubtful, Frank Macomber said in San Diego Union. California politicians were claiming “partial victory” in NASA’s selection of West Coast site for second shuttle launch and landing site. But “clear-cut win went to Florida’s Cape Kennedy.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had “made it clear it will be another eight years before space shuttle launch base work would begin at Vandenberg.” In eight years “entire U.S. space picture will have changed. There will be a whole new set of American leaders, and a Congress which today would approve a space shuttle program for the West Coast might be so changed by 1980 that it would be voted down.” (Copley News Service, SD Union, 5/14/72, 23)
NASA achievements in 1972 were reviewed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in letter to staff. NASA had received “great vote of confidence from the President, the Congress, and the country” in assignment to develop space shuttle. Assignment had been “most appropriate” in year when Apollo program would be concluded and was “a new challenge . . . worthy of the one we are about to complete.” Year 1972 had also been one of “great decision” because in NASA FY 1973 budget “we have also won approval for the concept of a well-rounded space program, with funding for significant progress in all major fields of space activity during this decade. We will stress practical benefits from spacecraft in Earth orbit in this decade and the next. But we will also build greatly improved spacecraft to study the universe from Earth orbit and to explore throughout the solar system.” NASA might be “moving faster with a bigger budget, but I don’t see how we could be doing a better job.” (NASA Activities, 11/15/72, 224)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on July 26 award of space shuttle contract to North American Rockwell Corp.: Argument over shuttle economics continued but “decision has already been made, as a practical matter, in favor of the shuttle. That is good news for the California economy in general, and aerospace workers in particular. But, more than that, it signals the country’s decision to continue the exploration of space.” (LA Times, 7/28/72)
NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on decrease in research and program management (r&pm) budget in House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on FY 1973 NASA authorization: Requested $700.8 million was decrease of $26.5 million from FY 1972. Ceiling of 26 850 was proposed for Civil Service component of nasa in-house work force, 1500 lower than original 1972 ceiling—bringing total reduction since 1968 peak to 8300 positions, or 25%. NASA had planned to achieve 1973 ceiling by normal attrition, but rate of attrition was running 22% lower than required and Center directors had been instructed to use reduction-in-force procedures as necessary to reach ceilings. Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz testified that under FY 1973 authorization bill all NASA facility projects would be presented for approval and funding under full disclosure concept. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), Director of Facilities in Office of Administration, entered prepared statement detailing $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities and explained $8 million request for facility planning and design within that total. First $3.5 million was for “regular recurrent” requirements and $4.5 million for “special” requirements. Of the $4.5, $3.75 million was for space shuttle facilities, including preliminary engineering reports for larger 1974 and 1975 programs. Second portion was for large aeronautical facility —$750 000 for design of full-scale subsonic wind tunnel that would ultimately cost $150 million to $200 million if approved, with total design cost of $7 million to $10 million. Requested FY 1973 funds would complete design on drive section of tunnel. Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology George W. Cherry described FY 1973 disbursements for aeronautics: Important part dealt with reduction of jet aircraft noise, with $28.5 million requested for research and technology to continue this work. Roughly one half was for research and technology attacking noise generation and noise propagation; $12.4 million'was for programs for near-term relief from jet aircraft noise. Of the $12.4 million, $9 million was requested for engine-modification development program and $3.4 million for development of operational procedures for noise abatement. Cherry presented audiovisual demonstration of effectiveness of engine modifications and operational procedures. (Transcript)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract award and issuance of requests for proposals for work on space shuttle. One-year, $99 985, firm-fixed-price contract went to Lowey/Snaith, Inc., to study methods for making space shuttle orbiter interior pleasant environment for working and living. RFPs were for design study for orbiter’s orbital maneuvering system (oms). Firm selected would receive one-year, $250 000 firm-fixed-price contract, (msc Releases 72-29, 72-30)
New York News editorial commented on space shuttle decision: “We would like to see the U.S. taking on, too, some of the more exciting space challenges that could be achieved with America’s present knowhow. But at least Mr. Nixon has furnished assurance that he will keep the U.S. in the space business. We can be thankful for that at a time when undeserved abuse is being heaped on the whole program by people who prefer to shut out the beckoning glitter of the stars so they can concentrate on the mud at their feet.” (NY News, 1/9/72)
Former scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary continued dialogue with Univ. of Michigan astronomer James A. Loudon [see Jan. 16 and March 28] in letter published by New York Times. “I basically agree with Mr. Loudon’s defense of the human value of communications and other applications satellites, but we do not need enormous shuttles to transport such minuscule payloads. In addition, the shuttle juggernaut is forcing nasa to cancel, postpone or trim much of its space science and applications activity. This is regrettable. We need to take a very careful look at the space shuttle before Congress appropriates billions of dollars and we are irrevocably committed to an apparent boondoggle.” {NYT, 5/16/72, 40)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial commented on high level of Soviet space activity: “It is fine to talk about devoting activities in space to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind, as the United States has done. But the talk is hollow when the space scorecard shows the Soviets at an all-time high in military launches, and the United States at a low point, with the trend still further downward.” There was urgent need for U.S. “to develop military space weapons capable of neutralizing Soviet supremacy.” (St Louis G-D, 3/27/72) March 27-April 3:	Working Group of NASA and Soviet engineers met at Manned Spacecraft Center to discuss technical details of docking mechanisms. Talks continued U.S.-U.S.S.R. study of compatible rendezvous and docking systems for spacecraft. (NASA Release 72—69; msc pao) March 28:	Space leaders endorsed shuttle in supplement published by Washington Daily News: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said shuttle would “produce substantial flight economies, ease strictures on spacecraft design, lower manufacturing cost, remedy malfunctions in orbit, and afford a built-in versatility that will alter the nature of space planning and operations in major ways.” Editorial writer had described shuttle’s impact on space program as transition from dramatics of a countdown to an airport routine, Dr. Fletcher said. “The dramatics will be fondly remembered by many of us, but nostalgia will not obscure the hard fact that the routine and economic access to space, of which the shuttle is the hinge pin, is the practical and commonsense means by which we shall reap the great harvest of benefits that space holds for mankind.” Supplement interview quoted Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, as eagerly looking forward to shuttle flight. “By the time the first passenger shuttle flies I’ll be 68. I think flying into space in a shuttle will be just like being a passenger in an airliner, only smoother.” Dr. von Braun foresaw use of shuttle for travel to Mars “probably around 1990, or at least before the end of the 20th Century.” Flight probably would begin with Mars spacecraft being hauled, piece by piece, in space shuttle cargo bays, to be assembled in orbit. “I think the only way to fly to Mars is with nuclear power, and because we would never want to ignite a nuclear rock on earth, we’ll have to begin the journey from orbit.” Dr. von Braun saw shuttle preparing way for manned exploration by ferrying small, unmanned spacecraft into orbit and launching them toward Mars in late 1970s and 1980s. Article by Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said shuttle offered opportunity “not only to the United States to advance its own aerospace science and technology, but also to countries which could not finance a complete shuttle system. The advantages will be mutual and conducive to needed international scientific cooperation.” Proper use of shuttle “can help us in our efforts toward the resources management necessary to make this planet fit to house future generations of man.” James J. Harford, Executive Secretary of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said in article that guessing shuttle’s significance was “like trying to predict what the DC—3 would lead to in air transportation six years before its first flight. The space shuttle could be that powerful and more.” If shuttle performed the way NASA intended it to—“and NASA’s Apollo track record has to impress even the cynical”—shuttle would “help to create entire new industries and . . . hundreds of thousands of new jobs.” [W News, 3/28/72, 27, 29)
NASA announced award of 90-day, $9 800 000 letter contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. to begin work on development and production of engine for space shuttle orbiter stage. Rocket-dyne would begin work immediately, while negotiating $450 000 000, cost-plus-award-fee contract with NASA for engine, (nasa Release 72—73)
Washington Evening Star editorial supported space shuttle development: “Congress should go along with this proposed investment, knowing that if the country’s highly efficient space organization is killed, it will not easily be revived. There is still much work to be done on those peaceful cosmic frontiers that can spread many benefits and much inspiration on this troubled earth.” (W Star, 1/26/72, A17)
Large Space Telescope (lst) status briefing was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for representatives of potential industry participants in program to develop multipurpose telescope for launch by space shuttle in 1980s. lst feasibility studies would end in December. NASA expected to invite industry proposals on preliminary design and definition phase in early 1973. LST would operate from earth orbit to pick up galaxies 100 times fainter than those observed by most powerful ground-based optical telescopes. It would weigh maximum 11 000 kg (25 000 lbs) and have diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter, (msfc Release 72-142)
Appointment of Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, Director of Air Force Materials Laboratory, as Director of Science and Technology for Air Force Systems Command was announced by Gen. George S. Brown, afsc Commander. (afsc Release 104.72) September 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for series of 20 water-entry simulation tests with solid-fueled rocket casing assembly. Tests would provide valuable data for assessment of parachute water recovery of space shuttle booster and aid in preliminary solid-fueled rocket motor design. Rocket assembly—representing 77% scale model of shuttle booster—was 30 m (100 ft) long, weighed 39 000 kg (43 tons), and was from previously fired motor, (msfc Release 72—120)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp discussed space shuttle economics in letter published in Science. Cost and purpose of shuttle’s projected 900-metric-ton (1000-short-ton) payload over 10 yrs needed careful evaluation “before the nation plunges ahead on a space project whose cost may well eclipse that of the Apollo program.” Assuming NASA could slash payload costs to $2000 per 0.5 kg (1 lb), “then 20 million pounds [9 million kg] in orbit represent a national investment of $40 billion.” Shuttle development cost of $5.5 billion plus deployment and operation of shuttle system would cost from $11 to $16 billion. NASA estimate of less than $100 for lifting 0.5 kg (1 lb) of payload from earth to orbit was “easily disputed.” Estimate of $11 billion for shuttle cost divided by 9 million kg amounted to $550 per 0.5 kg and not much less than the $700 per 0.5 kg that existing NASA launch vehicles had cost. Only “if orbital payloads can be reduced so they cost only several times more per pound than gold, is it meaningful to seek cheaper space transportation. Even then the nation ought to be asking what kind of space program is the space shuttle designed to support.” (Science, 3/3/72, 944)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other officials testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 NASA authorization hearings. Dr. Fletcher said: “I regard the fiscal year 1973 budget . . . as marking the end of a difficult transition period for NASA. For the past 2 or 3 years, NASA, the executive branch, and the Congress have been grappling with questions on the course the Nation’s space program should take in the 1970’s and beyond. The main goals in science, exploration, and applications, and the advanced system and technology required to achieve these goals, have been identified . . . and generally approved .... But there has remained a basic uncertainty . . . the question of cost. Can the Nation afford the space program of the 1970’s? Will the approval of the Space Shuttle and the other programs . . . commit the Nation to a large increase in future spending levels? “This year we can give clear answers to these questions. We can assure the committee, the Congress, and the public that the program we are proposing does not commit the country to higher budget levels in future years, at least measured in current dollars .... The revised plan is, I believe, more realistic and will give the Nation a good, viable, and balanced program in aeronautics and space at a cost it can afford.” Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, reported substantial progress in two basic cooperative activities with U.S.S.R.—joint work on compatible docking systems and exchanges in scientific areas, including lunar sample exchanges. In response to question, Dr. Low said he thought it likely U.S.S.R. would continue lunar program after U.S. completed Apollo program. “They may even try to land men on the moon in the latter part of this decade. That will be a catching-up process.” To further question, Dr. Fletcher said that in late 1970s U.S.S.R. would be “doing things in the manned space program that are beyond what we would be able to do.” From end of Skylab in 1973 until 1978, “it is likely that they will be carrying on some important activity and we will have no opportunity to respond until 1978” [with space shuttle]. Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, submitted statement on NASA’s work force: “When several reductions are made serially, as they have been in NASA over the past several years, the effects compound, and the healing processes, such as the resumption of hiring of younger people, the filling of vacancies via merit promotion ... do not have an opportunity to function.” NASA was “feeling these disadvantageous effects severely.” Most worrying was “dwindling of the supply of new blood.” It was obvious “trend cannot continue without the health and vigor of the organization being undermined.” NASA needed “to embark upon a period of stability” in work force to “return to normal personnel development practices, heal the damage of the past several years, and be prepared to meet the challenges of the 70’s.” With the “prospect of a period of relative stability in the general level of spending” and “clearer view of the NASA forward mission,” such a policy was indicated. Statement submitted by Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, described NASA Regional Dissemination Centers’ assistance to users “ranging from small businesses to the largest companies in our Nation’s economy— across a broad spectrum of business sectors including manufacturing services, transportation and communications. The Centers also serve university faculty and students; varied national, state, and local organizations; and governmental entities at all levels.” NASA RDCs had served more than 2000 organizations in 1971, of which over 48% of industrial users were small businesses. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), NASA Director of Facilities, submitted statement on facilities. In $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities, $27.9 million was for modifications and additions to facilities for space shuttle, $11.2 million for facilities supporting scientific investigations in space, $12.9 million for facilities supporting aeronautical research and technology, and $25.3 million for smaller supporting activities and planning and design. (Transcript)
Space program costs were recounted for press by unidentified NASA spokesman at Manned Spacecraft Center. U.S. had spent more than $26,657 billion on manned space program in past 15 yrs and planned to spend $8.85 billion in next 5 yrs. Apollo series—most expensive program—would cost $25 billion through completion of Apollo 17. Gemini program had cost $1283.4 million and Mercury, $392.1 million. Skylab was expected to cost $2.6 billion, and early estimates for space shuttle program were $6.1 billion. NASA had saved $1.5 billion by eliminating Apollo 18, 19, and 20. (upi, NYT, 12/12/72, 38)
Engine concepts for space applications were described in Air University Review. Government and industry had spent more than $100 million on high-pressure-engine technology since 1961. Air Force XLR-129 engine program had provided strong technical base for space shuttle engine. Shuttle’s orbiter stage would use advanced-concept staged combustion engine “very similar to that of a turbojet equipped with an afterburner; . . . there are two different stages of combustion.” While first turbojet combustion occurred in main chamber, shuttle engine’s first burning occurred in gas generator or preburner. Preferred engine concept for future spacecraft would be “single engine that could operate as a rocket, a ramjet, a scramjet, and a turbofan.” At liftoff, rocket would be firing and “turbofan might also be operating to supply additional air to improve the performance of the rocket. After the vehicle is moving at a greater speed, the ramjet would start operating, and the turbofan would be removed from the airstream. The pure rocket would continue to operate briefly to aid the ramjet. As the vehicle reaches the outer fringes of the atmosphere, the inlets would be closed, and the pure rocket would be used alone for reaching, maneuvering in, and leaving orbit. To return to base after re-entry into the atmosphere, the ramjet and/or the turbofan might be used separately or they might be used like an afterburning turbofan.” To improve spacecraft performance further, “we would like to get away from having to carry an oxidizer for the rocket portion of the flight.” Future space engines would “mate the tremendous energy available from nuclear explosions with the ability of a rocket to operate at high thrust levels.” Performance of nuclear rocket “more than makes up for its being heavier than a normal rocket.” Nuclear rocket’s specific impulse was about twice that of “even the best chemical rocket.” Nuclear stage also would be useful for seeding space with unmanned applications satellites. (Holder, Siuru, Air IJniv Rev, 9/72)
Four companies submitted technical proposals to Manned Spacecraft Center for NASA space shuttle contract: Grumman Aerospace Corp., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div., and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. (nasa Release 72-103; Marshall Star, 5/17/72, 1)
Article in Soviet space magazine Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika (Aviation and Cosmonautics) had indicated U.S. was not only nation investigating space shuttle development, New York Times reported. Two Soviet space scientists using pseudonyms V. Vasilyev and L. Leonidov had called shuttle “logical continuation of the space exploration effort.” Times said it was “first technical discussion” of the space shuttle concept to appear in Soviet press since President Nixon approved U.S. shuttle development in January. (Shabad, NYT, 7/10/72)	_	_
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was chosen President of American College of Preventive Medicine at annual meeting in Atlantic City, NJ. (NASA Activities, 12/15/72; NASA Pio) November 14:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, visited Kennedy Space Center for briefings on ksc plans for 1970s. Programs included Apollo 17, Skylab, U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, space shuttle, applications programs, and Viking unmanned Mars missions for 1975 launch. Dr. Fletcher’s visit included Vehicle Assembly Building, to see Saturn V Orbital Workshop and Saturn IB launch vehicle for Skylab. (ksc Release 320-72)
President Nixon’s decision to support development of space shuttle was expected to stir “some loud opposition in Congress,” New York Times said, “bht probably not enough to sidetrack initial funding. . . .” Opposition was expected “from those who question the President’s decision to hack an expensive new space effort at a time when so many down-to-earth social programs have to wait in line for a share of the Federal dollar.” NASA officials had expressed “confidence that they have sufficient Congressional support for an initial shuttle appropriation.” (Wilford, NYT, 1/6/72, 14)
Representatives of 12 nations at European Space Conference ministerial meeting in Brussels agreed in principle to participate in space shuttle phase of U.S. post-Apollo space program, support French plan to build L-35 launcher, and fuse European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) and European Space Research Organization (esro) into one agency by Jan. 1, 1974. Space programs of individual European countries would he blended into common European program with each country maintaining independent choice of what projects to join. Conference President Theo Lefevre, Belgian Minister of Space, commented at close of meeting, “For the first time I can say I am satisfied with the results of the space conference.” United Kingdom and West Germany, who had agreed to abandon plans for European launcher [see Dec. 8], did not rule out participation (esro Release, 1/19/73; NYT, 12/21/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced three contract awards. Grumman Aerospace Corp. had been awarded 15-mo, $200 000 fixed-price, research and development contract to continue to design, build, and test space shuttle orbiter heating systems. Singer Co. had been awarded $135 530 firm-fixed-price contract to study and define simulator requirements for space shuttle mission simulator. McDonnell Douglas Corp. Astronautics Co. had received $181 000 contract for design study of orbital maneuvering system (oms) to maneuver space shuttle orbiter in space, (msc Releases 72-157, 72-158, 72-159)
Interview with Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Director of Equal Employment Opportunity, was published by Washington Sunday Star. Mrs. Harris had adopted as her philosophy phrase, “We are all fellow astronauts on Spaceship Earth.” She had said, “My position is to make sure the space program is for everybody. We have to get the alienated minorities into every NASA level, especially space exploration.” (Trescott, W Star, 1/9/72, Cl) January 10:	European participation in space shuttle development was discussed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers during press briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. European space officials had released to European industry “fairly extensive study . . . leading to the definition of the tug that the Europeans might build for the shuttle to carry.” Tug was 3rd stage of shuttle transportation system. Myers said NASA had examined three possible areas for European participation: “One would he in elements, physical pieces of the shuttle that would be managed ... as the prime contractor manages a subcontractor. We will expect the prime contractors to Work directly with the European industries in that case.” Europeans would supply money for parts developed by Europe. Second area Was tug. “If the tug were developed, we would expect it to be paid for by the Europeans.” Third area was sortie can, “experimentcarrying device to be carried in the payload compartment,” which would give them “an opportunity to enter into the use of the shuttle very extensively.” European space officials would meet with NASA within two months to respond on interest in participating. Timetable called for selection of industrial contractors in summer 1972, with subsonic and suborbital test flights beginning in 1975, manned orbital tests in 1978, and first fully operational mission by 1980. Site evaluation board would make its next report to NASA within few weeks, and site for shuttle launch and recovery would be selected by spring. One site would be selected initially, with another or others selected later according to program needs. “We don’t see the shuttle as a highly limited operation. And, I think that eventually there will be more than one site.” Location depended on mission. “Today . . . there is a preponderance of due-east missions out of ksc [Kennedy Space Center!, and . . . different azimuths out of the West Coast. We can’t go due east out of the West Coast very well . . . because of the populated areas east . . . and we can’t get as efficient in polar orbits out of Kennedy ... so there is a tendency to ... go to the two coasts. Now whether that really ends up being that way in the shuttle system, we don’t know yet.” (Transcript)
Apparent U.S. decision not to seek European participation in shuttle development was discussed by Nicholas Valery in British publication New Scientist: “By all accounts it seems that just as Britain and her continental partners were deciding whether to accept America’s invitation to join the post-Apollo space programme, Washington has slammed the door smartly in their face. Having used the idea of international participation—ostensibly to ease the burden on the US taxpayer—as a means of winning congressional support for its re-usable space shuttle, NASA is now quietly letting it be known that it has no intention of letting Europe get its hands on anything technologically important.” (New Scientist [London], 7/6/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $365 000 contract supplement to LTV Aerospace Corp. for work on space shuttle orbiter thermal-protection system using reinforced pyrolyzed plastic. Supplement brought total funding for work to be done by April 20, 1973, to $859 000. (msc Release 72-171)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
Newspaper editorials commented on decision to develop space shuttle. Kansas City Star:	“The next great step in space for the United States seems assured. President Nixon has pressed the go-ahead button and apparently it will be largely a matter of adequate funding by Congress. In view of the record of space accomplishments, there is not much doubt that the planned space shuttle program will be fruitful both from the standpoint of technological success and long-range scientific benefits.” (KC Star, 1/7/72)	" St. Louis Globe-Democrat:	“There are so many potentialities for the shuttle that it is bard to envision all of them. But there is no doubt that if it is completed space travel for the average citizen may become a distinct possibility in the 1980s.” (St Louis G-D, 1/7/72) Christian Science Monitor said “space discovery versus human needs argument should not be seen as an either/or issue. This is so even leaving aside the jobs creation or economic return arguments.” Monitor believed that “a space shuttle program, because it is so practically linked to fulfilling man’s age-old vision of mastering the heavens, will unleash more constructive human energy than it will consume. And this excess will make meeting earthside demands the easier.” (CSM, 1/7/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution:	“The program . . . has the almost immediate benefit of employing some 50,000 highly trained aerospace workers who have faced a dismal job picture as the Apollo program has phased out. And, again, the proposal demonstrates that imagination and vision and a willingness to dare are still part of the American way of doing things.” (Atlanta JC, 1/7/72) Milwaukee Journal:	“The shuttle offers the opportunity to make space flight fairly routine, of taking large numbers of people and supplies in and out of space, of manning earth resource space stations continuously, of monitoring and repairing communications and resource satellites. It is a worthwhile program.” (MJ, 1/7/72) Los Angeles Times said military aspect of space shuttle needed clarification. “Most taxpayers welcomed the decision to end the wasteful competition between NASA and the Air Force on the shuttle and orbiting space station.” NASA had not explained how shuttle’s civil and military functions would be kept separate. “No American wants the Soviet Union to tip the balance of power with its own space program. But it might help avert a new confrontation if the military applications were enumerated along with a statement of whether the American government thinks shuttles are bound by the international agreement barring nuclear weapons from outer space.” (LA Times, 1/7/72) Seattle Times:	“The history of warfare shows that victory usually goes to the one who occupies the high ground. Near-earth space is the ‘high ground’ of modern military planning. In approving a full go-ahead for . . . space shuttle program, President Nixon this week served notice that this nation intends to occupy the ‘high ground.’ ” (Seattle Times, 1/7/72)
North American Rockwell Corp., winner of $2.6-billion NASA space shuttle prime contract, might retain up to 70% of contract money for itself and four principal subcontractors, New York Times reported. Subcontractors were Honeywell, Inc., International Business Machines Corp., General Electric Co., and American Airlines. Acceptance by NASA of 70% figure could be “major blow” to Grumman Aerospace Corp., Times said. Only hope for Grumman, loser in shuttle contract competition, and other aerospace companies to obtain substantial subcontracting on shuttle project would be to enter competition with NR subcontractors for whom NR might already have preference. (Andelman, NYT, 9/5/72, 3)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23): “erts gives every sign of being an achievement of enormous potential. It is a demonstration of the value of the U.S. space program in applying technology both to extending the frontiers of knowledge, and in contributing to the improvement of life on earth.” {LA Times, 7/25/72) July 26:	NASA selected North American Rockwell Corp. (NR) Space Div. for negotiation of six-year, $2.6-billion cost-plus-fixed-and-award-fee contract as prime contractor to begin developing space shuttle orbiter. Increment covering first two years was $540 million. NR—selected from four firms submitting proposals—would be responsible for design, development, and production of orbiter vehicle and for integration of all shuttle elements. Shuttle main engine was being developed by NR Rocketdyne Div. under earlier contract. External tank and solid-fueled rocket boosters would be procured by NASA after system engineering for orbiter had progressed sufficiently. Shuttle, first reusable space vehicle, would have delta-winged, airplane-like orbiter able to land on conventional runways. It would have cargo compartment 18 m (60 ft) long and 4.5 m (15 ft) in diameter and would be able to place 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) into 185-km (115mi) due-east orbit. Reusable solid-propellant booster rockets and orbiter high-pressure, liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen main engines would boost orbiter into space and booster rockets would detach at 40-km (25-mi) altitude and splash down in ocean for recovery and reuse. Orbiter, under own power, would continue into low earth orbit. Shuttle would be able to place satellites in orbit, return satellites from orbit, permit in-orbit repair and servicing of satellites, deliver propulsive stages and satellites to low earth orbit, and make short-duration science and applications missions with self-contained experiments in low earth orbit. Shuttle development schedule called for horizontal test flights beginning in 1976 and manned orbital test flights beginning in 1978, with complete system operational by 1980. Employment generated by orbiter development and shuttle integration was expected to reach 15 000 by 1975-1976 and then would gradually decrease, (nasa Release 72153)
Edward P. Andrews, Manager of Skylab Spacecraft and Sky lab Launch Vehicles at NASA Hq., became Director of Systems Operation in Space Shuttle Program. (NASA Activities, 5/15/72, 105)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, described major alterations in “nature of the space effort” to be expected with 1978 introduction of space shuttle, in signed New York Times article. National space program had “turned an important corner in 1972—a year that, in a very real sense, was a year of decision” in choosing to proceed with shuttle. U.S. had “turned from a period of space exploration to a period of space exploitation for practical purposes.” By 1978 it would be “realistic to consider a variety of missions either not practicable at present cost levels or that were beyond the state of the art as it was in the pre-shuttle era.” Missions would include advanced, space-based communications systems that, when used for education, would “have the potential for eliminating illiteracy from the face of the earth.” Shuttle-launched advanced-version Nimbus satellites, combined with weather-modeling ground computers, would permit experiments in weather modification to dampen violent storms. Earth resources program data would provide precise picture of crop and timber conditions and extent of attacks by disease, drought, and fire. By 1980s, pilot space manufacturing operations might be in progress. “Super pure vaccine could thus be produced. Perfectly homogeneous alloys, fiber composites and perfectly round ball bearings are other possibilities.” During 1980s, “program of planetary exploration should record the completion of a close look at all the planets in our solar system as well as a detailed study of Mars, Jupiter and Venus. Large orbiting telescopes will be aimed at the outer reaches of the universe, examining such phenomena as quasars and pulsars.” (NYT, 12/4/72, 50)
General Accounting Office released Cost-Benefit Analysis Used in Support of the Space Shuttle Program (B-173677). Review of analysis prepared for NASA by Mathematica, Inc., and used by NASA to justify shuttle development economics, had been requested by shuttle-foe Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.). GAO said it had “worked with estimates received from Mathematica for two representative configurations of the space shuttle,” solid-fuel and liquid-fuel reusable-booster shuttles; “made computations using NASA’s cost model developed by Mathematica to show the effect of increasing or decreasing selected critical areas within their plausible boundaries”; and “found that the two configurations were economically justified in terms of the 10-percent investment criterion proposed by Mathematica as the hasis for evaluating the Space Shuttle Program.” Investment criterion used was “space transportation system having the lowest total space program cost, considering the time value of money.” Use of criterion required selection of discount rate to consider time value of money. Mathematica had proposed 10% discount rate. (Text)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of two requests for proposals for space shuttle heating contracts. One request was for design study of ablative materials with low density to protect space shuttle orbiter and one was for design and construction of heating unit to produce high temperatures for testing materials used externally on shuttle, (msc Releases 72-24, 72-25)
U.S. had withdrawn invitation to 10 European nations to build space tug, Today reported. Paper said European Space Research Organization (esro) and European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) representatives had been told by U.S. that U.S. preferred to build tug (reusable propulsion system to be put into low earth orbit by space shuttle, to deliver and retrieve payloads) [see June 14]. Paper quoted NASA sources as saying European firms lacked funds and advanced technology to construct tug that could be launched from shuttle to send a satellite into synchronous 35 000-km (22 000-mi)-altitude orbit. {Today, 6/22/72)
U.S. Comptroller General Elmer B. Staats said in letter to NASA Administrator, Dr. James C. Fletcher, that General Accounting Office had determined July 13, 1971, NASA award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. had been fair. “We believe the procurement was conducted in a manner which was consistent with applicable law and regulations and was fair to all proposers.” Award had been challenged by competing firm, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. (Text)
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)
Delivery to Dulles International Airport of arts iii—computerized automated radar terminal system to improve air traffic handling in busy terminal areas—was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. System processed radar beacon signals emitted by airborne transponders giving aircraft identity and altitude and presented information on radar displays for air traffic controllers, (faa Release 72-19) January 30:	First of four lunar eclipses to occur during 1972 was partially visible in portions of North and South America. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory spokesman said later that 37-min eclipse was not seen over Northeastern U.S. because of cloud cover. (NYT, 1/29/72, 19; 1/31/72, 3) January 31—February 23: European Space Research Organization’s 117-kg (257-lb) Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite was launched by NASA from Western Test Range by three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta (DSV-3L) booster at 9:20 am pst. Orbital parameters: 244 011-km (151621.4-mi) apogee, 416-km (258.5-mi) perigee, and 90.2° inclination. All vehicle systems monitored during launch functioned normally. Second burn of 2nd stage and ignition and burnout of 3rd stage occurred over Indian Ocean south of African continent. By Feb. 6 all flight experiments had been turned on and were working properly and all spacecraft systems were still functioning normally Feb. 23. On Feb. 18 NASA officially judged mission successful. Primary NASA objective was to place spacecraft into orbit that would permit successful achievement of esro scientific objectives and provide tracking and telemetry support. Satellite—16-sided cylinder with 70% of its outer surface covered with solar cells—carried seven experiments to investigate strength and direction of magnetic fields, energy distribution of protons and electrons, and nature of solar winds; make very-low-frequency solar observations; and detect micrometeorites. Heos 2 was second heos mission. Heos 1 had been launched Dec. 5, 1968, and was still in orbit. After orbital insertion, spacecraft was controlled from European Space Operations Center (esoc) and tracked by European Space Tracking Stations (estrack). European Space Technology Center (estec) was responsible for project management and would reimburse NASA $6.6 million for booster and prelaunch and launch support services, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-17; GSFC SSR, 1/31/72) January 31:	Mathematica, Inc., published Economic Analysis of the Space Shuttle System. Report of study directed by Klaus P. Heiss and Oskar Morgenstern under nasa contract concluded development of space shuttle system was economically feasible assuming level of space activity equal to average of U.S. unmanned space program of past eight years; thrust-assisted orbiter shuttle (taos) with external hydrogen and oxygen tanks was economically preferred choice among current shuttle configurations; and choice of thrust assist for orbiter shuttle was still open, with pressure-fed boosters and solid-fuel rocket motors, either using parallel burn, as main economic alternatives. Third economic choice was use of series-burn boosters. (Text)
l/g John W. O’Neil, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command since 1969, would retire from Air Force Sept. 1, AFSC Newsreview reported. President Nixon had nominated as successor to Gen. O’Neil, m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who had also been nominated for promotion to grade of lieutenant general, (afsc Newsreview, 7/72, 1) August 1:	Launch of first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, Erts 1, and selection of prime contractor—North American Rockwell Corp.— for space shuttle system demonstrated “how we have begun to turn the space program . . . around, how we are returning to the home seas of space after 12 years of strenuous and highly successful effort to explore the Moon,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in letter to NASA staff. NASA would continue new direction with 1973 Skylab launch, joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, and first orbital flight of space shuttle in 1978. Additionally NASA would explore solar system with improved unmanned spacecraft, build and orbit improved unmanned observatories, and accelerate efforts to develop “basic new technology for the most promising space missions of the Eighties and Nineties. We will . . . maintain a balanced national space effort with our main area of concentration shifted from the Moon to Earth orbit.” (NASA Activities, 8/25/72, 160-1)
MSFC announced it had extended interim contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for space shuttle main engine design. One-month, $l-million extension was awarded pending completion of review by General Accounting Office of original $500-million contract awarded July 13, 1971. Review had been requested Aug. 3, 1971, by competing contractor United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. (MSFC Release 72-23; A&A 1971)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, warned of challenges to U.S. leadership in technology if U.S. did not proceed in space shuttle development. In speech before Advertising Club of Baltimore he said: “The problem is very real. Last year, the United States for the first time had an annual trade deficit, a negative balance of trade, of over $2 billion. But this deficit would have been three times that amount—$6 billion—had it not been for a favorable balance of almost $4 billion achieved in the aerospace field.” Decision to proceed with space shuttle “provides a needed tool for the space program, and it will keep the United States strong in advanced technology.” (Text)
European Space Research Organization would use preliminary definition study of sortie laboratory for space shuttle application as basis for future negotiations with nasa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Study, to be performed by Dornier, was part of European effort to participate in post-Apollo program. (Av Wk, 10/30/72, 9)
Subcommittee on NASA Oversight submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Space Shuttle-—Skylab: Manned Space Flight in the 1970’s, status report prepared by Committee staff at request of Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague, from information from NASA space flight Centers and key industrial contractors. Conclusions on Skylab program were that program was within projected costs; bulk of equipment and systems were meeting design requirements in performance and reliability; and, despite some problems in procuring and integrating experiments, schedules were being met and no flight delays or significant cost increases were anticipated. Serious consideration was recommended for several options: possibility of flying backup Skylab B in 1974-1976 period; possible revisits to Skylab A after first three flights; and use of remaining Saturn IB launch vehicles in earth resources and applications flights after Skylab A program, during 1974-1978 period. Conclusions on space shuttle program were: Sufficient technology existed to undertake development of fully reusable, low-operation-cost, earth-orbital shuttle. Number of design possibilities had been studied, covering range of development costs. Regardless of design chosen, as development costs were reduced, system recurring operating costs increased. In addition to reducing cost of near-space operations by order of magnitude, shuttle offered many opportunities for increased flexibility of earth resource surveys and management, space manufacturing, and short-term rapid-response laboratory facilities. And shuttle could also be used to improve national security position. (Text)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of nine-month $140 090 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study operational processing of space shuttle payload carriers at KSC space shuttle launch site. Study would develop objectives, technical information, and recommendations for flexible, cost-effective procedures for shuttle processing, (ksc Release 86-72)
Manned Spacecraft Center awarded two parallel, firm-fixed-price contracts for study of aircraft that could simulate subsonic flight characteristics of space shuttle orbiter. Grumman Aerospace Corp. would receive $150 000 and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Georgia Div. would receive $149 000 to provide sufficient data to assure NASA that proposed shuttle training aircraft was technically feasible and acceptable and that recommended design could meet specified requirements, (msc Release 72-147)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
Senate confirmed nominations of Kenneth Rush as Deputy Secretary of Defense and of Eberhardt Rechtin as Assistant Secretary of Defense (Telecommunications). {CR, 2/3/73; dod Directory, Spring 1973) February 4:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of one-month $l-million interim contract extension to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for space shuttle main engine. Contract was awarded pending completion of General Accounting Office review of original $500-million contract awarded July 13, 1971. Review had been requested by competing contractor, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., on Aug. 3, 1971. (msfc Release 72-9; A&A 1971)
President Nixon’s “enthusiastic support” of space shuttle had “pumped fresh breath of life” into NASA, “buoyed the spirits of a flagging aerospace industry and lost no friends in politically vital West Coast and southern states,” Robert Gillette said in Science article. Shuttle endorsed by President was “considerably less ambitious, and at least a billion dollars cheaper, than the shuttle NASA has fought for” but “in basic outline it remains unchanged. . . .” Shuttle “and its presidential stamp of approval stand as a tribute to NASA’s deft and persistent salesmanship, a talent marked by careful acquiescence to political and economic realities and by a willingness to bleed other programs, including Apollo, to keep the shuttle alive.” While “some budget bureau officials are said to be unhappy with the magnitude, the design, and the pace of the shuttle project as it now stands,” prospects for “scuttling the shuttle are slim.” Shuttle possessed few of sst’s intrinsic weaknesses. Central moral issue raised by the sst was “the propriety of government subsidy for an essentially commercial enterprise.” Shuttle “has no such commercial overtones, and, by any measure, it is a more truly national enterprise.” Congressional attack on supersonic transport program, while largely based on project’s economics, had drawn strength from “vast and vocal public constituency aroused by alarms ... of environmental damage.” No such catalytic issue seemed likely to arise in shuttle debate. Gillette quoted unidentified Senate aide as saying, “Unless we can pull together the kind of public campaign that brought down the SST, the shuttle is going to get by this year without a thorough examination and without an adversary hearing in Congress.” (Science, 1/28/72, 392-6)
nasa announced organizational changes within Office of Manned Space Flight to fit post-Apollo/Skylab activities. New Mission and Payload Integration Office had been established, Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force, Advanced Missions Office was redesignated Advanced Programs Office, and Apollo Program Office became Apollo/astp Program Office. Functions of Engineering and Operations Directorate in omsf had been reassigned to Advanced Programs Office. Mission and Payload Integration Office would plan and coordinate requirements between payload sponsors and shuttle and sortie lab organizations. Sorties Lab Task Force would manage NASA planning and definition activities to produce manned module for research and applications activities with space shuttle. Current project emphasis was on technical definition and planning for hardware development phase. Parallel definition studies were being made by NASA and European Space Research Organization. If Europe undertook development of sortie lab, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said, NASA Task Force would coordinate NASA and esro activities. Philip E. Culbertson was Director of Mission and Payload Integration Office and Acting Director of Advanced Programs Office. Douglas R. Lord was Director of Sortie Lab Task Force, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone was Director of Apollo/ASTP Project for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. (nasa Release 72-232)
Flying model of winged shuttle orbiter by erno Raumfahrt-technik GmbH of West Germany would be air-launched during year to study subsonic dynamic stability, Spaceflight reported. Program, begun in mid-1960s by Federal German Ministry for Education and Science, had led to development of small pilotless flight model called Bumerang, which made first unguided flight off Heligoland Aug. 12, 1971. Research to date by erno specialists, participating with space shuttle team led by McDonnell Douglas Corp. of TJ.S. had been on winged (nonlifting body) orbiter models at German Research and Test Establishment for Aviation and Spaceflight. (SF, 8/72, 301)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released statement from San Clemente, Calif., following President’s announcement of decision to proceed with development of space shuttle. Decision was consistent with NASA FY 1972 budget and was “a most historic step in the nation’s space program—it will change the nature of what man can do in space. By the end of this decade the nation will have the means of getting men and equipment to and from space routinely, on a moment’s notice if necessary, and at a small fraction of today’s cost. This will be done within the framework of a useful total space program of science, exploration, and applications at approximately the present overall level of the space budget.” Dr. Fletcher described shuttle as “airplane-like orbiter, about the size of a DC—9 . . . capable of carrying into orbit and back again to earth useful payloads up to 15 feet [4.6 metersl in diameter by 60 feet [18 meters] long, and weighing up to 65,000 lbs [29 500 kg]. Fuel for the orb iter’s liquid-hydrogen liquid-oxygen engines will be carried in an external tank that will be jettisoned in orbit.” Orbiter would be launched by unmanned booster and would operate in space for one week, during which crew could launch, service, or recover unmanned spacecraft; would perform experiments; and, in future, would resupply and restaff space modules brought to space by shuttle. He cited reasons “space shuttle is important and is the right step in manned space flight and the U.S. space program.” First, “the shuttle is the only meaningful new manned space program which can be accomplished on a modest budget. Second, the space shuttle is needed to make space operations less complex and less costly. Third, the space shuttle is needed to do useful things. Fourth, the shuttle will encourage greater international participation in space flight.” Dr. Fletcher said NASA and contractors would focus until late February on technical areas, including comparisons of pressure-fed liquid- and solid-fuel rocket-motor options for shuttle’s booster stage, before NASA issued requests for proposals in the spring. “This summer we will place the space shuttle under contract and development work will start.” At press conference in San Clemente following release of shuttle statements, Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Low discussed President’s decision. Dr. Fletcher said President was “particularly anxious that I stress the international aspects of this. This program will be open to all nations of the world, and it is his hope some day that foreign visitors from all over the world will be able to participate by moving to and from space in the space shuttle.” NASA anticipated that “at its peak, the direct employment on the space shuttle will be of the order of 50,000 individuals. Of course, a great many of those will be employed in this area.” Responding to question, Dr. Fletcher said decision on shuttle launch site, “which will be the same as the landing site,” depended on recommendation of launch site selection group. “It is not necessarily Cape Kennedy or any other site at this time.” (Text: Transcript)
Bathroom commode system for space shuttle passengers was described by Manned Spacecraft Center engineer A. F. Behrend, Jr., and J. E. Swider, Jr., of United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div, during annual Environmental Control and Life Support System Conference in San Francisco. In space, high-velocity airstreams would compensate for earth’s gravity and would assist water-flush mechanism. Waste would be vacuum dried and chemically treated. System, being built for further testing and evaluation by Hamilton Standard under $238 000 NASA contract, was of type being studied by commercial airlines to reduce maintenance and operating costs, (nasa Release 72-163)
New York Times editorial criticized Apollo 17 TV coverage: “One might have thought that the Apollo 17 moonwalks would be thoroughly covered by television as they took place. But the published television schedules indicate that the networks have chosen to dish out their usual commercial fare while giving only minimal live coverage to moonwalks that will make history. It is a poor choice from the point of view of public service.” (NYT, 12/12/72, 46) December 12—13:	Review of plans for space shuttle external tank and solid-fueled rocket booster was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for 350 industry and Government representatives. Attendees heard presentations by NASA and North American Rockwell Dec. 12. NASA officials conducted separate briefings Dec. 13.	(Marshall Star, 12/12/72, 1)
Senate Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.432-billion NASA appropriation. Senate appropriation was $24 million above budget request of $3,408 billion and increase of $82.4 million over House appropriation of $3,349 billion voted May 23. Senate version raised appropriation for research and development (r&d) $74.9 million above House version, to $2,624 billion. Construction of facilities funds were increased by $7.5 million, to $77.3 million. Research and program management funds remained unchanged. Of r&d appropriation increase, $24 million was for aeronautical research in noise abatement and aviation safety and $50.9 million to restore funds deleted in House bill from other NASA research programs. Construction of facilities increase restored funds deleted in House bill—$5.5 million requested by NASA for modification of space shuttle manufacturing and final assembly facilities and $2 million for planning and design. Shuttle funds would support orbiter assembly and external hydrogen and oxygen tank manufacture, baselined “for estimating purposes” at Michoud Assembly Facility, one of possible sites for either or both of these functions. (S Rpt92-820)
Col. Daniel D. McKee (usaf, Ret.), manager of Bell Aerosystems in Houston and former Assistant Director of NASA Manned Satellite Programs in NASA Hq., died in Houston at age 53 after apparent heart attack. (msc Hist Off) January 17:	Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), in speech before National Press Club in Washington, D.C., asked, “Shall we spend our dollars on a space shuttle and an SST for the few to fly the heavens, when many here on earth have simple unmet needs like homes and schools and health?” (Text)
House by vote of 367 to 10 passed H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.349-billion NASA appropriation [see May 18]. House rejected amendment by Rep. Rella S. Abzug (D-N.Y.) to delete $200 million for space shuttle. (CR, 5/23/72, H4896-924)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced establishment of Sortie Can Task Team to plan project definition phase for sortie can—low-cost, space shuttle payload carrier for manned research and applications studies in earth orbit. Team would be managed by Fred E. Vreuls, with Hans R. Palaora as chief engineer, (msfc Release 72-41) Marshall Space Flight Center announced request for proposals for nine-month space tug operations and payload support study. Contractor selected would define flight operations to be conducted by tug after deployment from space shuttle and define interface between tug and automated payload or satellite that tug was delivering or returning. Proposals were due by April 10. (msfc Release 72-39)
Newspapers continued editorial comment on decision to develop space New York Times: “The space shuttle is far less expensive than the Apollo project, and, fortunately, is not being launched in the atmosphere of Cold War hysteria that attended the birth of the lunar landing effort. On the contrary, NASA has already stated publicly it would welcome cooperation on the space shuttle from other industrially developed nations, including the Soviet Union. The argument that the space shuttle is simply another SST boondoggle has little validity. The potential benefits are far greater, and the space shuttle presents none of the environmental problems that counted so heavily against the supersonic transport.” (NYT, 1/8/72, 28) Detroit News: “It is good that the $24 billion outlay on the Apollo moon program is not to he wasted by the United States dropping out of the space program. Mission Impossible became mission accomplished because there was a national commitment to beat the Russians to the moon. The fact that the race has been won, however, should not blind Americans that it was only the first, tentative step in unlocking the mysteries of space. If we don’t press on, others will.” (D News, 1/8/72)
Final Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearing on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill heard testimony on space shuttle by Dr. Brian O’Brien, physicist and Chairman of nasa Space Program Advisory Council and of National Academy of Sciences’ Advisory Committee to Air Force Systems Command. Committee also heard shuttle testimony from Dr. Courtland D. Perkins, Chairman of Princeton Univ. of Dept, of Aerospace and Mechanical Sciences and Chairman of nasa Space Systems Committee. Dr. O’Brien said he believed shuttle would provide “space transportation system which can be available on short notice to meet unforeseen conditions which may result from world events, and . . . great flexibility in our space operations, whether civil or military.” It “should make possible a drastic reduction in cost of launches and in cost of payloads destined for earth orbit; while providing the opportunity for refurbishing or repairing satellites in orbit, or returning them to earth. In short, it should prove an invaluable tool in keeping us at the forefront in our operations in space.” Dr. Perkins said nothing NASA could do “could have a more profound effect on the total space program in the years ahead.” Shuttle would provide launch capability for nearly all programs, manned and unmanned, permitting elimination of large stable of rocket boosters and large complex of launch sites. Program provided strong signal to young scientists and engineers that U.S. wasn’t “about to throw away our carefully developed competence in space” and it was one of only few new national programs continuing “growth and stretch” in high technology. (Transcript)
Washington Daily News editorial urged space shuttle funding by Congress: Shuttle was “gamble worth taking—not just because it will provide 50,000 new jobs in the depressed aerospace industry, but because it offers a window on the universe at a relatively modest cost.” To retreat from space “after so many billions have been spent and so many men have risked their lives” would be “small credit to a nation that prides itself on perseverance, a pioneering spirit and common sense.” (W News, 4/21/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $299250 contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to study and develop program for weld-bonding materials for space shuttle, (msc Release 72-55)
Wall Street Journal article criticized “strange aspects to NASA’s push for the shuttle.” Economic estimates of cost were “troublesome.” Some critics had charged that development costs might be “two to four times the $6 billion estimate of NASA. And the operating cost may not be as cheap as NASA says.” “Strangest” aspect of NASA argument was “agency’s almost total silence on the one space project for which the shuttle makes real sense—the permanent orbiting space station.” It had been assumed space station would be “keystone of any long-range space effort involving men” from beginning of space program. Project had been “shoved aside” in favor of manned lunar landing but “the moment that race was won . . . NASA pulled the space station plans back out.” It was easier to sell public $6-billion research and development program for “useful” space shuttle than $40-billion program for space station. But NASA’s “selling spiel” was “somewhat misleading.” Once $6-billion development program was finished shuttle would go into routine operation. “Plans call for 30 to 40 flights a year for 10 years. At $10.5 million a flight this comes to $30 billion to $40 billion— about the same in time and money as proposed for the space station.” Paper later acknowledged its arithmetical miscalculation and corrected total to “$3 billion to $4 billion,” but said corrected figure also was “misleading.” NASA estimate had projected $35 billion for shuttle program through 1990, including $12 billion for shuttle and $23 billion for payloads. (WSJ, 6/16/72, 10; 6/20/72)
Decision to plan large multipurpose optical telescope to be launched and serviced by space shuttle in 1980s was announced by NASA. Large Space Telescope (lst) to study energy processes in galactic nuclei, early stages of stellar and solar system formation, supernova remnants and white dwarfs, and other phenomena relevant to origin of universe would also provide long-term monitoring of atmospheric phenomena on Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Telescope, able to observe galaxies 100 times fainter than those seen by most powerful ground-based optic telescope, would weigh between 9000 and 11000 kg (20 000 and 25 000 lbs) and have length of 12 to 16 m (40 to 52 ft) and diameter of 3.6 to 4 m (12 to 13 ft). It would include diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter. LST project management had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 72—98)
Award of $400 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Bell Aerospace Corp. for space shuttle orbiter reaction control system (rcs) was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Bell would supply Air Force Minute-man III post-boost propulsion system technology to rcs requirements. (msc Release 72-109)
NASA held separate Headquarters debriefings for three losing aerospace firms in $2.6-billion space shuttle contract competition. North American Rockwell had won contract July 26. Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., told press after Grumman debriefing that his firm was unsuccessful largely because its shuttle design was more “conservative” than that of NR. Gavin said NASA officials had considered “mission suitability” and not management problems as weakness in Grumman bid. Grumman design had more complex swing arms to hold shuttle stationary before launch and lacked “background with large cryogenic tanking” used in shuttle’s fuel supply. Grumman design had also been more expensive than NR version. Spokesmen for other losers, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp., declined to comment after debriefings. [See also Oct. 4.] (Andelitnan, NYT, 8/8/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $226 256 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study system for handling space shuttle cargo in space. MSC engineers envisioned manipulators to handle payloads in shuttle orbiter as being 9-12 m (30-40 ft) long, electrically powered, and free-moving like human limbs, (msc Release 72-189; Av Wk, 9/18/72, 9)
House and Senate conferees submitted conference report on H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that contained $3.408-billion NASA appropriation. Conference recommended $2.601-billion appropriation for NASA research and development, instead of $2,550 billion proposed by House and $2,624 billion proposed by Senate, and included $24 million for aeronautical research in noise abatement and aviation safety as proposed'by Senate. Recommended appropriation for construction of facilities was $77.3 million as proposed by Senate, instead of $69.8 million proposed by House—and included $5.5 million for modification of manufacturing and final assembly facilities for space shuttle as proposed by Senate and $8 million for facility planning and design as proposed by Senate, instead of $6 million proposed by House. Appropriation for research and program management remained unchanged at $729.45 million. (H Rpt 92-1261; NASA Off Administration)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in Dept, of Defense, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on dod coordination with NASA on space shuttle development during hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization: “I firmly believe that the U.S. must retain a strong national commitment to scientific and technological progress. The NASA space program is a vital element of this overall effort.” In space area, DOD was “becoming increasingly dependent on space systems, particularly in . . . communications. Other agencies and the public are becoming increasingly dependent on the use of space for communications, weather forecasting, and natural resource exploration. The Department of Defense supports the NASA space shuttle as an important part of the President’s program, which will lead to a greater and more effective use of the space environment in the future.” Dr. Foster discussed Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) for military needs not satisfied economically and reliably by more traditional communications systems. First dscs, currently operational, employed “simple, low-power satellites and ground terminals originally designed for experimental and test programs. To replace the existing satellites ... we are deploying new DSCS satellites that have roughly 10 times the communications capability. . . . We are also developing improved terminals which will supplement the existing dscs terminal complex.” (Transcript)
Grumman Corp. officials said layoff of 300 employees, from top engineers to maintenance and security personnel, would begin Aug. 4 as direct result of NASA’s award of space shuttle contract to North American Rockwell Corp. (Andelman, NYT, 8/2/72)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $1 323 565 contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to provide liquid hydrogen to East Coast space program users from June 1, 1972, through March 31, 1973. Liquid hydrogen would be distributed to Government agencies and contractors in Saturn V booster and space shuttle activities. Under interagency agreement, NASA contracted for all liquid hydrogen used by NASA and Dept, of Defense in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 72-69)
NASA announced signing of definitive contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for development and production of space shuttle main engine. NASA had announced selection of Rocketdyne for negotiation of contract July 13, 1971, but award had been delayed pending outcome of protest by United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. Initial work had been under way for several months under temporary contracts during final negotiations. First increment of cost-plus-award-fee contract for primary development through- Aug. 31, 1975, was estimated at $205 766 000. Second increment of $236 709 000 would be for engine production and remaining development from Sept. 1, 1975, to June 30, 1979. (nasa Release 72-167)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of $82 000 fixed-fee contract to Howard, Needles, Tammen and Bergendorff for preliminary survey of Launch Complex 39 as proposed site for Space Shuttle Landing Facility, (ksc Release 150-72)
Award of $168 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for design study of low-density ablative materials was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Materials could be used to protect space shuttle orbiter from heat, (msc Release 72-117)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $407 630 to General Electric Space Div. for development of checkout system for space shuttle software. GE would develop system specifications, computer program compatible with msc system, procedural documents, and demonstration plan; would document results; and would demonstrate system, (msc Release 72-21)
NASA officials met with 25 national winners in Skylab student project competition at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss design of students’ space experiments and demonstrations. During visit students toured msfc laboratories and Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (nasa Release 72-94; msfc pao) May 9:	Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) said in Washington, D.C., that arguments for space shuttle development had become “classic case of bureaucratic deception and waste.” He would offer amendment to cut off all shuttle funds. (NYT, 5/11/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $175 183 costplusfixedfee contract to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., to conduct simulations of space shuttle orbiter approach and landing. Simulations would enable engineers to establish more accurately aft location of orbiter’s center of gravity and systems for vehicle aerodynamic control. Contract would end July 31. (msc Release 72-31)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United, States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data Through 1971 and a Forward Look (72-17 SP). Report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—updated Senate Document 92-51 released Jan. 6 and discussed future directions and significant aspects of space programs. Soviet planetary probes Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) were studying temperatures, density, and constituents of Martian ionosphere, atmosphere, and surface. Joint experiment with France on Mars 3 had been studying solar wind. With Soviet start in planetary exploration during 1971, U.S. should continue to feel competition in planetary program until NASA Viking landed on Mars in 1976. nasa future plans gave prominent priority to space shuttle. While Soviet plans for reusable space vehicle had not been divulged, “it is hard to imagine their attainment of announced goals . . . without use of a shuttle.” U.S.S.R. talked of putting up space station in five years. “It may be that the long awaited new large launch vehicle will find use in lifting major components for such a station. Using this vehicle, the U.S.S.R. could put up its equivalent of the U.S. Skylab any time from 1972 on.” U.S.S.R. had recorded “wide variety of commitments ... to conduct wide-ranging program” of solar system exploration and of earth applications. They had discussed possibility of Grand Tour flights and of manned planetary missions. In space cooperation, “although no firm commitment has been made and no real timetable set, the possibility has been opened that some of the surplus Saturn IB and Apollo hardware might be used to send an American crew to dock with a future Soviet space station. Then perhaps later if a remaining Saturn V is used to put up a Skylab 2 ... a Soviet Soyuz might send a crew to dock with it. More joint planning and more funds will be required to accomplish these suggestions.” (Text)
House passed H.R. 10243 to establish Office of Technology Assessment for Congress by vote of 256 to 118. Office would identify and consider impacts of technological application. (CR, 2/8/72, H865—7) February 8—11:	NASA and European Space Conference (esc) Joint Experts Group met in Neuilly, France, to identify potential areas for European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space program. In statement issued Feb. 11 Group said NASA, “noting President Nixon’s approval on Jan. 5, 1972, to proceed with development of the space shuttle,” had encouraged European participation in shuttle development. NASA expected that European participation would be “within the context of a broader program which included multilateral European responsibility for development of a major element such as reusable space tugs to provide access to geosynchronous and other orbits” beyond shuttle’s capability or “shuttle-borne orbital laboratories” for research by U.S. and European scientists. Group recommended calendar for actions to permit governmental decisions consistent with July 1 NASA commencement of shuttle development. (NASA Note to Editors, 2/11/72)
Among strongest arguments for funding space shuttle was its great military usefulness, D. J. R. Bruckner said in Washington Post column. Argument might persuade Congress, “but do they really need another weapon?” Shuttle’s greatest use would be “as a tool supporting research, including the construction and maintenance ... of a research station on the moon’s surface.” But that was insufficient reason for Congress. “If they cannot convince themselves that it will help destroy something, they won’t put up the money for it.” Apollo program had destroyed nothing. “It only added a cubit to the stature of every American in the eyes of mankind, . . . benefited the understanding, the imagination and the spirit of humanity . . . [and] opened up enormously fruitful areas of knowledge about how the world we live in was formed and how it works.” (W Post, 4/22/72, A14)
President Nixon sent $246.3-billion FY 1973 budget request to Congress— increase of $9.6 billion over FY 1972. National total included research and development budget of $17.8 billion (increase of $1.4 billion), with $3,740 billion requested for civilian and military space R&D. Total request for NASA new obligational authority (noa) of $3,379 billion (1.3% of total U.S. budget) was $83 million more than FY 1972 NOA of $3,296 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase by $11 million, against decline of $200.9 million in FY 1972. Increase to $3,192 billion reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle engine and airframe. Of budget request, $2.6 billion would go for R&D, $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $701 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $472.5 million, to $128.7 million, reflected completion of Apollo program with Apollo 16 and 17 scheduled for launch during calendar year. Manned space flight operations—including $540.5 million for Skylab, $200 million for space shuttle, and $23 million for orbital systems and experiments—would increase from $682.8 million in FY 1972 to $1,094 billion in FY 1973. Space life sciences would receive $25.5 million and development, test, and mission operations would receive $305.2 million, including funds for detailed design and development of shuttle airframe and engine. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,224 billion, down $61 million from FY 1972. Funding for NASA space science and applications programs would increase $123.7 million, from $740.4 million in FY 1972 to $864.1 million in FY 1973. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for High Energy Astronomy Observatory ($59.6 million in FY 1973) and orbiting explorers ($32 million) ; to lunar and planetary exploration (up $29.7 million, to $321.2 million, with $229.5 million for Viking project, $31.6 million for Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, and $18.7 million for supporting research and technology advanced studies) ; and to launch vehicle procurement. Funding for Pioneer planetary exploration program would decrease from $12.8 million in FY 1972 to $10.2 million. Increase of $7.2 million in applications programs, to $194.7 million in FY 1973, included $48.4 million for earth resources survey, $61.2 million for ATS, and $28.3 million for Nimbus. Total requested for NASA aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $212.8 million in FY 1972 to $249.3 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $110 million in FY 1972 to $163.4 million, including $27.5 million for quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft and $3 million for vertical takeoff and landing (vtol) research/ experimental vehicle programs. Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) development was terminated in favor of reoriented program to define smaller nuclear rocket system. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $4.9 million, to $259.1 million. Dept, of Defense FY 1973 budget of $83.5 billion was all-time high, $6.3 billion above FY 1972 budget authority, 30% of total Federal outlays for FY 1972, and 6.4% of Gross National Product—-but percentage of gnp had dropped from FY 1972’s 7%. dod total included $8.6 billion for research, development, technology, and engineering, $1.1 billion increase over FY 1972. Of requested Rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, continued flight experiment programs, and applied research and technology programs— would receive $454 million (up $49.4 million). Military sciences would receive $572.7 million (up $34.9 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,948 billion (down $36.8 million) and missiles rdt&e $2,383 billion (up $437.8 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for undersea long-range missile system (ulms) to supplement and eventually replace Poseidon-Polaris fleet ($942.2 million, up $802 million), B-l advanced strategic bomber ($444 million, up $74 million), F-15 air superiority fighter ($910 million, up $490 million), airborne defense warning and control system (awAcs) ($470 million, up $331 million), and Safeguard antiballistic missile program ($1,483 billion, up $366 million). Some $299 million was requested for advance procurement of components for new nuclear-powered CVAN-70 aircraft carrier. Increases were also programmed for prototype development of vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft for Navy, stol transports for possible C-130 replacement, Air Force SCAD strategic bomber penetration decoy, and engines for future transport and fighter aircraft. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration FY 1973 budget included $39.9 million for meteorological satellite operations, $6.8 million more than FY 1971 allocation of $33.1 million. Funding would complete financing of fourth satellite in ITOS series, continue financing of fifth and sixth ITOS satellites and one Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes), and initiate procurement of seventh itos. Dept, of Transportation budget request of $8.56 billion was decrease of $91.5 million over FY 1972. dot funding would start 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect atmosphere, and design safer and more productive airport system. Atomic Energy Commission FY 1973 budget request of $2.56 billion, up $247 million over FY 1972, would be used for development of liquid-metal fast-breeder power reactor and for controlled thermonuclear fusion research. National Science Foundation FY 1973 budget request of $653 million would cover basic scientific research, experimental program to test incentives to stimulate non-Federal R&d investment, program to analyze effect of R&D on national economy, continuation of research applied to national needs in advanced technology and environmental problems, program to improve research management at institutions of higher learning, and funding for astronomy to permit development of very large array of antennas for radio astronomy, (omb, Budget of US Govt, FY 1973; omb, US Budget in Brief; omb, Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; dot budget briefing transcript; aiaa Release 72-3; nsf Release 72-106; Kelly, W Star, 1/24/72, A14; Av Wk, 2/14/72, 14)
North American Rockwell Corp. released statement that it was awarding $8 million in subcontracts to Grumman Corp. for engineering work on space shuttle. McDonnell Douglas Corp. would receive subcontracting worth $4 million, and $200 million worth of subcontracts would be parceled to companies throughout U.S. early in 1973. Grumman subcontracts would preserve jobs of some 300 top engineers and McDonnell Douglas subcontract, 140, New York Times reported. (NR Release; Andelman, NYT, 9/17/72, 23) Air Force succesfully flight-demonstrated powered balloon system (pobal) that had fly-and-float capability readily adaptable to military use in electronic fields. POBAL—coupling free helium-filled balloon to propulsion system—flew from White Sands Missile Range for three hours after reaching altitude, driven by 11.9-m (39-ft) propeller connected to 9-kw (12-hp) electric motor. Steering rudder, connected to lengthy tail boom, was 2.7 m (9 ft) high and 0.8 m (2.5 ft) wide. System was controlled by radio signals from the ground, pobal would extend station-keeping capabilities by combining free balloon flight with propulsion and autopilot control system, with planned I2-hr flight under power at speed of 15 knots. It would float powerless remainder of time. (AF Release 129.72)
European Space Conference delegation visited U.S. to complete resolutions for July 11 esc conference in Brussels, which would discuss government action on European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space program. Brussels conference later was postponed. During Washington, D.C., meeting NASA and Dept, of State officials told esc delegation that space tug was no longer being considered as item for European development. Possibilities for European participation had been reduced to four structural areas of space shuttle. U.S. urged esc to undertake development of shuttle sortie laboratory. (NASA OMSF; Av Wh, 7/17/72, 19)
Atomic Energy Commission was “encouraging” NASA to examine cost of permanent removal from environment of wastes from atomic plants by “shooting these high-level radioactive wastes into the sun—taking them right out of the world,” Dr. James R. Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, said in interview published by U.S. News & World Report. Method would “depend on development of the space shuttle ... a decade away.” (US News, 2/14/72, 46-51)
Newspaper editorials commented on President Nixon’s decision to develop space shuttle. Washington Post said arguments for or against shuttle were not “error free” since “major ones rest on projections into the future which are exceedingly difficult to make and others rest on basically undemonstrable assumptions about the quest for knowledge. Part of the difficulty springs from the fact that no one can know what space-based research will discover. Is the key to the hydrogen atom and thus to unlimited energy out there . . .? Will the world some day need to import minerals from space to sustain life here? Will man have to be in space to accomplish things such as these or can machines do them all? Above all, where does this kind of program fit in a national budget that cannot provide for doing all the things at home that ought to be done?” Such questions would make debate over space shuttle “different in character and significance from last year’s debate over the sst.” Standards applied to “project which involves scientific research and military considerations . . . must be somewhat different from those applied to a project, such as the sst, which involved only another way to move people from place to place.” (W Post, 1/14/72, A22) Houston Post: “With the last Apollo moon flight scheduled later this year and the Skylab project to terminate in 1973, the shuttle holds the key to an on-going space program. Our failure to build it would indicate our lagging interest in space research to the possible detriment of future cooperation with the Russians in this field. It is true that we have important social priorities which need attention, but our space research posture in relation to the Soviet Union, whether competitive or cooperative, also carries a high priority.” (H Post, 1/14/72)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial commented on space shuttle decision: “Man’s ability to perform capably in a prolonged state of weightlessness has yet to be proven and until it is the arguments for a large shuttle program must remain inconclusive. Beyond this, the recent agreements between this country and the Soviet Union to exchange biomedical and other space data and to work toward compatible docking systems would seem to make a full scale shuttle program a prime candidate for a co-operative enterprise.” (St Louis P-D, 1/11/72) January 12:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 471 from Baykonur into orbit with 317-km (197-mi) apogee, 194-km (120.5-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 25 (gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; SBD, 1/13/72, 51)
Adelbert 0. Tischler, Director of Shuttle Technologies Office in NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), testified on progress of shuttle transportation system before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during NASA FY 1973 authorization hearings: “Methods for rapidly assessing the aero-heating and flight handling characteristics of the shuttle are being developed. A base for applying new design methods and for use of new materials in the sensitive problem of structural mass has been laid. Thermal protection systems, some comprising materials which were virtually unknown at the start of the program, will be brought to . . . technological readiness. The questions of long-lived propulsive and power equipment, suitable for repeated re-use, will be answered.” Computerized index and search procedure for access to all published shuttle technology was nearing completion. “While technology issues remain, the continuing progress of the technology program conducted by . . . NASA centers and industrial contractors is building a technological base that is far deeper and stronger than that which has heretofore underlain new development programs. This base . . . will assure successful Shuttle development.” David S. Gabriel, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office, described NASA-funded electrophysics research program conducted by Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Program was concerned “with understanding and, ultimately, using electrons, nuclei, atoms and molecules. Such work is of central importance to future sciences, for example, to laser beam generation, transmission and conversion; superconductivity; or plasma power devices.” In FY 1972, research had been completed on continuous-flow plasma accelerator to simulate spacecraft reentry conditions accurately, new contributions to understanding plasma turbulence had been made, knowledge of uranium plasma properties had been improved, and carbon monoxide lasers had been demonstrated to be highly efficient. New superconductor made up of thin films of vanadium and silicon had been discovered. For FY 1973 $3.4 million had been requested for programs in plasma dynamics, lasers, superconductivity, and nuclear physics. Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified that “clearly the space shuttle orbiter, a rather sophisticated piece of machinery, is not only a launch vehicle and a spacecraft but also a high speed airplane, with all the attendant considerations of aircraft-type control and landing. It offers NASA an opportunity to apply aerodynamic, structural, and materials technology that has been developing over the past 10 or 15 years for high performance aircraft. Reciprocally the shuttle work offers much to benefit aircraft in the next 10 to 15 years.” NASA had also capitalized on early Air Force technology oriented toward manned high-speed flight in the atmosphere as well as reentry into the atmosphere, such as Dyna-Soar and X-15 projects. Francis J. Sullivan—Director of Guidance, Control, and Information Systems in oast—testified on nuclear electric power system research for spacecraft: Nuclear electric power systems offered “attractive alternatives” to batteries for long-life orbiting systems, “in terms of minimizing structural constraints and the economic considerations of supplying several kilowatts of power. Current research is directed primarily toward two types of nuclear systems, isotope systems for low power levels of about 1 kilowatt, and the intermediate reactor power systems for levels in the range of several kilowatts up to 10-20 kilowatts.” Isotope systems were radioisotope thermoelectric generators (rtgs). Intermediate reactor power system consisted of zirconium hydride reactor to generate heat and thermoelectric power-conversion components to convert this heat into electricity. Program was directed toward reactor test in 1976-1977 period to demonstrate long-life capability. Stable performance had been achieved on thermoelectric converter test modules. Effort in FY 1973 would concentrate on verifying this performance. Conversion system would be developed for testing with the reactor to verify the integrated system performance. (Transcript)
Leesburg, Fla., high school students Dale Delpit and Mike Holloway emerged after 6 days and 16 hrs in capsule built by their science class to simulate spacecraft. They had walked and slept on waterbed to simulate weightlessness and had eaten pre-prepared foods. Both boys, aged 14, emerged with wobbly knees and with charcoal on faces to look like astronauts’ beards. (W Star, 6/12/72, 20) April 12:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other NASA officials testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science-Veterans Appropriations during hearings on NASA FY 1973 appropriation. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, demonstrated model of space shuttle and explained configuration and costs. Dr. Fletcher said that in halving cost of original plans main sacrifice was that “we are not reusing all the parts. We use this expendable gas tank to supply the orbiter. . . . That, however, had an enormous effect on the size. We were able to bring the size of the orbiter down so that we were able to use solid fuel rockets.” Dr. Low added, “We sacrificed nothing in terms of what kinds of satellites, what kinds of payloads we can put into orbit.” Estimates of larger costs by shuttle opponents had been derived by adding in cost of “all the satellites it will carry, the weather satellites, the communications satellites, and all of those things that would be carried anyway, whether there is a Shuttle or not,” Dr. Low said. “And this could be likened to charging to the cost of a freight train the cost also of all of the freight that it is going to carry.” In reply to question on cooperation with U.S.S.R., Dr. Low cited decision to build docking and rendezvous systems compatible between U.S. and U.S.S.R. manned spacecraft. Shuttle “will have a system on it so it can attach to another satellite and we will make that system so it is the same as the Russians will use on their satellites, so that if we need to rescue each other ... or if we want to conduct joint experiments in space, we can do that.” Queried on comparison of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs, Dr. Fletcher said, “It is quite apparent that over the last 3 or 4 years, the Soviet space effort has grown in dollar volume and in number of launches per year, during the period that ours has declined. So that . . . they are spending quite a bit more in space than we are. It is estimated that perhaps 2 percent of their gross national product is spent for space, whereas a half of a percent of our GNP is spent on space. . . . Our number of launches per year has steadily declined from a peak of something [like] almost 80 in 1966, down to . . . the order of 30 or 35 in 1970 and 1971; whereas, the number of their launches has steadily climbed . . . and is now higher than even our peak. In 1971, they launched over 80 spacecraft, whereas our launches were down to less than half that.” (Transcript)
Extension of McDonnell Douglas Corp. contract for design study of space shuttle orbiter auxiliary propulsion systems to include study of earth-storable propellants was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Extension increased contract value to $576 000 and carried it through Oct. 15, 1972. (msc Release 72-101)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., said in interview that 1500 employees might lose jobs because of award of NASA space shuttle contract to competitor, North American Rockwell Corp. [see July 26]. First layoffs at Bethpage, N.Y., plant might come in three weeks, with 200 employees affected. Labor officials later noted that action could affect as many as 8000 workers, including fringe concerns. (Andelman, NYT, 7/28/72)
Award of $112 000 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for visual system definition study leading to development of space shuttle mission simulator was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center, (msc Release 72-92)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
NASA released official summary of reasons for selection of North American Rockwell Corp. for $2.6-billion prime contract to build space shuttle. Summary said NR had been chosen over competitors—Grumman Aerospace Corp.; Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Inc., Space Systems Div.; and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—because “North American Rockwell attained the highest score from a mission suitability standpoint* because its cost proposal was lowest and credible, and because its approaches to program performance gave high confidence to us, to the [Source Evaluation] Board, and to the Manned Space Flight center directors, that it will indeed produce the Shuttle at the lowest cost.” Summary—signed Sept. 18 by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator—said NR’s “greatest advantages” within mission suitability area were in management, with efficient control of program and best overall top project management team. NR design provided lightest dry weight. NR’s “good understanding of all electrical power subsystems reflected the very thorough studies . . . made following the Apollo 13 accident.” Analysis of maintainability was excellent. Further, NR management techniques “should provide earlier identification of cost problems” and planned constrained buildup of resources in beginning of program lent confidence in ability to control costs. Grumman Corp. had been “very close behind” but its plan to build up its work force to early manpower peak had been seen by NASA as threat of “premature commitment of resources during the course of the program.” Grumman’s greatest strength had been in its technical design; McDonnell Douglas design had strong features but some technical drawbacks; and Lockheed’s proposal had lacked “consistent technical depth.” NASA had originally made summary available only to General Accounting Office and to competing bidders because of potential embarrassment to losers. Agency had later released summary, Wall Street Journal said, “to demonstrate that politics didn’t play any role in the decision and that the most painstaking selection procedures in the agency’s history were observed.” (Text; WSJ, 10/5/72, 12)
After series of meetings in U.S. and abroad, esro decided to develop sortie laboratory to fly with NASA’s space shuttle in 1980s. President Nixon announced new policy making U.S. launch assistance available to interested countries and international organizations for satellites intended for peaceful purposes. Third Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in January was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 17 foreign countries. Participating Soviet scientists consulted with U.S. scientists, examined lunar samples, and helped select Apollo 14 samples to return to U.S.S.R. as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. exchange agreement. Apollo 15 lunar soil samples were exchanged for soil samples collected by U.S.S.R.’s Luna 20. Apollo 16 materials were distributed to scientists in 15 foreign countries, and Apollo 17 samples also would be distributed to other nations for analysis and display. NASA launched 29 sounding rockets in cooperative international program to test weather data systems for France, Japan, and U.S. Program was sponsored by United Nations World Meteorological Organization’s Commission for Instruments and Methods of Observation, Since beginning of international program in 1962 with launch of U.K. satellite Ariel 1 (April 26) and Canadian satellite Alouette 1 (Sept. 29), number of foreign countries and international organizations with which NASA had participated in space activities had reached 134. Total of 55 foreign agreements included cooperative flight projects with 25 countries, earth resources survey with 39, lunar sample analysis with 20, tracking and data acquisition with 22, and reimbursable launchings with 4. Scientists from 85 countries and organizations had worked with NASA—80 in meteorological research, 41 in personnel exchanges, and 52 in other space projects. Total countries and organizations exchanging scientific and technical information with NASA reached 63; total sending visitors to NASA reached 126, and total cooperating in some form with NASA reached 94. (nasa Release, 12/27/72; A&A 1972; Fletcher, NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 2-3; nasa Int Aff)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced renegotiation and extension of thermal protection contract with LTV Aerospace Corp. for advanced development of reinforced pyrolyzed plastics to protect space shuttle orbiter. About $493 500 would be added to previous funding for total study cost of $767 500. (msc Release 72-121)
nasa Associate Administrator Dale D. Myers—following detailed presentation on space shuttle decision announced by Administrator James C. Fletcher [see above]—moved to testimony on Apollo program, during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. In new Apollo 16 lunar surface experiments, far-ultraviolet camera/spectograph would photograph celestial objects or areas emitting or absorbing energy from atomic hydrogen. Data would provide information on “composition, density, distribution, and motion of interplanetary, interstellar, and intergalactic gas clouds which will . . . enhance our understanding of the structure and evolution of the galaxy.” Data, recorded on film and returned from lunar surface by astronauts, would be “first attempt to evaluate the Moon as a platform from which to make future celestial observations.” Second new experiment, cosmic ray detector, would acquire data on origin and source mechanism of high-velocity cosmic rays and solar particles beyond effects of earth’s atmosphere and magnetic field. (Transcript) March 15:	NASA Associate Administrator jar Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, Administrator James C. Fletcher, and Deputy Administrator George M. Low (left to right) explained space shuttle plans at a press conference following the announcement that the shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rockets. In the artist’s drawing, the rockets are dropping away for recovery. NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 29th flight from Flight Research Center. Purpose of flight was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Fixed rakes and rotating survey probes were checked out and angle-of-attack calibrations were obtained at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude from mach 0.9 to 1.1. (nasa proj off)
Space shuttle concept endorsed by President Nixon made it “all but certain” that Kennedy Space Center would be selected for shuttle’s launch site, New York Times said. Space experts seemed to feel that only by “converting the assembly buildings, launching pads and communications center” at ksc “would it be possible to develop a shuttle port for $300 million.” (NYT, 1/7/72, 7)
Decision that space shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rocket motors in parallel burn configuration, rather than by pressure-fed liquid-fueled rocket motor, was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Announcement was also released to press during morning and Dr. Fletcher held press conference in afternoon. Dr. Fletcher said both solid- and liquid-fueled boosters had been found technically feasible but “choice was made in favor of the solid parallel burn because of the lower development cost and the lower technical risks. Cost estimate for shuttle development was now $5.15 billion instead of earlier $5.5-billion estimate. Request for proposals would be issued about March 17. nasa expected to select shuttle launch and landing site shortly. At press conference he said: “I think we have made the right decision at the right time. And I think it is the right price.” Dr. Fletcher said it was likely NASA would want to launch and land at same coastal site and possibly from sites on both coasts. Inland sites were unlikely because of requirement for booster recoverability. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at conference there would be eight-week response time to request for proposals to become prime contractor for shuttle development. NASA would evaluate proposals in another eight weeks and would be ready for choice of contractor in early July. Requirements had been developed jointly with Air Force and “we have a shuttle that meets the user’s requirements, both in NASA and in the Air Force.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, estimated breakdown of 580 shuttle flights projected over 12-yr period for newsmen. Out of 100% of missions, 26% would be manned or man-tended, 74% unmanned. Of that 74%, 27% would be for applications (including NASA and other agencies or commercial applications), 25% for science, and 22% for Dept, of Defense missions. (Hearings transcript; Press conference transcript)
New York Times editorial commented on March 19 visit of its science writer John N. Wilford to U.S.S.R.’s Star City, home of cosmonauts. Visit “implied a major change in Soviet policy toward space cooperation. No Western journalist had previously been permitted inside this key center of Soviet manned space activities.” Wilford’s report had suggested U.S.S.R. might be willing to explore moon jointly with U.S. “If so, the idea catches the United States at an embarrassing point in development of its space program. After the scheduled flights of Apollos 16 and 17 . . . this country plans to focus most of its future activity in space on earth-orbiting space stations and development of a space shuttle.” (NYT, 3/23/72) March 24:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 12:45 pm pst by Thor-Burner II booster. Orbital parameters: 884-km (549-mi) apogee, 802-km (498-mi) perigee, 101.7min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/29/72, 156)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., said he hoped to obtain SI billion worth of subcontracts in space shuttle program. New York Times said later that this was more than three times as much as North American Rockwell, winner of $2.6-billion prime contract, had tentatively allocated to all of New York State. (Witkin, NYT, 7/29/72)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, issued statement in Washington, D.C., on President Nixon’s Jan. 5 decision to proceed with development of space shuttle. Decision “initiates a program which holds great promise for scientific and technological advances in the interests of the nation and all mankind. We are also interested in its potential as a means for performing our military mission more efficiently and economically. The Air Force role in the program is to provide NASA data to help assure that the Shuttle will be of maximum utility to the dod and we are pleased that the proposed vehicle is configured to meet potential DOD needs. We will continue our close coordination with NASA as their development program proceeds.’-’ (Text)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of requests for proposals for development of concepts, construction of hardware, and testing of thrust chamber for space shuttle orbit maneuver engine (ome). Two firms would be selected, each to receive one-year, $275 000, firm-fixed-price parallel contract, (msc Release 72-33)
President Nixon issued statement on U.S. space program following splashdown of Apollo 17 command module: “The safe return of the command module America marks the end of one of the most significant chapters in the history of human endeavor. In October 1958, this Nation set about sending men into a hostile, unknown environment. We had little idea what lay before us, but there was new knowledge to be gained and there was a heritage of meeting historical challenge— the challenge of greatness—to be sustained. Project Mercury, begun in 1958, taught us that man could survive and work in space. In 1961, President Kennedy voiced the determination of the United States to place a mem on the moon. We gained the understanding and the technology to embark on this great mission through Project Gemini and we accomplished it with the Apollo lunar exploration series. In 1969, for the first time, men from the planet Earth set foot on the moon. “Since the beginning of Apollo, nine manned flights have been made to the moon. Three circled that nearest neighbor in the universe, six landed and explored its surface. We have barely begun to evaluate the vast treasure store of extraterrestrial data and material from these voyages, but we have already learned much and we know that we are probing our very origins. We are taking another long step in man’s ancient search for his own beginnings, pressing beyond knowledge of the means of human existence to find, perhaps, the meaning of human existence. “Nor is this great work ending with the return of Gene Cernan, Jack Schmitt, and Ron Evans from the moon today. Rather it has barely begun. As Sir Isaac Newton attributed his accomplishments to the fact that he stood ‘upon the shoulders of Giants,’ so Newton himself is one of the giants upon whose shoulders we now stand as we reach for the stars. The great mathematician once wrote: ‘I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.’ I believe we have finally moved into the great ocean and we are trying now to understand what surrounds us. “The making of space history will continue, and this Nation means to play a major role in its making. Next spring, the Sky lab will be put into orbit. It will be aimed not at advancing exploration of deep space, but at gaining in space new knowledge for the improvement of life here on earth. It will help develop new methods of learning about the earth’s environment and the earth’s resources, and new methods of evaluating programs aimed at preserving and enhancing the resources of all the world. It will seek new knowledge about our own star, the sun, and about its tremendous influence on our environment. Scientists aboard the Skylab will perform medical experiments aimed at a better knowledge of man’s own physiology. Also, they will perform experiments aimed at developing new industrial processes utilizing the unique capabilities found in space. Skylab will be our first manned space station. It will be in use for the better part of a year, permitting the economy of extended usage, and laying the groundwork for further space stations. “Economy in space will be further served by the Space Shuttle .... It will enable us to ferry space research hardware into orbit without requiring the full expenditure of a launch vehicle as is necessary today. It will permit us to place that hardware in space accurately, and to serve or retrieve it when necessary instead of simply writing it off in the event it malfunctions or fails. In addition, the Shuttle will provide such routine access to space that for the first time personnel other than trained astronauts will be able to participate and contribute in space as will nations once excluded for economic reasons. “The near future will see joint space efforts by this Nation and the Soviet Union in an affirmation of our common belief that the hopes and the needs that unite our people and all people are of greater consequence than the differences in philosophy that divide us. “Finally, we will continue to draw knowledge from the universe through the use of unmanned satellites and probes. “We cannot help but pause today and remember and pay homage to those many men and women—including those who made the ultimate sacrifice—whose hopes, whose energies, skill, and courage enabled the first man to reach the moon and who now have seen with us perhaps the last men in this century leave the moon. But the more we look back the more we are reminded that our thrust has been forward and that our place is among the heavens where our dreams precede us, and where, in time, we shall surely follow. “Though our ancestors would have called the deeds of Apollo miraculous, we do not see our age as an age of miracles. Rather, we deal in facts, we deal in scientific realities, we deal in industrial capacity, and technological expertise, and in the belief that men can do whatever they turn their hands to. For all this, however, can we look at the record of 24 men sent to circle the moon or to stand upon it, and 24 men returned to earth alive and well, and not see God’s hand in it? “Perhaps, in spite of ourselves, we do still live in an Age of Miracles. So if there is self-congratulation, let it be tempered with awe, and our pride with prayer, and as we enter this special time of spiritual significance, let us reserve a moment to wonder at what human beings have done in space and to be grateful.” {PD, 12/25/72, 1788-9)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1970, 1971, 1972 (nsf 71-35). Federal obligations for research and development (r&d) in 1970 totaled $15.3 billion excluding plant; slight rise to $15.4 billion was expected for 1971. Figure was decrease of 5% in constant dollars. Basic research obligations were expected to rise from $2.1 billion in 1970 to $2.2 billion for 1971 and $2.4 billion for 1972. Federal support for basic research declined in 1970 but was expected to reach new record highs for 1971 and 1972. Bulk of Federal basic research, 81%, was funded by NASA; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; National Science Foundation; Atomic Energy Commission; and Dept, of Defense. NASA had led in basic research support since 1961, with 29% of total in 1971. Applied research obligations totaled $3.5 billion in 1970 and were expected to rise to $3.8 billion for 1971, increase of 8%. Total was expected to reach $4.2 billion in 1972—all-time high in current dollars. dod, hew, and NASA continued to dominate Federal applied research effort and would account for 78% in 1971. Obligations for development totaled $9.7 billion in 1970 and would decline 3%, to $9.4 billion, in 1971. In 1972, Federal development total was scheduled to rise to $10.0 billion, or 1966 level, dod, nasa, and AEC were most prominent in Federal development effort in 1960-1972, accounting for 92% in 1971. dod funded 63%; nasa share had declined since 1965 to expected 19% for 1971. Although total Federal R&D obligations were expected to increase 9% from 1970 to 1972, nasa and aec decrease continued. NASA estimate for 1972, however, was smallest reduction since downward trend began in 1967. Report noted increases in key programs—Skylab, space shuttle, Viking Mars explorations, and unmanned missions to outer planets—had almost offset decreases in Apollo program. (Text)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Japanese government were discussing production in Japan of twin-engine version of Lockheed TriStar transport aircraft, Wall Street Journal reported. McDonnell Douglas had proposed production in Japan of smaller-version DC-10.	(WSJ, 8/22/72, 8) August 23:	Republican National Platform for science and technology was published by Washington Evening Star and Daily News: “We will place special emphasis on these areas in which break-throughs are needed: Abundant, clean energy sources; safe, fast and pollution-free transportation; improved emergency health care; reduction of loss of life, health, and property in natural disasters; rehabilitation of alcoholics and addicts to dangerous drugs. We will press ahead with the space shuttle program to replace today’s expendable launch vehicles and provide low-cost access to space for a wide variety of missions, including those related to earth resources.” (W Star & News, 8/23/72, A10)
NASA test pilot Gary E. Krier flew modified F-8 jet fighter equipped with digital-fly-by-wire control system from Flight Research Center in first flight test of aircraft that was completely dependent on electronic control system. Aircraft had no mechanical backup control system. Purpose of flight, limited to maximum speed of 680 km per hr (425 mph) and maximum altitude of 6000 m (20 000 ft), was to check out aircraft’s primary and secondary flight control system. Fly-by-wire system with digital computer and inertial measuring unit had been developed originally for Apollo lunar module and was designated for future use in space shuttle to ensure smoother flight. (nasa Release 72—112)
New York Times published response by Univ. of Michigan astronomer James A. Loudon to Jan. 16 letter in which former scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary questioned compatibility of space shuttle with national goals. O’Leary letter had been “strange document from a man who wrote a whole book to complain that scientists don’t have access to space.” Shuttle’s most important aspect, “aside from its economy,” was its ability to carry passengers. “For the first time, scientists will be able to perform experiments in space without spending years in irrelevant pilot training first.” Shuttle’s effect would be “to make space very much more available, with results for a dozen different branches of science that are now incalculable.” (NYT, 3/28/72)	_
Space shuttle was “investment in the future,” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, said in Aerospace article. Controversy over manned versus unmanned space flight had been “negated” by advancing technology that provided “entirely new approach to space operations.” Shuttle combined “advantages of man in the cycle with a degree of economy hitherto unobtainable.” Fundamental reason for shuttle program was “to make available a means of routine access to space, to remove the constraints imposed by an earlier level of technology, to progress from space adolescence to full maturity.” (Aerospace, 4/72, 3-9)
President Nixon informed Congress of plans for six-month International Exposition on the Environment to be held in Spokane, Wash., in 1974. {PD, 8/21/72, 1237) August 15—16:	Symposium on composite structural materials for space shuttle application, at Marshall Space Flight Center, reviewed progress and facilitated exchange of space shuttle composites information originated by NASA Centers and contractors, (msfc Release 72—107)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress 26th annual report on U.S. participation in work of United Nations. He noted in transmission message that 26th U.N. General Assembly had endorsed two treaties sponsored by U.S., Convention on the International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects and Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. International Civil Aviation Organization conference had adopted Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation. {PD, 9/11/72, 1351-2) September 8—9:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of NASA Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., celebration included open house and Sept. 8 ceremony honoring original 14 employees who had participated with Air Force in successful 1947—1951 X-l rocket aircraft program to exceed speed of sound in level flight. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented plaques to seven original employees who attended. Since creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, predecessor of NASA, frc had participated in advanced aircraft research programs that had extended boundaries of manned aeronautical flight from subsonic speed to 7200 km (4500 mi) per hr achieved by X—15 aircraft between 1959 and 1968. Other frc programs included rocket-powered D-558 II Skyrocket, first aircraft to fly twice the speed of sound; X-5, forerunner of F—111, F—14, and B-l aircraft; lunar landing research vehicle, prototype of Apollo lunar landing trainer; and XB-70 aircraft that had takeoff weight of more than 226 800 kg (500 000 lbs) and mach-3 cruising speed, frc programs were continuing effort to improve safety, utility, and flying qualities of general-aviation aircraft; M2, HL-IO, and X-24A lifting-body flights to validate concepts for future manned spacecraft and aircraft; YF-12 program to acquire inflight data for future supersonic military and commercial aircraft; supercritical wing program to evaluate new NASA-developed wing’s ability to permit modified F-S aircraft to cruise economically at higher speeds; and digital fly-by-wire aircraft program to evaluate use of electronic flight control system to control aircraft completely. Fly-bywire system was being considered for space shuttle use. (NASA Release 72-173; frc Release 15-72; frc X-Press, 9/15/72) September 9:	Tass reported results of Venus 8 probe that had landed capsule on Venus July 22 after four-month flight. Wind had moved descending capsule horizontally in same direction as planet’s rotation on its axis. Wind speed had declined from 48 m (160 ft) per sec at 45-km (28-mi) altitude to 2 m (6 ft) per sec at 11 km (7 mi). Key question during landing was whether sunlight reached Venusian surface or was absorbed completely by atmosphere and clouds. Preliminary data on changes in illumination at different altitudes showed that Venusian atmosphere considerably weakened sunlight but some sunlight did reach surface. Atmosphere consisted of 97% carbon dioxide, less than 2% nitrogen, and less than 0.1% oxygen and contained 0.01-0.1% ammonia at altitudes between 33 and 46 km (20 and 30 mi). Surface in landing area resembled earth granite rock in radioactive composition with 4.0% potassium, 0.0002% uranium, and 0.00065% thorium. (fbis-Sov, 9/13/72, L7)
McDonnell Douglas Corp. announced in St. Louis that it was laying off 11 000 employees in next 17 mos, largely because of its failure to win prime contract for space shuttle. President and Chief Executive Officer Sanford N. McDonnell said 260 employees would he laid off immediately and that by year’s end figure would reach 6000. Most of 11 000 layoffs—perhaps 9800—would be from California divisions of company that employed total of 92 000 persons. (Andelman, NYT, 8/3/72, 43)	:
LeRoy E. Day, NASA Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, described studies of shuttle’s effect on payload development costs during speech before American Institute of Astronautics and Aeronautics Rocky Mountain Section in Boulder, Colo.: “A number of . . . payloads have been flown and historical design and program cost data were available. We have determined by actual preliminary design, preparation of program plans, and detailed costing analyses, that these payloads could have been redesigned to fly on the shuttle with payload development cost savings ... of 50% of the historical baseline. The studies conclude that the cost of developing payloads (the major portion of space program costs) can be reduced primarily as a result of the shuttle’s ability to retrieve payloads for reuse, refurbishment and updating.” Dichotomy of unmanned and manned space programs should not be perpetuated, Day said. U.S. needed to continue “vigorous and meaningful manned space program” that did not “obscure the automated satellite programs.” Shuttle was “the one mechanism that can effectively support both goals in an optimum way” within national space budget. (Text)
William Hines commented on space shuttle decision in Chicago SunTimes: “What the President offered last week was not a completely reusable workhorse aerospace plane at all, but a scaled-down hodgepodge of obsolete, current and avant-garde technology that cannot possibly meet the stated goal of $100-a-pound payloads in 1980. The sad truth is that the original shuttle couldn’t, either, once it became apparent that development costs would approximate $13 billion rather than the $5.2 billion estimated in 1969. As backers of the defunct supersonic transport finally had to admit, when you markedly alter the development cost of a flight system, you alter its economics also.” (C Sun-Times, 1/12/72)
U.S. press commented on safe April 27 return of Apollo 16 astronauts. New York Times: Mission had “reminded us once again that man’s study of the moon is but in its infancy, and that the great bulk of the moon’s territory is still completely unexplored.” Yet, “only one more manned lunar mission is now scheduled.” As Apollo program ended, “its enormous successes underline the opportunities on the moon and compel all men to lift their eyes to the heavens if they would understand whence and how our species, our world and our solar system came into being.” (NYT, 4/28/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution: “These three strong young men are heros in the truest sense of the term. They have pitted their courage, their physical strength and their minds against a multiplicity of awesome forces which singularly or collectively could totally obliterate them. And they did it for the noblest of reasons—the pursuit of knowledge. If mankind has any claim to greatness, surely it is men like this that give it credence.” Editorial also approved space funding: “It is appropriate to note, just when the next-to-last planned Apollo spacecraft is safely home from the moon, that a few days ago the U.S. House voted approval of a $3,4 billion space agency budget bill. Part of the money will go for the development of a space shuttle, the next logical step in the great adventure of exploring space. The technological advances that are part of the space program have already proven themselves of value here on earth. It’s likely that this kind of extra technical dividend will continue to lead to break-through areas not even related to space.” (Atlanta JC, 4/28/72) San Francisco Examiner:	. . Apollo 16 may well turn out to be the most rewarding of all our moon expeditions. All Americans can take pride in a feat so remarkably compounded of scientific precision and human courage.” (SF Exam, 4/28/72) Chicago Daily News: “With experience, the crews and the thousands of technical experts supporting them from the Earth have learned to correct the minor flaws and juggle the entire intricate timetable when necessary. It seems a pity that much of the experience so dearly gained is soon to be put on the shelf. . . . But the lessons of Apollo can be applied at least in part to the portions of the space program that will remain. . . . And if the pioneering aspects of the space program are about over, its benefits will continue—most spectacularly in the weather and communication satellites, but extending also into more mundane improvements in daily living.” (C Daily News, 4/28/72)
Events leading to President Nixon’s endorsement of space shuttle development were reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology: “The struggle between NASA and omb [Office of Management and Budget] officials reached the point of acrimony when the latter suggested design changes and demanded to know from NASA engineers the dollar savings that would result. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, finally appealed directly to the office of the President with a complaint that omb was attempting to design the U.S. space shuttle rather than merely budget it.” President Nixon had removed omb accountant from conference with NASA and demanded shuttle agreement. “The dispute culminated in Fletcher’s triumphal flight to San Clemente ... to join in the announcement that the space shuttle had been approved by the Administration.” (Av Wk, 1/10/72, 15)
Air Force unveiled F—15 air superiority fighter aircraft in ceremonies at McDonnell Douglas facility in St. Louis, Mo. F-15 was fixed-wing, single-place aircraft in 18 000-kg (40 000-lb) class, with maximum mach 2 speed, (afsc Release 080.72) Organization’s Research and Technology Center, estec had been asked by esro to determine resources required by Europe if European Space Conference decided to develop space shuttle sortie lab [see June 14]. NASA told estec officials Europe should view sortie lab as nearly uniquely European as possible, with dependence on U.S. held to minimum. If U.S. agreed to let Europe build system to U.S. design, U.S. would insist on completely new qualification program to qualify source and system. NASA found esro and estec representatives “eager” to undertake sortie lab program. (NASA omsf, Memo for Record, 9/7/72) June 27:	Eole transponder—radio receiver/transmitter developed for French-built weather satellite Eole (launched by NASA for France Aug. 16, 1971)—had sailed on American yawl Foolscap during Newport Bermuda race, Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Objective was to test its potential for locating lifeboats by satellite. Transponder had sent position data to Eole as satellite passed 800 km (500 mi) over Foolscap. Information, transmitted to tracking station operated by French Center for Space Studies (cnes), was processed and tele-typed to gsfc. Foolscap’s up-to-date location was then plotted and sent on to U.S. Coast Guard in Miami, Florida, and race committee in Bermuda. Test, sponsored by gsfc engineers, had proved highly successful and indicated that small inexpensive transponders might become standard equipment on ship and aircraft lifeboats, (gsfc Release G—10-72; gsfc proj off)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) in press release called for “full and open debate” on space shuttle development issue, “leading to the rejection of this wasteful program.” It was “typical” that Nixon Administration “can squander $6.5 billion to fly four people into orbit when it refuses to invest less than one-third that amount to provide desperately needed day care and development programs for millions of children.” Space shuttle was “many timbs worse than SST” in “magnitude of its cost, in the folly of its concept and in its damage to the country.” (Text)
Astronauts Edgar D. Mitchell and James B. Irwin announced plans to resign from NASA and military. Mitchell, Navy captain, had been lunar module (lm) pilot on Apollo 14 (Jan. 31—Feb. 9, 1971). Irwin, Air Force colonel, had been lm pilot on Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) and was backup pilot for Apollo 17, scheduled for launch in December. Because of Irwin’s plans to retire, new backup crew for Apollo 17 had been named, effective July 1: John W. Young, Stuart A. Roosa, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Original Apollo 17 backup crew was David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and Irwin. Scott, Worden, and Thomas K. Mattingly II had been assigned to Space Shuttle Program in Manned Spacecraft Center Astronaut Office. Mattingly, who recently had become a father, had requested' assignment which would allow him more time with his family during next six months, (nasa Release 72-110)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on scientific forecasts that earth’s surface would become too hot for habitation in 4 billion yrs: “While we work on problems of more immediate concern, let’s not scrimp on the space shuttle. Down the line a few billion years, they may think well of us for that.” {LA Times, 8/18/72)
NASA had asked private industry to help assess space shuttle boosterrecovery system, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Large parachutes would lower 90-metric-ton (lOO-U.S.-ton) spent booster stages to ocean. Six proposals for study of parachute deceleration system had been received, (msfc Release 72-70)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced agreement with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Huntsville Div. to provide facility design and construction support as needed by msfc for space shuttle program, (msfc Release 72-61)
Sophisticated TV systems were being used by some of world’s largest telescopes to record planetary atmospheres, faint galaxies, and quasistellar objects, Science reported. Astronomers had been criticized for being less receptive to new technologies than other physical scientists. “At a time when automation of many stages of data-taking is standard procedure . . . automation of large telescopes is just becoming fashionable.” (Metz, Science, 3/31/72, 1448-9) During March: nasa released Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1971-1973: Annual Report to the National Science Foundation. Report, for inclusion in government-wide survey published by nsf for Congress, White House, Government agencies, and scientific community, showed distribution of nasa funds based on FY 1973 budget estimates. It reflected nasa’s total direct obligations incurred in FY 1971 and budget estimates for FY 1972 and FY 1973. In FY 1973 nasa would fund approximately 19% of Federal Government’s total research and development effort and provide 23% of funds for research, alone. When Dept, of Defense was excluded from computation, nasa was expected to conduct 36% of total civilian R&D effort. Total research in FY 1973 was expected to show 4% increase over FY 1971. For first time since FY 1962 research would represent over 50% of nasa funding for Research and Development. Increase in research resulted in decreased funding for development, with impending completion of Apollo and Sky lab development; decrease was offset to a degree by funds applied to begin space shuttle development. Analysis of funding showed decline in engineering funds of about 7% of total, with increases in physical and life sciences. Reduction in engineering reflected anticipated completion of Apollo. High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program effected increase in astronomy, and Viking program, increase in chemistry and biology. (Text)
Senate passed H.R. 14070, $3.444-billion NASA FY 1973 authorization bill, after adopting amendment by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) that increased allocation for aeronautical research and development by $24 million. Increase included $21 million for program to design and demonstrate certifiable modifications to retrofit existing civil aircraft for quieter performance and $3 million for aircraft collision avoidance. Senate rejected, by vote of 61 to 21, amendment by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to delete $228 million requested for space shuttle development. (CR, 5/11/72, S7698-7763)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract awards for space shuttle work. Three companies had been awarded six-month extensions to contracts for continued development of new surface materials for shuttle orbiter stage. McDonnell Douglas Corp. received $350 000, General Electric Co. Aerospace Group $346 000, and Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. $345 000. Companies would deliver to msc sample tiles of rigidized reusable surface insulation for special testing. cci Aerospace Corp. Marquardt Co. had been awarded $181 846, cost-plus-fixed-fee, research and development contract to study helium regulator systems that could be used by shuttle orbiter. Martin Marietta Corp. had received $130 000, firm-fixed-price, R&D contract to design, build, and test couch to be used by passengers on shuttle, (msc Releases 72-145, 72-146, 72-148)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced three awards for space shuttle work. Textron, Inc., Bell Aerospace Div. received $261 500 firm-fixed-price contract and North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. received $258 000 for constructing and testing thrust chambers for space shuttle engines for in-space maneuvering. Bell Aerospace also received 15-mo, $540 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to study and design hypergolic bipropellant engine for space shuttle orbiter reaction control system. (msc Releases 72-140, 72—142)
Europe’s dilemma over altered conditions for participation in post-Apollo space program was described by Kenneth W. Gatland in Spaceflight. Europe had been invited to develop research and applications module (ram) for space shuttle, rather than space tug as originally discussed. Elimination from Europe of any shuttle propulsion technology had “left little room for manoeuvre.” Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm would be “denied the opportunity to contribute their Attitude Control Propulsion System (acps) engine” which “is considered to be fully competitive with U.S. equivalents” because NASA had rejected acps as “too advanced and too complex” a European contribution. Space tug— with attributes of both launch vehicle and spacecraft—would have pushed propulsion technique “well beyond what is currently envisaged in Europe.” Tug covered “very extensive range of the basic techniques of interest to the Europeans and might engender solutions to the most classic problems.” Tug’s “far-reaching integration with the shuttle and with the payload during operations would have afforded Europe effective participation in most American missions, i.e., the majority of space activities in the 1980s.” (SF, 9/72, 322-3)
President Nixon announced decision U.S. should develop space shuttle system. In statement re'eased from San Clemente. Calif., following 45-min meeting with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, President said: “I have decided today that the United States should proceed at once with the development of an entirely new type of space transportation system designed to help transform the space frontier of the 1970’s into familiar territory, easily accessible for human endeavor in the 1980’s and 1990’s. “This system will center on a space vehicle that can shuttle repeatedly from earth to orbit and hack. It will revolutionize transportation into near space, by routinizing it. It will take the astronomical costs out of astronautics. In short, it will go a long way toward delivering the rich benefits of practical space utilization and the valuable spinoffs from space efForts into the daily lives of Americans and all people. “The new year 1972 is a year of conclusion for America’s current series of manned flights to the moon. Much is expected from the two remaining Apollo missions—in fact, their scientific results should exceed the return from all the earlier flights together. Urns they will place a fitting capstone on this vastly successful undertaking. But they also hring us to an important decision point—-a point of assessing what our space horizons are as Apollo ends, and of determining where we go from here. “In the scientific arena, the past decade of experience has taught us that spacecraft are an irreplaceable tool for learning about our near earth space environment, the moon, and the planets, besides being an important aid to our studies of the sun and stars. In utilizing space to meet needs on earth, we have seen the tremendous potential of satellites for intercontinental communications and worldwide weather forecasting. We are gaining the capability to use satellites as tools in global monitoring and management of natural /resources, in agricultural January 5; President Nixon and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher examined a model of the reusable space shuttle at San Clemente, Calif,, following the President’s announcement that the United States would proceed with shuttle development. applications, and in pollution control. We can foresee their use in guiding airliners across the oceans and in bringing televised education to wide areas of the world. “However, all these possibilities, and countless others with direct and dramatic bearing on human betterment, can never be more than fractionally realized so long as every single trip from earth to orbit remains a matter of special effort and staggering expense. This is why commitment to the space shuttle program is the right next step for America to take, in moving out from our present beachhead in the sky to achieve a real working presence in space—because the space shuttle will give us routine access to space by sharply reducing costs in dollars and preparation time.” It was significant, President said, “that this major new national enterprise will engage the best efforts of thousands of highly skilled workers and hundreds of contractor firms over the next several years. The amazing ‘technology explosion’ that has swept this country in the years since we ventured into space should remind us that robust activity in the aerospace industry is healthy for every one—not just in jobs and income, but in the extension of our capabilities in every direction. The continued pre-eminence of America and American industry in the aerospace field will be an important part of the shuttle’s ‘payload.’ ” Shuttle program would “give more people access to the liberating perspectives of space, even as it extends our ability to cope with physical challenges of earth and broadens our opportunities for international cooperation in low-cost, multi-purpose space missions.” President quoted Oliver Wendell Holmes: “We must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it, but we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.” President concluded, “So with man’s epic voyage into space—a voyage the United States of America has led and still shall lead.” (PD, 1/10/72, 27-8; Transcript of Fletcher, Low press conference, 1/5/72)
More than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies were using nastran (nasa’s structural analysis computer program) to solve their structural engineering problems, NASA announced. nastran was general-purpose program originally designed to analyze behavior of elastic structures in space program. One major use had been in design of space shuttle. More than 600 engineers had been made familiar with nastran since it was made available to public in November 1970 and program was being used in more than 185 different applications, with at least 55 more planned. Firms using nastran predicted many improvements in product safety, reliability, and quality as direct benefit to their customers, (nasa Release 72^40)
The Manned Spacecraft Center had awarded a shuttle contract to Charles S. Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the MSC Roundup reported. The Laboratory had received a $1 375 484 cost-no-fee contract to provide technical support for guidance, navigation, and control subsystems in space shuttle program, (msc Roundup, 2/16/73, 1)
A five-week Ames Research Center experiment to determine women’s qualifications for space flight had shown women to be as physically fit for travel in weightlessness as men, NASA announced. The experiment— in which 8 of 12 Air Force flight nurses had two weeks of total bed rest in weightlessness simulation, while 4 acted as ambulatory controls—was one of a series to investigate responses to space flight conditions, looking forward to use of the space shuttle by other than pilot-trained astronauts. NASA emphasized that the test was to determine women’s qualifications for space flight and did not represent a commitment to add women to the astronaut corps. Dr. Harold Sandler, head of the experiment team, said the bedridden nurses were weaker after the experiment and showed a 50% reduction in their tolerance to various stresses. “But the same is true of men astronauts.” (nasa Release 73-218; AP, P Inq, 10/25/73)
Four seven-year subcontracts totaling $140 million for the design and fabrication of major structural components for the space shuttle orb iter were awarded by Rockwell International Corp. Fairchild Hiller Corp. received a $13-million contract for the design and fabrication of the vertical tail. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received a $40-million contract to design and build the double delta orbiter wing. Convair Aerospace Div. of General Dynamics Corp. was awarded a $40-million contract to build the mid-fuselage that formed the payload bay section. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received a $50-million contract to design and build the orbital maneuvering system that would aid in orbital circularization and change and in rendezvous and deorbit maneuvers. (ri Release SP—17)
Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr.—Apollo 13 lunar module pilot, Apollo 8 and 11 backup pilot, and Apollo 16 backup commander—had been named Technical Assistant to the Manager, Orbiter Projects Office, at Johnson Space Center, jsc announced. Haise, who had logged 142 hrs 54 min in space, would be responsible for assisting Manager Aaron Cohen in the overall management of the space shuttle orbiter development, (jsc Release 73-41)
b/g William J. Kennard (usaf, Ret.), former air surgeon of the Military Air Transport Service, died at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., at age 67. He had served from 1959 to 1967 as Executive Vice President of the Aerospace Medical Assn, and managing editor of Aerospace Medicine. (W Post, 10/26/73, C8) October 24:	Establishment of the Spacelab Program Office in the Office of Manned Space Flight was announced by nasa. The new office, to be headed by Douglas R. Lord, would replace the Sortie Lab Task Force. The reorganization followed the Sept. 24 signing of a cooperative agreement by NASA and the European Space Research Organization which called for European design, development, and manufacture of a Spacelab to be flown in the space shuttle orbiter. (NASA Release 73-228)
The People’s Republic of China was expanding communication lines to rest of world with the aid of American communications satellite technology, the New York Times reported. Communications Satellite Corp., RCA Global Communications, Inc., and Western Union Internationa] had provided ground stations that would be operational before the end of 1973, to link Peking and Shanghai via satellite to 63 nations that also had ground terminals. (Lyons, NYT, 1/5/73, 4) January 5:	NASA began program cutbacks to adjust to a lower spending level in compliance with President Nixon’s $250-billion target for total Government spending in FY 1973. Space shuttle manpower buildup would be slowed, delaying the first orbital flight. Work on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) was being suspended at least one year and work on communications satellites would be phased out, with cancellation of ats-G. Work on nuclear propulsion would be discontinued and work on nuclear power curtailed. Plum Brook Station of Lewis Research Center would be closed. In aeronautics, quiet, propulsive-lift, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft would be canceled, but technology would continue to be developed. Skylab, space shuttle, Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), Viking, Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, and many applications and aeronautics projects would be retained to continue essential elements for a balanced and productive space and aeronautics program within tight fiscal restraints. NASA also would continue development of a new front fan to reduce jet aircraft engine noise. NASA spokesmen told the press that the cutbacks would trim 700 civil servants from the NASA payrolls and would save the Government $200 million through June 30, 1973. (nasa Release 73-3; W Post, 1/6/73)
The General Accounting Office released Comptroller General!s Report to the Congress: Analysis of Cost Estimates for the Space Shuttle and Two Alternate Programs. The review, made by GAO at the request of Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), said gao was “not convinced that the choice of a launch system should be based principally on cost comparisons” and “not certain that the Space Shuttle is economically justified (is less costly when the time value of money is considered), even though NASA’s calculations show that it is.” Payload cost was the major element in program cost estimates for both the shuttle and alternate use of existing expendable launch vehicles. NASA had estimated $30.2 billion for the shuttle and $50.1 billion for the expendable systems. The $19.9-billion difference was due to estimated low-cost design of shuttle payloads which could be recovered, refurbished, and reused. GAO recommended that Congress “consider the future space missions used in NASA’s economic analysis ... to determine whether these missions are a reasonable basis for space program planning at this time” and “review the estimates for the Space Shuttle annually, giving due consideration to the appropriateness of the missions used in making those estimates.” {CR, 6/8/73, S10703^1)
A New York Times editorial noted that “works aimed at exploring the planets by instruments of the most diverse sort” continued activity after the close of manned exploration of the moon. It commented on the discovery by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists that the Venus equatorial area was dominated by huge craters [see Aug. 5]. (NYT, 8/8/73, 32) Mars 7, which would reach its destination in mid-March 1974, was similar in design and mission to Mars 6. Both spacecraft—intended for exploration of Mars, near-Mars space, and the interplanetary medium— carried Soviet- and French-built scientific equipment. All four Mars probes would carry out research in combination. Tass said Mars 4 would perform experiments using instruments on Mars 6 while Mars 5 would work in conjunction with Mars 7. On Aug. 10, at 4:00 am Baykonur time (7:00 pm edt, Aug. 9), Mars 4 was 6 432 000 km (3 997 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 5, 5 067 000 km (3 148 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 6, 1535 000 km (954 000 mi) from the earth; and Mars 7, 102 000 km (63 000 mi) from the earth. Tass reported that all spacecraft were proceeding according to their programs. A midcourse correction of the Mars 6 trajectory Aug. 13 and of the Mars 7 trajectory Aug. 16 put the flight paths “within the pre-set limits.” Tass said onboard systems of all four probes were functioning normally and measurements were being made of physical characteristics of interplanetary space, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; fbis-Sov, 8/10/73, LI; 8/16/73, LI; 8/17/73, LI; SBD, 8/13/73, 217) August 9:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of identical, parallel, $800 000, 17-mo contracts to Itek Corp. Optical Systems Div. and Perkin-Elmer Corp. for competing preliminary designs and program definition of the Large Space Telescope (lst). The large, multipurpose, orbiting, optical astronomical facility would be launched by the space shuttle, which also would return it to the earth for major maintenance and refurbishment. The LST would use a 3-m (10-ft) primary mirror and—because of its size, quality, and location above the earth’s atmosphere—would be able to resolve objects 10 times smaller and 100 times fainter than those observed by ground telescope, (msfc Release 73—110)
An Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation in space shuttle development was signed in Paris by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. The agreement included European funding and development of the Spacelab for the space shuttle. A NASA-European Space Research Organization (esro) Memorandum of Understanding that supplemented the agreement was initialed by NASA and ESRO representatives in Europe. The memorandum would be signed in Washington, D.C., by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Alexander Hocker, esro Director General, Sept. 24. (nasa Release 73-191; nasa Int Aff)
In its program of international cooperation, NASA launched Anik 2 domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada and Intelsat-IV F—7 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. A significant milestone was the Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation on Spacelab, signed by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. To be funded and developed by nine members of the European Space Research Organization, the Spacelab would be carried into orbit by NASA’s space shuttle orbiter and would accommodate experiments and personnel on missions of 7 to 30 days. Notable progress was made in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, with the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission on schedule for July 1975 launch. Working groups met in both countries and a November Moscow meeting familiarized eight U.S. astronauts with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. Docking system designs were essentially completed and all hardware construction was on schedule. Joint dynamic testing of test units began at Johnson Space Center. Flight crews were selected in both countries. Eighty-three nations entered into Definitive Agreements for intelsat, permanently establishing the global communications satellite system envisioned in the U.S. Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Scientists from other nations cooperated in nasa studies ranging from investigations of the solar system to practical applications of space technology. Erts 1 and Skylab environment and resources data were used throughout the world. Scientists from 37 countries and the United Nations participated in Erts 1 experiments and Brazil and Canada established their own erts data-acquisition facilities. Four foreign experiments were carried on Skylab missions and foreign scientists participated in the Apollo solar telescope program and in correlated astronomy sounding rocket programs. Scientists in 19 countries and the U.N. participated in 40 Skylab data-analysis investigations. German and Australian scientists were coinvestigators for Pioneer 11 experiments and French and U.K. scientists for Mariner 10. Investigators from 40 nations and esro were selected to participate in the Apollo 17 lunar sample program. A joint working group of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and nasa held the third and fourth meetings on space biology and medicine, exchanging information on manned space flight. Parallel communications channels using Intelsat and Molniya comsat systems were planned for 1974 to support the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Direct Communications Link, with construction of earth stations in both countries for access to each other’s satellites. Work went forward for future cooperative satellite projects. Agreement was reached with Italy to fly San Marco C-2 in 1974. Negotiations were underway with West Germany for 1974 launch of the aeros-b aeronomy satellite and work continued on the experimental cts comsat to be launched with Canada, the helios solar probe with Germany, the intasat ionospheric beacon with Spain, the UK—5 stellar x-ray satellite, Canada’s Anik C, and U.K.’s X4 technology spacecraft. Negotiations were also underway on nasa launch services for the French-German Symphonic comsat in 1974 and two ESRO test comsats in 1976 and 1977. The U.S. and esro were about to enter agreement for an air traffic control and navigation satellite system. During the year nasa launched 30 sounding rockets from ranges in other countries, including rockets carrying foreign payloads or cooperative experiments. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, Brazil, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. (Pres Rpt 1974; nasa Release 73-281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74, 2-3) • A burgeoning worldwide energy shortage led President Nixon to propose in June the establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept, of Natural Resources, an Energy Research and Development Administration, and a Nuclear Energy Commission. The shortage reached crisis proportion with the embargo by Arab nations on oil shipments to the U.S. in retaliation for U.S. support to Israel during the October Arab-Israeli war. In a November speech President Nixon noted the U.S. was on the verge of “the most acute shortage of energy since World War II.” He called for reduced use of heat, electricity, and gasoline; announced Federal Government steps to lower energy consumption; asked the Atomic Energy Commission to accelerate licensing and constructing nuclear power plants; and asked for an emergency energy act. Nine energy bills, passed in rapid succession by the first session of the 93rd Congress, included authorizations for mandatory fuel allocation programs, construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, a return to year-round daylight saving time, a speed limit on interstate highways, and the National Emergency Act. Soaring prices of all kinds of fuel, long lines of cars and banned Sunday sales at gas stations, and airline fare increases and schedule cutbacks marked closing months of the year. Economists forecast a possible depression as energy shortages aggravated an already recessed economy. Scientists sought additional sources of fossil fuels and, for the future, new sources of energy to make the U.S. energy-autonomous. The focus turned to NASA and its pioneering expertise in the technologies of solar energy and development of hydrogen as a substitute for gasoline in automobiles and aircraft. At the year’s end pending legislation endorsed NASA cooperation with other appropriate agencies in solving the worldwide energy shortage and in providing the U.S. with future sources of non-fossil-fuel energy. (A&A 1973; Library of Congress, Congr Research Service, Major Legislation of the 93rd Congress; Newsweek, 12/3/73)
New York Federal Court Judge Edward Wienfeld dismissed the $2-million libel suit brought by Dr. W. Ross Adey, Univ. of California at Los Angeles brain research specialist, against New York-based animal welfare organization United Action for Animals [see Jan. 22]. The organization’s bulletin had criticized Dr. Adey’s treatment of Bonny, the instrumented monkey used to measure life functions under weightlessness during the NASA-Air Force Biosatellite 3 experiment (launched June 28, 1969). Judge Wienfeld said that, as a public official, Dr. Adey “must accept harsh criticism, ofttimes unfair and unjustified.” (upi, W Post, 6/27/73, A10) June 26:	Johnson Space Center’s selection of a United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. TF33—P—‘7 engine for use on the space shuttle orbiter in atmospheric flight was announced by NASA. The engine was similar to those used on the Air Force C-141 Starlifter transport aircraft. The USAF would secure 25 engines for NASA use during horizontal flight-testing of the orbiter and for ferry flight when the shuttle was operational, (nasa Release 73-121)
Johnson Space Center had issued a request for proposals for a costplusfixed-fee contract to build two modified aircraft for flight crew training simulating space shuttle operations, NASA announced. Proposals were due Oct. 9, with work to be completed in two and one half years. The shuttle training aircraft (sta) were to simulate space shuttle orb iter flying characteristics, performance, and trajectory during atmospheric flight, (nasa Release 73-194)
Johnson Space Center announced the issuance of requests for proposals to build hydraulic actuators for space shuttle applications and to test them under simulated space conditions. The actuators were being considered for aerodynamics-surface and thrust-vector control on the shuttle. Proposals, leading to a firm-fixed-price research-and-development contract, were due by April 2. Work was to be concluded 12 mos after the contract award, (jsc Release 73-27) March 15-30:	Five U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint working groups met at Johnson Space Center and reached agreements on the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Technical specialists from each country would be in the other country’s control center during the mission and flight crews and specialists would be trained and made familiar with each country’s spacecraft and systems. Under a flammability agreement, the U.S. would provide fire resistant material for the Soviet cosmonauts’ flight clothing; the cosmonauts would use an Apollo headset in the Apollo spacecraft for communications to the Soyuz spacecraft over the Soviet communications link; the Soviet TV camera used in the Apollo spacecraft would be in a fireproof hermetically sealed container; and the still camera and film used by the cosmonauts in Apollo would be stored in a flameproof container. The U.S. would provide a 16 mm camera for Soviet use during docked operations in both Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. Agreements were reached on the prescribed procedure if either country encountered anomalous results during test activities that concerned the other country and on mission planning for rendezvous. The groups agreed that additional testing was required on the docking seals, that the U.S. would limit Apollo control system thrusting in the roll axis to two thrusters to preclude excessive structural loads on the Soyuz spacecraft, and that an additional docking test could be performed on the second day, with the Apollo systems passive and the Soyuz active. Both countries agreed to perform and exchange safety assessments in fire, pyrotechnic devices, cabin pressure, and propulsion and control systems. The 47-man delegation of Soviet scientists and engineers included Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and the Soviet astp Technical Director, Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev. At a March 19 press conference Bushuyev and U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney agreed that cordial, friendly, and cooperative progress was being made in planning the joint mission. Preliminary drawings of the two spacecraft had been exchanged so that mockups could be built. (C. M. Lee presentation to Aerospace Advisory Panel, 4/10/73; msc Release 73-24; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; Wilford, NYT, 3/20-73, 32; jsc pio)
Proposals for developing space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motors (srms) had been received from Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and United Technology Center, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The space shuttle motor program would be conducted in three increments: design, development, and test, ending in September 1979; production of new and refurbished SRMs for 54 flights (108 units) beginning early in 1978; and delivery of new and refurbished units for 385 flights (770 units) beginning in July 1980. (msfc Release 73-125)
The return payload limit on the space shuttle orbiter had been increased 28%, up from 11 300 kg to 14 500 kg (from 25 000 lbs to 32 000 lbs), following system analysis by Rockwell International Corp., Aviation Week & Spcwe Technology reported. The increase could be made without modifying the orbiter structure, by permitting the orbiter to land at a faster speed, and without exceeding the 68 000-kg (150 000-lb) liftoff weight limit. The orbital payload limit remained 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) in easterly orbits and 13 600 (30 000 lbs) in polar orbits. (Av Wk, 11/5/73, 9; nasa omsf)
nasa announced the signing at Johnson Space Center of a $6 618 500 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with ibm Federal Systems Div. to design, develop, and maintain avionics software for the space shuttle orbiter data system. The contract would be effective through April 10, 1975. IBM also was selected by Rockwell International Corp. to develop and produce two other key electronic units for the orbiter—an orbiter general-purpose avionics computer and an input-output unit to work with the computer. The two contracts had raised IBM’s new business in August to nearly $22 million, (nasa Release 73-192)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on cooperation with the Dept, of Defense during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization: nasa and dod were evaluating alternative vehicles to the space tug and development approaches that could provide the capability to transport shutde payloads to and from higher-than-earth orbits, or propel payloads to earth-escape velocity. A joint decision would be made in the fall as to which agency would conduct the development of “this very important propulsive stage.” Air Force personnel had been assigned to the space shuttle program offices, and NASA personnel served in a liaison capacity at the Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso). Civilian and military representatives of DOD served on source evaluation boards and working groups on aerodynamics, structure, propulsion, crew systems, electronics, and operations. dod sponsored special industry and in-house studies such as payload requirements, security, and crew safety, dod also provided results of research in solid rocket technology, lifting bodies, thermal protection, and similar topics. (Transcript)
Kennedy Space Center requested bids from 50 construction firms on the 4600-m (15 000-ft) runway to be built for the space shuttle northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. The runway would be the first facility built in reshaping Launch Complex 39 for its new role in the shuttle program. Bids were to be opened Feb. 22, 1974. (icsc Release 7-74)
Award of a 12-mo, $234 788, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to General Electric Co.’s Valley Forge Space Center to study future earth resources systems was announced by NASA. GE analysts would assist Johnson Space Center’s Earth Resources Program Office in planning projects to be started at the decade’s end. Guidelines would include unique space shuttle contributions to earth resources surveying. The study would focus on hardware and procedures to be developed for use from 1978 to 1982. (nasa Release 73-94)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced receipt of proposals from five firms for a contract for design, procurement, fabrication, installation, and checkout of a data-acquisition system to support space shuttle structural testing. The firms were Avco Corp., Computer Science Corp., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Systems Engineering Laboratories, and Wyle Laboratories. The contract would be awarded in October, (msfc Release 73—107)
Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar announced completion of Phase I of the air-route-control-system automation program. Memphis had been the last of 20 cities to install IBM 9020 computers in a nationwide network system to transfer flight data from one facility to another. The network had 61 automated radar terminal systems (arts), (faa Release 73-32) February 14:	Selection of four firms to negotiate contracts to study systems for the space tug (space shuttle 3rd stage) was announced by Marshall Space Flight Center. General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. each would perform a 10-mo study of a cryogenic tug using liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants. Grumman Aerospace Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. would perform parallel studies of tug using storable propellants, (nasa Release 73—24)
Contractor project definition and cost (Phase B2) studies were begun in Europe on the European Space Research Organization (esro) Spacelab (sortie lab) for NASA’s space shuttle. (NASA Release 73-191)
The House-Senate Conference Committee reported out its compromise Conference Report on H.R. 7528, recommending a $3.065-billion FY 1974 NASA authorization. The Senate agreed to the report, clearing it for House action. The bill provided $2,246 billion for research and development, up $14.5 million from the June 19 Senate-approved authorization but $9 million less than the May 23 House-approved bill. It provided $112 million for construction of facilities, the same as the House authorization but $2 million more than the Senate’s, and $707 million for research and program management, unchanged from the House and Senate versions. The r&d allocation included $555.5 million for space flight operations, $475 million for the space shuttle, $1.5 million for advanced missions, $63.6 million for physics and astronomy, $311 million for lunar and planetary exploration, $177.4 million for launch vehicle procurement, $161 million for space applications, $180 million for aeronautical research and technology (including $14 million for the JT3D refan retrofit research program), $72 million for space and nuclear research and technology, $244 million for tracking and data acquisition, and $4.5 million for technology utilization. Construction of facilities funds included $67.2 million for space shuttle facilities at various locations. (CR, 6/28/73, D773; Rpt 93-272)
A lightweight version of the space shuttle was being refined by Rockwell International Corp.’s North American Aerospace Group for the major systems requirement milestone, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The lightweight version, with a gross liftoff weight of 1.86 million kg (4.10 million lbs), was scaled down in size from the previous baseline configuration, which had a gross liftoff weight of 2.38 million kg (5.25 million lbs). It had the same maximum payload capability of 29 480 kg (65 000 lbs). The major weight reduction had been achieved by switching to a more efficient double delta wing on the orbitor. Also, a newly designed external fuel tank, which could be separated from the vehicle before orbital velocity was reached, would eliminate the need for a solid-fueled-rocket deorbit motor on the nose of the tank. The solid-fueled boosters were also redesigned to a lighter weight. (Av Wk, 4/16/73, 18-19)
NASA announced the selection of Thiokol Corp. for negotiation of a $106million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for design, development, test, and evaluation of the solid-fueled rocket motors for the space shuttle. The six-year contract would run through 1979. (nasa Release 73-258)
Appointment of Dr. Myron S. Malkin, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Technical Evaluation), as Director of the State Shuttle Program in the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight effective April 9, was announced by NASA. Malkin would be responsible for planning and directing the design, development, and test of the space shuttle system. (nasa Release 73-68)
The Soviet research ship Professor Vize sailed from Leningrad with 60 scientists from Soviet weather service centers on an expedition to collect data on ionizing radiation of the sun and its influence on the upper stratosphere. During the two-month project the scientists would observe the June 30 solar eclipse, launch a series of high-altitude research rockets with onboard measuring instruments and photo equipment, and take deep measurements of the Atlantic Ocean. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 6/1/73, May 30:	The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 7528, a $3.046-billion FY 1974 nasa authorization bill, $28 million lower than the $3.074-billion House bill passed May 23. The Senate authorization—$30 million above NASA’s requested $3,016 billion—would be NASA’s lowest since FY 1962 and the lowest percentage of the total Federal budget—less than 1.2%—in 12 yrs. It would provide $2,231 billion for research and development, $34 million more than NASA’s request but $24 million less than the House bill; $110 million for construction of facilities, as requested but $2 million less than the House bill; and $705 million for research and program management, as requested but down $2 million from the House bill. The Senate Committee would retain Skylab funding at NASA’s requested $233 million and space shuttle funding at $475 million. It concurred with the House addition of $7 million for Earth Resources Technology Satellite program funding and added $5 million to space applications funding to replace NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft, lost in an April 12 crash. (CR, 5/30/73, S9866; S Rpt 93-179)
Selection of 36 scientists, representing 27 organizations and 4 countries, to define experiments for the Large Space Telescope to be launched by the space shuttle in the 1980s was announced by NASA. The instrument evaluation teams had been selected after evaluation of 118 proposals submitted to NASA’s Space Science and Applications Steering Committee. (nasa Release 73-109)
NASA’s 15th anniversary year—memorable for advances in earth resources technology, aeronautics progress, expanded international cooperation in space, and increased promise for future manned and unmanned planetary exploration—boosted the U.S. space program from the spectacular orbit of Apollo lunar exploration to a steady program of extended service to science and mankind. Skylab’s triumph heralded the approach of the shuttle era that would weld with the earth the vast regions of near-earth space, extending man’s transportation system into regions beyond land, sea, and air. The newest Pioneer probes began penetration into the mysteries of outer planetary space. Budget restrictions in line with President Nixon’s January 1250-billion target for total Government spending slowed space shuttle manpower buildup, suspended work on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory, and required phase-out of communications satellite work and curtailment of work on nuclear propulsion. But Skylab, the space shuttle, the scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the Viking, the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, and many applications and aeronautics projects were retained in a balanced and productive program. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for the past seven years and member of the NASA staff since October 1958, retired at the end of the year. Dr. Newell had been Science Program Coordinator in the Nation’s first satellite program, the Naval Research Laboratory’s Project Vanguard, before establishment of NASA. Tight funding and the near completion of the Skylab missions brought a net reduction in NASA Civil Service employees of 1646, including retirements, during the calendar year, with a total 25 598 on board Jan. 5, 1974. Headquarters employees dropped by a net change of 80, Kennedy Space Center by 117, Johnson Space Center by 110, Marshall Space Flight Center by 374, Ames Research Center by 49, Flight Research Center by 13, Langley Research Center by 62, Lewis Research Center by 494 (with the phasing down of Plum Brook Station), Goddard Space Flight Center by 289, and Wallops Station by 14. aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office was closed with the end of the nerva program. Further reductions of 628—including 405 at msfc and 200 at LeRC—were scheduled in 1974, to bring the FY 1974 end-of-year total to the required 24 970 ceiling. Aerospace industry employment in the Nation increased to 946 000 in June but declined to 935 000 by the year’s end. Techniques developed for aerospace activities were applied to earthquake prediction, development of residential solar heating, and fuelsaving integrated systems for housing. NASA added 550 technical briefs to its more than 5000 technical innovations already available for U.S, industry use. More than 68 000 U.S. industrial and commercial firms requested additional data on these innovations. Some 3000 firms spent $625 000 for special assistance from nasa’s Regional Dissemination Centers; 1500 firms purchased 1891 computer programs and related documentation for $221 530. NASA liberalized its patent-licensing procedures to speed technology transfer and during 1973 five exclusive patent licenses, the largest number since the program’s inception, were granted. A nasa liaison office was opened in New York City to work directly with city agencies on public safety, drug detection, and fire prevention. A rechargeable heart pacemaker was developed under nasa auspices by the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Electronic components designed for space use were incorporated in the device, which could be recharged at home by the patient, eliminating the need for surgery every two years to replace conventional devices. A new radio transmitter temperature pill allowed doctors to check localized internal body temperature changes. A portable visual testing device permitted early detection of eye disorders. A test hospital room for paralyzed patients used space-developed devices for remote operation of communications systems and appliances. The nasa FY 1974 appropriation of $3,002 billion was $13.9 million below the budget request, $62.4 million below the $3.0645-billion FY 1973 authorization, and $406 million below the FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion. (A&A 1972; A&A 1973; Aerospace, 2/74, 6-11; nasa Off Comptroller; nasa Off of Admin; NASA SP-5119; nasa Release 73281)
Mobile launcher 3, used for five manned Apollo/Saturn V launches, was being deactivated at Kennedy Space Center. A task team of NASA and contractor employees, organized by the icsc Support Operations Directorate, was removing and storing reusable equipment from the platform that was two stories high, 49 m (160 ft) long, 41 m (135 ft) wide. Nine swing arms had already been removed; other items to go included an acceptance checkout equipment room; a computer station; racks of electronic, timing and communications gear; and instrument cables. Cable salvage alone was expected to cover half the deactivation cost. With completion of deactivation in mid-1974, equipment worth millions would have been salvaged for future use in space shuttle and other programs. The basic launcher structure would be modified for use in space shuttle launches, (ksc Release 288—73)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics continued hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, identified locations for space shuttle development: Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., as the launch and landing sites; NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility for the external tank production; and the Rockwell International Corp. facility at Downey, Calif., for orbiter and systems integration. “The major unknown, at the moment, is where the solid rocket boosters will be produced and tested. We expect that this location will be identified when the solid fueled rocket booster contract is awarded this November.” Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in omsf, contrasted a typical operational communications satellite program using expendable launch vehicles with one using the space shuttle. Launched on the Titan IIIB-Centaur launch vehicle, each spacecraft was estimated at 467 kg (1030 lbs). To fulfill 1979-1990 requirements for reliable communications services, 26 spacecraft would be required. Use of the Titan IIIB-Centaur would require 26 new spacecraft and 26 new launch vehicles, at an average cost for each flight of $25.8 million. “If the same program is carried out using the Shuttle and Tug, the cost changes significantly. First, with the Shuttle we can apply the low cost approaches to payload design. We are no longer constrained by weight limitations; therefore, we can ruggedize the spacecraft structure, simplify the design and verification test program, and thus reduce both development and unit spacecraft cost.” The shuttle and tug combination could deploy and retrieve 2 satellites on a single flight, making 13 flights to deploy 26 spacecraft—10 new and 16 refurbished. On 8 of these flights 2 spacecraft would be deployed and retrieved. “The total cost for conducting the program would be $14.9 million per spacecraft flight, compared to the $25.8 million for the expendable approach—a savings of 42 percent.” m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, discussed disposition of facilities at Lewis Research Center’s Plum Rrook Station, which would he closed because of FY 1974 budget cuts. LeRC was discussing the station’s availability and capability with potential user agencies—including the Electric Research Council, which planned to establish an electric power research institute, and the Eusi-ness and Employment Council of the Governor of Ohio, which had recommended establishment of a state-funded Ohio Development Center. LeRC was studying possible use of the station’s reactor for environmental research by the Environmental Protection Agency. The Plum Rrook space power facility was being prepared to test the shroud for NASA’s Viking spacecraft but “there are no additional programmatic needs for the use of this facility and it is anticipated that it will be placed in a standby mode by the end of Fiscal Year 1974.” (Transcript)
President Nixon sent a $268.7-billion FY 1974 national budget request to Congress—an increase of $18.9 billion over FY 1973. The budget projection for the succeeding fiscal year was included for first time, with the FY 1975 budget estimated at $288 billion. The national total for FY 1974 included an R&D budget of $17.4 billion (an increase of $300 million), with $3.1 billion requested for civilian and military space programs. Emphasis was on practical, immediate results from R&D rather than expanding scientific knowledge, with reduced priority for space research. The total request for NASA new obligational authority of $3,016 billion (1.2% of the total U.S. budget) was $391 million less than the FY 1973 noa of $3,407 billion. FY 1973 funds of $91 million were to be carried over to FY 1974. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase $74 million, from $3,062 billion in FY 1973 to $3,136 billion. The FY 1973 increase of $11 million had been largely for space shuttle engine and airframe design and development. Of the FY 1974 budget request, $2,288 billion would go for R&D, $112 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. In manned space flight, elimination of Apollo funding reflected successful completion of the Apollo program with the Apollo 17 mission. Manned space flight operations—including $233.8 million for Skylab; $90 million for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) ; $220.2 million for development, test, and mission operations; $21 million for space life sciences; and $15.5 million for mission systems and integration— would decrease from $879 million in FY 1973 to $580.5 million. The decrease reflected removal of space shuttle funding from the manned spacecraft operations category to separate program status. The FY 1974 budget request allocated $475 million to the space shuttle program for the orbiter, main engine, solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tanks, technology and related development, and vehicle and engine definition. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring the total for manned space flight (including the shuttle) to $1,057 billion, down $100 million from FY 1973. Funding for space science programs would decrease $95.2 million, from $679.2 million in FY 1973 to $584 million in FY 1974. The decrease reflected suspension of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program, in which two flights had originally been scheduled during 1976-1978. The physics and astronomy program would receive $95 million, down from $126.2 million; lunar and planetary exploration would receive $312 million, down from $331.9 million; and launch vehicle procurement would receive $177 million, down from $221 million. NASA’s space applications programs would receive $153 million (a decrease of $35.7 million), including $51 million for weather and climate research with satellites, meteorological soundings, experimental instruments and techniques, and for the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $13.9 million for pollution monitoring, including $9 million for Nimbus-G oceanographic and air pollution observation satellite; $42.6 million for earth resources survey; $10.7 million for earth and ocean physics; $3.1 million for space processing; $22.1 million for communications, including a multi-use communications experiment satellite (ats-f) and a Canadian Cooperative Satellite (cas-c) ; $3 million for a multidisciplinary Earth Observing Satellite (eos) ; $4.5 million for shuttle experiment definition; and $2 million for application studies. The total requested for NASA’s aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $232.5 million in FY 1973 to $240 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $150.6 million in FY 1973 to $171 million, including $22 million for experimental engine programs, $9.3 million for flight experiment programs, and $30 million for system technology programs. Space research and technology would receive $65 million, and nuclear power and propulsion $4 million (a drop from $17.1 million). Tracking and data acquisition funding would rise from $248.3 million in FY 1973 to $250 million. The Dept, of Defense FY 1974 budget of $85 billion was at an1 all-time high,	$4.1	billion above the	FY 1973 budget	authority, but was 28.4% of	total Federal outlays for	FY 1974 (a	percentage decrease from 29.0% in FY 1973 and the lowest proportion since 1950) and 6.0% of the	gross	national product	(the lowest	GNP	percentage in 24 yrs, down	from	6.2% in FY 1973). The dod	total	included $8.7 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation (rdt&e), a $600 million increase over FY 1973. Of the requested rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, the first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, a prototype satellite to demonstrate precise navigation capabilities, continued flight experiment programs, and technology programs in advanced navigation, guidance, sensors, cooling, reentry, and propulsion—would receive $604.6 million (up $169.9 million). Military sciences would receive $509.8 million (up $13.7 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,787 billion (down $86 million), and missiles rdt&e $2,245 billion (up $143 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for the Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile system ($1,712 billion, up $917 million), new Air Force F—4J jet fighter aircraft ($131 million), CVN-70 aircraft carrier ($657 million, up $358 million) and F-15 air superiority fighter ($1,148 billion, up $240 million). Decreases of $198 million in funding for the Safeguard antiballistic missile system, $208 million for the Poseidon missile, and $64 million for the short-range attack missile (sram) reflected a modernization program, as dod continued the transition from combat support in Southeast Asia to strengthening baseline forces. The Dept, of Transportation budget request of $9,025 billion was a decrease of $2,302 billion from FY 1973. dot funding would continue a 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration funding of $2,126 billion would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect the upper atmosphere, and design a safer and more productive airport system. The Atomic Energy Commission FY 1974 budget request of $3,066 billion, up $382 million over FY 1973, would cover production of nuclear materials to make electricity and for use in nuclear weapons and as nuclear reactor fuel, research into availability of source materials, operation safety, and development of techniques for long-term storage of radioactive waste. The National Science Foundation FY 1974 budget request of $582.6 million was down $63.1 million from FY 1973, but r&d funding would increase from $510.3 million in FY 1973 to $554.1 million. Programs would emphasize research into domestic problems, problems of long-range national interest, and effects of R&D on the economy. Priorities would include development of solar power as an energy source and of tunneling technology for urban use under the Research Applied to National Needs (rann) program and development of a very-large-array radioastronomy facility. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (in the Dept, of Commerce) budget request of $343.0 million, down from $366.7 million in FY 1973, would permit continued improvements in weather monitoring, prediction, and warning; continuation of its polar orbiting satellite system and implementation of a two-geostationary satellite system in the weather satellite program; major hurricane modification research; and expansion of research on marine ecosystems analysis to determine effects of ocean dumping. The Environmental Protection Agency budget request of $148.7 million was down from $173.1 million in FY 1973. (omb, Budget of the US Govt, FY 1974; US Budget in Brief; Special Analysis; nasa budget briefing transcript; DOD Release 44-73; AIAA Release 73—3; nsf Release 73-106)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced the award of a $1 375 484 costnofee contract to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for technical support for guidance, navigation, and control in the space shuttle program. The Laboratory would develop and evaluate mission requirements, integration of guidance, navigation, and control with avionics and the shuttle, failure detection, navigation techniques, and guidance policies, (msc Release 73-11) January 27:	NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying a Norwegian Defense Research Establishment magnetospheric physics experiment. Preliminary data indicated that the rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) January 28:	Japan launched four-stage rocket from Uchinoura Space Center to test orbiting techniques. (AP, NYT, 1/29/73, 3)
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for proposals for space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motor (srm) development to Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and United Technology Center. Technical proposals were due Aug. 27 and cost proposals Aug. 30. The program would include increments for design, development, and test (including production of sufficient hardware for six development flights) ; for production of new and refurbished SRMs for 54 flights; and for delivery of new and refurbished units for 385 flights., (nasa Release 73-133)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held a hearing on the General Accounting Office’s June 1 report on space shuttle program costs. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator Willis H. Shapley testified: “nasa believes that the results of our cost benefit analyses are important and valid elements supporting the decision to develop the Space Shuttle, even though the principal justification for the Space Shuttle is in the new capabilities it will provide. In our view, the GAO review, which we welcome as an independent review and check of what we have attempted to do, has not found or demonstrated any substantial reasons for questioning the correctness of the decision which has been made to proceed with the development of the Space Shuttle.” The Subcommittee concluded, following their testimony by NASA and Gao representatives: “a. The five noneconomic issues cited by gao ‘ as major considerations in the decision to develop a space shuttle are valid and proper elements in the original decision to proceed and in the future evaluation of the progress and pace of space shuttle development, b. Cost, performance and schedule goals and estimates are both a valid and essential element in the decision making process of the Congress and the GAO studies in these areas . . . must have sufficient depth to encompass all major cost considerations, c. The fragmentary arguments with respect to costs advanced by GAO reports are so incomplete as to fail to validate the GAO conclusions drawn from them. d. That GAO should continue review of the space shuttle program development in conjunction with the legislative and oversight activities of the responsible committees of Congress with emphasis on evaluation of cost, performance and schedule as the space shuttle development program progresses.” (Transcript)
President Nixon announced the designation of Robert D. Timm Chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board, effective March 2. He would succeed retiring Secor D. Browne. The President also accepted the resignation of the first NASA Administrator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, as U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency. He submitted to the Senate the nomination of Alexander P. Butterfield to be Federal Aviation Administrator. (PD, 2/26/73, 189, 244; 3/5/73, 192) February 26-March 3: The nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine met in Moscow to exchange information on preliminary biomedical results of the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7—9, 1972) and Soviet research in weightlessness modeling. The Group agreed on common procedures to test body negative pressure, to make active orthostatic evaluations, and to make biochemical blood and urine studies, permitting comparison of pre- and postflight data on body functions. The Group also discussed biological experiments in space and countermeasures to weightlessness. The U.S. delegation—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences— visited Soviet medical research facilities and the Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training. They examined spacecraft trainers, medical equipment used for cosmonaut training and evaluation, and medical instrumentation used on Salyut spacecraft. The Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. R. N. Gurovsky. The next meeting would be held in the U.S. in late 1973 or early 1974. (nasa Release 73-79) February 27:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 4567, House version of the $3.016-billion NASA FY 1974 authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said the “historic accomplishments of the Apollo program” were “an open record and an enduring tribute to a basic belief in human progress. The Apollo flights, in three short years, gave us an order of magnitude increase in our knowledge of the solar system. Although the epic Apollo voyages have ended, the results of these missions will provide the scientific, the technical, and medical, and the managerial communities with a rich store of data that will be studied and analyzed for many years to come.” NASA had completed the Apollo program and “moved from the era of learning how to live and work in space to a new plateau, where this Nation can utilize space and its unique capabilities for expanding its horizons in science and in applications, in defense, commercial activities and in international cooperation at reduced costs.” Skylab—scheduled for May launch—would be the “first post-Apollo step into the intensive utilization of space” and toward reorienting manned space activities to earth orbit. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) , scheduled for July 1975 launch, would be “a major step forward in meaningful and beneficial international cooperation in manned space flight” and a significant step in space safety and in reducing costs by cooperation. Later, the space shuttle would provide “ample additional opportunities for meaningful technical and economic cooperation in space.” One opportunity would be to carry sortie, lab being developed by group of European nations using their own funds. Closing out of Apollo activity would include “very careful screening of available production tooling for applicability to future shuttle or other NASA requirements.” Available flight articles included two Saturn V and two Saturn IB launch vehicles, one completed command and service module, two partially assembled csms, and a backup Skylab cluster. This hardware would he placed in storage for potential use. (Transcript)
Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass.), Chairman of the House Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans, introduced H.R. 8825, FY 1974 HUD-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation bill that included a $2.989-billion NASA appropriation—$2,194 billion for research and development, $87.8 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. The bill would cut NASA’s requested $2,197 billion for r&d by $3 million and the $112 million requested for construction of facilities by $24.2 million. Research and program management funding would remain at NASA’s requested $707 million. The Subcommittee had reduced NASA’s requested $28 million for supersonic flight research to $11.7 million; strongly urged NASA to continue advanced nuclear technology development “within the total funds provided in this appropriation”; urged NASA to reprogram funds to launch ERTS—B as early as possible if the malfunction in Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) continued to degrade performance; urged continued development of the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft “to insure American competitiveness in this largely underdeveloped area of commercial aviation”; and allocated $2.5 million to replace NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft (lost in an April 12 mid-air collision). Reductions in construction of facilities funding would defer amounts for space shuttle facilities construction. (CR, 6/19/73, H4994, H Rpt 93296)
U.S.S.R. sounding rocket launchings, first step in joint Soviet-French meteorological studies, had begun from French Kerguelen Island, Tass reported. The first rocket had studied a vertical cross-section of the atmosphere over the island and reported temperature, pressure, and wind velocity in the upper atmosphere. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/9/73, LI) March 7:	Elements of the space shuttle preliminary bioresearch laboratory simulator had been delivered to Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. Equipment would be installed aboard the payload carrier simulator for testing. The bioresearch laboratory model, the first shuttle-era payload to be delivered for testing and integration at msfc, included a mass-measurement and microscopy unit, preparation unit, centrifuge, cryogenic freezer for storage of tissue, and an instrument for freeze-drying tissue, (msfc Release 73-31)
The House, by a vote of 315 to 21, approved H.R. 8825, FY 1974 Dept. of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation [see June 19]. A point of order was overruled, to block an amendment by Rep. Bella S. Abzug (D-N.Y.) that would have cut $475 million in NASA research and development funds and forbid any funding for the space shuttle. (CR, 6/22/73, H5191-5238)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D—Wash.), introduced S. 2782 to establish a National Energy Information System, to authorize the Dept, of the Interior to undertake an inventory of U.S. energy resources on public lands and elsewhere, and for other purposes. (CR, 12/6/7.3, S22002) December 7:	A major reorganization plan that included two key directorates at Johnson Space Center had been announced by Dr. Christopher C.	Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, the jsc Roundup reported. Effective immediately, the reorganization would not be implemented fully until February 1974. Flight Crew Operations and Flight Operations would be combined into a new Flight Operations Directorate devoted entirely to space flight and aircraft activities. A new Data Systems and Analysis Directorate would provide institutional and programmatic data systems and analysis and the onboard software for the space shuttle. Pilot astronauts in the former Flight Crew Operations Directorate would be assigned to the Astronaut Office in the new Flight Operations Directorate. Scientist-astronauts would be assigned to Astronaut Offices in the Science and Applications and Life Sciences Directorates. Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht and Flight Control Div. Chief Eugene K. Kranz would be Director and Deputy Director of the new Flight Operations Directorate. They also would continue in their present assignments through completion of the Skylab program. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would be Chief of the Flight Control Astronaut Office. Howard W. Tindall, Jr., and Lynwood C. Dunseith had been named Director and Deputy Director of the Data Systems and Analysis Directorate. Astronaut Owen K. Garriott was Deputy to Director Anthony J. Calio of the Science and Applications Directorate; Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt would be Chief of the Science and Applications Astronaut Office. Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin would be Chief of the Life Sciences Astronaut Office, which also would include astronaut physicians F. Story Musgrave and William E. Thornton. In addition to their duties as space shuttle crew candidates, Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Eugene A. Ceman had been assigned duties in project management. Haise would be Technical Assistant to the Space Shuttle Orbiter Project Manager, Duke would be Technical Assistant to the Acting Manager for Space Shuttle Systems Integration, and Cernan would be Special Assistant to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Manager. Of 37 astronauts on active flight status, 26 were pilots. Of these, 16 would participate in space shuttle activities; 10 had been assigned to the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Eight scientist-astronauts would work in the Science and Applications Office, and three in Life Sciences. (Roundup, 12/7/Ti, 1)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight transmitted Space Shuttle— Skylab, 1973: Status Report (dated January 1973) to its parent House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The report covered the transition from detailed design to development phase of NASA’s shuttle program (in which the first manned flight was planned for 1978) and the updated cost, performance, and status of the Skylab program (to be completed in 1973). The Subcommittee concluded that technology and resources existed for successful development of the NASA configuration for an earth-orbital shuttle and that the shuttle design would permit the total development cost to stay within $5.15 billion and the per-flight operational cost within $10.5 million. Success in meeting this cost was “particularly sensitive” to the cost of the hydrogen-oxygen tanks and an acceptable recoverable and refurbishment cost of the solid-fueled rocket boosters. Space tug development was “of key importance to gaining full utility of the space shuttle.” Development of a low-cost space shuttle system was essential “if the nation is to realize the full benefits of near space in . . . scientific exploration, practical application, and national security.” The Skylab program was within costs projected by NASA for FY 1973. Development schedules were being met “with some problems being encountered in procuring and integrating experiments.” NASA was recommended to consider the possibility of flying Skylab in the 19741976 period and also possible Skylab revisits after the first three manned missions. (Text)
The House passed H.R. 7528, the $3.074-billion nasa FY 1974 authorization bill [see May 9], by a vote of 322 to 73. Rejected were a motion to recommit the bill to the Committee on Science and Astronautics, an amendment by Rep. Bella S. Abzug (D—N.Y.) to delete $567 million for space shuttle programs, and an amendment by Rep. John Conyers, Jr. (D-Mich.), to prohibit use of tracking and data acquisition funds in South Africa because of South Africa’s apartheid policy. (CR, 5/23/73, H3921-51)
Johnson Space Center announced it had authorized Rockwell International Corp. to modify a building at Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, Calif., for final assembly, system installations, and checkout stations for two space shuttle orbiters. The modifications would be made under an existing cost-reimbursement-no-fee contract and would bring total contract value to $6 000 000. (jsc Release 73-137)
The National Science Foundation published Federal Funds for Research, Development and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1971, 1972, and 1973 (nsf 72-317). The FY 1973 budget had indicated an upward trend since 1970 in Federal research and development support. The Federal r&d obligation total was expected to rise from $15.5 billion in FY 1971 to an estimated $16.8 billion in FY 1972 and to an all-time high of $17.8 billion in FY 1973. Of the $970-million increase in R&D obligations scheduled for FY 1973, the Dept, of Defense accounted for $400 million and NASA and the Atomic Energy Commission $67 million each. The three agencies made up more than 50% of the 1973 growth. (Text) February 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced establishment of the Large Space Telescope Task Force to direct planning and preliminary design of the lst to be launched by the space shuttle in the 1980s. The lst—to be capable of looking at galaxies 100 times farther than those seen by the most powerful ground-based telescope—would study energy processes that occurred in galactic nuclei, study early stellar and solar system stages, and observe supernova remnants and white dwarfs. The lst Task Force would be managed by James A. Downey III, Associate Director for Science in the Program Development Directorate, (msfc Release 73-15)
The April 6 announcement of the discovery of a distant quasar had strengthened the growing theory among astronomers that they had seen the edge of the universe, Walter Sullivan said in the New York Times. The implication was that, as Einstein believed, the universe was finite. “Beyond its expanding volume, . . . nothing exists—not even space, because, in this concept, over such great distances space curves back upon itself.” By determining the rate at which a quasar was flying away from the earth, astronomers could estimate its distance in terms of the time its light had traveled to the earth. The universe appeared to have originated in a “big bang” some 13 billion yrs ago, and the earliest quasars should be visible far enough away for their light to have been traveling earthward for that long. “But looking across vast distances—and hence, far back into time—man can see out only to 12 billion years (in the most distant quasars).” Hale Observatory astronomer Dr. Alan R. Sandage had said that in these quasars astronomers were seeing “the edge of the world.” Astronomers had long suspected the existence of some sort of wall preventing them from seeing quasars in the region beyond 12 billion yrs. “Now it is beginning to look as though the ‘wall’ is real.” (NYT, 4/8/73, 63) April 8-23:	Lunokhod 2 (landed on the moon by Luna 21 Jan. 16) began its fourth lunar day in the Sea of Serenity near the Le Monnier Crater with the activation of its solar battery. All onboard systems functioned normally after the third lunar night. During an April 9 session cosmic ray characteristics were researched, magnetic measurements made, and panoramic photos of the parking site were taken. Lunokhod 2 was brought to an area in the eastern part of the crater where a layer of basalt lava was bisected by a fissure 16 km (10 mi) long and i00 m (328 ft) deep in some places, to study the chemical composition and magnetic properties of the lunar rock in the fissure. Ledge rocks aided Lunokhod 2’s movement. The vehicle did not stick in the loose ground and its velocity could be increased. On April 17 the lunar vehicle was halted to replenish electric power reserves before making a complex trip around the fissure. On April 23 Lunokhod 2 was parked for the lunar night after covering 11 km (7 mi). (Moscow Domestic Service, fbis-Sov, 4/9/73, LI; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/11/73, L1-L2; 4/16/73, LI; 4/18/73, LI; Reuters, NYT, 4/23/73, 43) April 9:	Appointments of Philip E. Culbertson as Director of the new Mission and Payload Integration Directorate in the Office of Manned Space Flight and of Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.) as Deputy Director of the Advanced Programs Directorate, OMSF, were announced by NASA. Culbertson, formerly Director of Advanced Manned Missions, would be responsible for planning, direction, and coordination of payload activity and for management of the interface between users and the space shuttle, sortie lab, and tug. Freitag would participate in planning future manned space flight systems and in early development work, (nasa Hq WB, 4/9/73, 6)
Johnson Space Center announced the award of a $1 947 000 costplusfixedfee contract to Chrysler Corp. to distribute and document wind-tunnel data for space shuttle development, (jsc Release 73—50)
Former nasa scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Hampshire College astronomer, criticized manned space flight spending in a New York Times article: “The spectacular problems of the $2.5-billion Skylab mission and the failure of the first three Soviet Salyut space stations may have dealt a death blow to manned space flight. The enormous expense, the high risk, the much-ballyhooed and grossly exaggerated claims about the pertinence of manned earth orbital flights to the quality of life on earth are creating an ever-widening credibility gap between the public interest and a vested interest inherited from the space of the nineteen-sixties. The result is the squandering of public funds.” He suggested “indefinite postponement of the space shuttle program, a reduction in excessive NASA management costs and the establishment of a moderate unmanned space program emphasizing space science and applications” on a less than $2-billion budget. (NYT, 6/5/73, 39)
The Air Force announced issuance of a $1 358 695, firm-fixed-price contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for special tooling for F-4 jet fighter aircraft, (dod Release 20-73) January 10—12:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 11th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in Washington, D.C. The Dry-den Research Award winner for 1973, Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Laboratory Space Sciences Div., delivered the Dryden Lecture “High Energy Astronomy.” The lecture, which carried $1000 honorarium, had been named in 1967 in honor of the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first nasa Deputy Administrator, who died in 1965. Dr. Friedman said high-energy astronomy was “almost exclusively the subject of space research.” X-ray astronomy to date had revealed about 125 discrete sources and a “diffuse background which spans the energy range from 100 ev to tens of Mev.” X-ray sources revealed included supernova remnants, pulsars, and binary systems in the galaxy. Extragalactic sources included radio galaxies, quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and clusters of galaxies. Gamma ray astronomy had shown “no evidence for antimatter within the universe.” (Program; Text) A committee established by aiaa to evaluate NASA’s space shuttle program reported its conclusion that a shuttle system, including both manned and unmanned flight, ought to be built. The committee recommended a research and applications module system with interchangeable modules that could be removed in space to become part of an orbiting laboratory. Other nations should be encouraged to participate in shuttle development, the committee said. (Tech Rev, 5/73, 55) Advanced applications of the shuttle were discussed by J. E. Blahnik of Science Applications, Inc., and D. R. Davis of ITT Research Institute. An exploratory study had concluded that use of the shuttle orbiter for advanced, manned, high-energy missions from low earth orbit should be competitive with other proposed concepts, if orbital and refueling requirements were satisfied by using normal shuttle missions to deliver propellant in addition to their payload. (Program) January 10—13:	The American Astronomical Society met in Las Cruces, N. Mex. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. Robert Howard said six-year observations through the 46-m (150-ft) solar telescope at Mt. Wilson Observatory had shown sections of the sun’s outer atmosphere to be in motion with respect to time. Movements had extended to 259 000 sq km (100 000 sq mi) of photosphere—the sun’s gassy surface—and had appeared to be east-west or west-east. Some motions had been calculated at 6257 km per hr (3888 mph) ; others, at 7300 km per hr (4536 mph). Cause and significance of the motion were unknown. At a press interview Dr. John C. Brandt, chief of the Goddard Space Flight Center Solar Physics Laboratory, said Indians in New Mexico, Arizona, and California nine centuries ago might have recorded a star explosion. Drawings on walls and ceilings of a cave at Chaco Canyon National Monument, N. Mex., closely resembled an explosion of July 4, 1054, as recorded by the Chinese. Similar drawings had been found in Arizona and California. (Alexander, LA Times, 1/11/73; AP, W Post, 1/14/73, A13) January 11:	Cosmos 543 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 309-km (192.0-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 24. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; SBD, 1/12/73, 54)
“We hope that through astute improvisations much of the Skylab I mission can be salvaged. Yet if it has to be scrubbed, then NASA should be encouraged to go ahead with backup plans to send a second space laboratory into earth orbit next year.” NASA could find the money “if it is prepared to cut back or postpone other activities, including the controversial $14 billion space shuttle program. . . . While space shuttles can operate independently, they will approach their full potential only when they can rendezvous with orbital space stations or laboratories.” (B Sun, S/YI/1Z, A18)
Award of a $19 500 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for design, construction, and testing of an electromagnetic pulse simulator for testing large aircraft systems was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 190-73) April 16-17:	A joint meeting on the space shuttle Sortie Lab/Spacelab Project at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center was attended by 20 representatives of the European Space Research Organization (esro) , European Space Research and Technology Center (estec), and European space consortiums headed by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH and erno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH. The group was briefed by NASA on the space shuttle and Skylab programs, concept verification testing, and the msfc sortie lab activities. The consortiums presented a summary of European Spacelab studies, (msfc Release 7344)	. Dr. Bruce Murray, Cal Tech astronomer and principal TV investigator of the Mariner 9 mission (launched May 30, 1971), disputed the theory that ancient floods on Mars had carved the huge canyons shown in the Mariner 9 photos. “Mars’ atmosphere, which, at present, is only one-hundredth as dense as the earth’s, very probably never has been dense enough for water to run on the planet’s surface.” There might have been times “when Mars had virtually no atmosphere at all.” (NYT, 4/22/73, 31; Swaim, Pasadena Star-News, 4/22/73) April 17:	NASA announced the signing of a definitive contract with Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Div. for design, development, and production of the orbiter vehicle and for the integration of all space shuttle system elements.-The cost-reimbursement, fixed-fee, and award-fee contract would have a $477 400 000 initial increment. The contract superseded an Aug. 9, 1972, letter contract and would continue through Aug. 3, 1974. A second work increment—the balance of design, development, test, and evaluation, plus delivery of two orbiters—was planned to begin Aug. 4, 1974. Rockwell planned to subcontract to firms and suppliers in almost every state. (NASA Release 73-76)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
Some members of Congress were urging a second series of Skylab missions beginning in 1976, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The purpose would be to avoid the hiatus in manned space exploration between the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission in 1975 and the first orbital flight of the space shuttle in 1978. Dr. James Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had estimated the cost of a second Skylab series at less than $1 billion if the same experiments were flown. Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), would try to add funds for a second Skylab to nasa’s FY 1974 authorization. (Av Wk, 3/12/73, 16)
NASA announced the selection of Grumman Aerospace Corp. for negotiation of a contract to modify two Gulf stream II aircraft for crew trainers for the space shuttle orbiter, The contractor’s proposed cost was $19.5 million, (nasa Release 73—278)
Johnson Space Center was evaluating a Lockheed Aircraft Corp. proposal to test the feasibility of using a G-5A aircraft to ferry the space shuttle orbiter. Lockheed had proposed to mount a scale model of the orbiter in latest configuration on a C-5A scale model for tests in its low-speed- tunnel, (nasa Release 73-193)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
Military and aerospace expenditures in the laser field were expected to average about $317 million annually in the next five years, according to a study by technological market research organization Frost & Sullivan, Inc., the New York Times reported. The FY 1973 laser market would be about $290 million, more than double earlier estimates. Operational thermal (laser) weapons were probably 10 yrs in the future, but prototype experiments were expected to be made by 1975. Technology had progressed to high-energy, gas-dynamic lasers that produced light beams when their internal gases were heated, expanded, and forced through small nozzles at supersonic speeds. The laser’s most notable military contribution thus far had been bombs directed through the air toward targets illuminated by laser lights. A new system, target-recognition attack (tram), was being developed to spot targets day and night with an infrared detector bore-sighted with a laser range finder to illuminate the target. (Middleton, NYT, 9/13/73, E22) September 13-October 17:	Ames Research Center conducted a five-week experiment to determine the effects of weightlessness and reentry into earth gravity on female space shuttle passengers. The experiment, with 12 Air Force nurse volunteers participating, was a follow-on to similar studies on men made in 1972. Following two weeks of orientation and medical studies, eight of the nurses would simulate weightlessness with absolute bedrest while four acted as ambulatory controls. After two weeks of immobility, the eight would be subjected to g forces expected when the shuttle entered the atmosphere at a mission’s end. The final week would be for recovery and testing, (arc Release 73-107; arc Biomed Research Div)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the statement given out at the nasa FY 1974 budget briefing held Jan. 27: “The budget the President has approved for NASA for FY 1974, like those of other agencies, has been reduced substantially below previous plans and expectations to hold total government spending to the targets set by the President. At the same time, the budget will permit NASA to carry forward a substantial and significant program in space and aeronautics.” The budget provided for continuing the major projects in the schedule announced Jan. 5 and for starting two new projects: Nimbus-G, “another in NASA’s series of experimental earth oriented satellites, which will be directed at environmental pollution and oceanographic measurements, and LAGEOS, a new geodetic satellite for extremely accurate measurements of movements of the earth’s surface.” In addition to reductions in programs announced Jan. 5, the budget required “that we stretch out schedules in a number of ongoing projects. The second Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-b) will be delayed two years, until 1976. This will allow it to carry an additional sensor. Tiros-N, the prototype of a new series of operational meteorological satellites for the National Weather Service, will be delayed by about one year to 1977. “We will also undergo another belt-tightening in NASA. By the end of FY 1974 our civil service complement will be reduced 1880 positions below the FY 1973 end strength approved in the FY 1973 budget. This reduction includes the previously announced reductions related to the termination of our nuclear programs.” Despite a “sharp decrease from the level budget anticipated last year,” Dr. Fletcher was “very pleased with the program content we were able to retain. Clearly from what has been said today and on January 5, we will have to curtail several activities that are of major importance to the nation.” But “we have been able to keep NASA’s main line program essentially intact and each of the programs curtailed will still be done, either at a later date than anticipated or in an alternate way to that planned last year. Although I, personally, would like to see a higher NASA budget, I believe we can capitalize on the belt-tightening required to produce even greater yield for the tax dollar in future years.” NASA was “making substantial efforts to reduce future costs . . . while still giving the nation a strong program in space and aeronautics.” Additionally, a prime object of the space shuttle program was to reduce costs of operating in space. NASA intended to “develop and introduce new design concepts and management approaches which, together with the relaxed weight and size constraints of the Space Shuttle, will result in substantially lower development and operating costs.” NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly discussed personnel cutbacks necessitated by the new budgetary limitations. The total NASA Civil Service reduction of 1880 positions would include a Marshall Space Flight Center cut of 650; Goddard Space Flight Center, 158; Kennedy Space Center, 100; Manned Spacecraft Center, 75; Wallops Station, 17; Lewis Research Center, 660; nasa Hq., 150; and Ames, Langley, and Flight Research Centers, a total of 70. From a peak Civil Service complement of more than 34 000 in 1967, nasa would be reduced to under 25 000 employees by June 1974—a drop of 30%. Total employees from all sources—contract and in-house—would drop from the 1966 peak of 420 000 to about 100 000. (Text; Transcript)
Problems of the European space program were described in a Science article by Dominique Verguese of Paris Le Monde: Since 1964 the European Space Research Organization and the European Launcher Development Organization had spent $1 billion on space. One third had been used for the successful launchings of seven satellites but the remainder had been spent on an expensive and yet unsuccessful booster. Interest in the booster had dissipated despite the French desire to continue and the offer to pay for 60% to 70% of the costs. At two European conferences on space (December 1971 and December 1972) plans were made to merge ELDO and ESRO into a single agency and to allow member nations to cooperate with NASA on building a sortie lab for the space shuttle. France had threatened to leave ESRO unless more emphasis was placed on applications satellites and ESRO closed its plasma laboratory in Italy and its sounding rocket range in Sweden. France had also insisted that more use be made of national facilities and teams rather than esro’s technical center. Final agreements and objectives on a European applications satellite could not be made because of the conflicting interests of each nation. Nor could it be decided what role national programs should play. But Europe had successfully launched 26 satellites and had acquired an industrial competence which could easily provide a firm basis for more ambitious projects. (Science, 3/9/73, 984-986)
Receipt of proposals for design, development, test, and evaluation of the space shuttle external tank from McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Boeing Co., Martin Marietta Aerospace Corp.’s Aerospace Div., and Chrysler Corp.’s Space Div. was announced by Marshall Space Flight Center. The contract, calling for three ground-test tanks and six developmental flight tanks in the development phase, was expected to be awarded by Aug. 1. (msfc Release 73-60)
U.S. technological progress had proceeded “almost without interruption” during 70 yrs of flight, Marquis Childs said in his Washington Post column. The doubters had “always been proven wrong.” In astronautics, Skylab was continuing successfully and work was progressing on the space shuttle. “As for the scientific benefits, perhaps only a few specialists can give a proper evaluation. Rut the cynics who spoke derisively of spending billions to put some clown in the sky are wrong on several scores.” The aircraft production record was equally impressive. In 1972 the U.S. had made 79% of the aircraft being operated by the world’s airlines, exclusive of the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China. The achievements in U.S. production, discovery, and invention were “in painful contrast to the failures in self-government illustrated by the grim mess in Washington, It may not be too much to say that if we find a way out of the morass, the swamp of intrigue, deceit and doubt, it will be thanks to American productivity.” The Smithsonian Institution’s new Air and Space Museum was to be dedicated July 4, 1976. “That no one can predict what manner of man will preside over thi occasion is a melancholy commentary on the gap between technology and politics.” (W Post, 10/9/73) October 9—12:	A radical new growth hormone theory evolved from Ames Research Center studies was introduced by arc scientist Dr. Richard E. Grindeland during a Raltimore, Md,, symposium on growth hormones. Dr. Grindeland’s theory that the growth hormone in blood was chemically different from that in the pituitary gland had originated from arc research to determine effects of physiological stresses like acceleration, simulated weightlessness, chemical agents, thermal extremes, and nutritional status on the human body. The theory, which the symposium suggested would have profound effect on the understanding of growth hormone physiology, showed that radio immunological methods detected only a minute fraction of the concentration of growth hormone in the blood, (arc Astrogram, 10/25/73, 1) Release 73—143; ksc Release 238—73; Marshall Star, 10/3/73, 1; MSFC PAO)
The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)
United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. announced a $42million cooperative program with nine electric utility companies to develop a 26 000-kw fuel cell as a new way to generate electricity. The utility companies had provisionally ordered 56 cells for possible delivery by 1978 and had options on 112 more. Orders totaled more than $250 million. The program did not include Government support, but Pratt & Whitney was discussing the program with Federal energy officials and “would welcome government participation,” Pratt & Whitney President Bruce N. Torell told a New York press conference. A fuel ceil produced electrical power directly from fuel through a chemical reaction. It could be an efficient system for generating electrical power with little pollution. Pratt & Whitney had produced small cells for nasa’s Apollo and Skylab spacecraft and for the space shuttle. It had also tested larger units for home use. {WSJ, 12/20/73, 24; P&w Pio)
NASA and space shuttle contractors held the third quarterly Space Shuttle Review at Marshall Space Flight Center. Attended by 400, the review provided information on external tanks and solid rocket boosters. (Marshall Star, 3/7/73, 1)
Award of a $7.3-million contract to Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. to provide a site for the final assembly and checkout of the space shuttle orbiter was announced by NASA. The contract included modifications and additions to facilities at Air Force Plant 42, Palmdale, Calif. (nasa Release 73—196)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. announced the award of a $30million-plus subcontract to ltv Aerospace Corp. Vought Systems Div. to design and develop the leading-edge structural subsystem of the space shuttle orbiter’s thermal protection system. Final details were being negotiated. (ri Release SP—45)
Johnson Space Center had invited Boeing Co. to submit a proposal for wind-tunnel tests using a 747 transport aircraft to ferry the space shuttle orbiter, nasa announced. The orbiter would be mounted pickaback on the 747 in tests to determine feasibility of the plan. Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had been invited earlier to submit a proposal for use of a C-5A cargo aircraft as a ferry during wind-tunnel tests [see Sept. 25]. (nasa Release 73—204)
Marshall Space Flight Center was drop-testing the space shuttle solidfueled rocket booster (srb) scale model and a three-parachute recovery system to determine the feasibility of keeping parachutes attached to the SRB rather than releasing them on impact with the water, (msfc Release 73—172)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development, Space, Science, Veterans, proposed to the Senate a counterbudget that would cut $4 billion from the President’s $268.7-billion FY 1974 U.S. budget request. The counterbudget would reduce the $3.1-billion space budget by $500 million. “The prime candidate for cutting is the space shuttle, which this year will cost us $400 million. ... I think Skylab, where spending of $315 million is scheduled, could be stretched out and postponed. Additional savings could be made in a much more vigorous effort to substitute unmanned for manned space efforts. Scientists tell us that unmanned flights can be as productive as manned flights at roughly half the cost.” (CR, 2/6/73, S2108-10)
Aviation pioneer Col. Clarence M. Young (usa, Ret.), holder of U.S. Civil Air License No. 2, died in Cottonwood, Ariz., at the age of 84. He had been appointed Director of Aeronautics in the Dept, of Commerce in 1927 and helped develop the Federal airways system. From 1929 to 1933 he was Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Aeronautics. Young joined Pan American World Airways, Inc., in 1934 to pioneer the first flying service across the Pacific. He was named to the Civil Aeronautics Board in 1946 and rejoined Pan Am in 1950 to direct its Pacific-Alaska Div. until his retirement. He learned to fly as a bomber pilot in World War I, was a member of the Aviation Hall of Fame, and had been named an Elder Statesman by the National Aeronautic Assn. (AP, NYT, 4/12/73, 44) April 10—12:	The Aerospace Industries Assn, of America’s International Committee held its Spring National Meeting in San Francisco. Richard J. H. Barnes, Director of International Planning & Programs in NASA’s Office of International Affairs,, discussed U.S.-European cooperation on the space shuttle sortie lab (designated Spacelab by the European Space Research Organization). ESRO was sponsoring a Phase B design competition between European industrial consortiums. Germany, Italy, Belgium, and Spain were participating, with other European countries expected to join. Germany had pledged to fund at least 40% of the program; Italy 20%. The program’s hardware phase was expected to start in early 1974. esro would design, develop, and deliver one Spacelab flight unit to NASA. NASA would provide assistance and would purchase one or more production units. Participating European countries would receive preference over nonparticipating countries in future use of the Spacelab. Ludwig Boelkow, President of the West German consortium Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH, described the status of European civil aircraft production: “The resources which only the U.S. had in the early fifties are now also available in Europe. . . . Europe today enjoys a slight edge in SST [supersonic transport] technology, as evidenced by the Concorde, and I believe equality in subsonic jets, as evidenced by the excellent progress in terms of cost, schedule, and test performance of the A300 B [European airbus].” (aia Memorandum gen 73-43) April 11:	The Air Force Systems Command announced it was developing the Air Force Satellite Communications (afsatcom) System to satisfy high-priority Air Force requirements for command and control of forces, afsatcom’s space segment would consist of Air Force ultrahigh-frequency transponders on the Navy Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System, the Air Force Satellite Data System (sds), and the global backup capability on other Dept, of Defense host satellites. The production contract award would be made after an extensive test program, (afsc Release 029.73)
French hydrogen bomb testing in the Pacific was “a moral outrage and a diplomatic embarrassment,” a Washington Post editorial said, “but it is also a political fact, and one likely to become more rather than less important as the 1970s unfold.” As a strategic weapon the French nuclear striking force was relatively elementary, lacking warheads to fit into long-range missiles, multiple warheads, long-range missiles, and missile-carrying submarines. “As a political force, however, the force de frappe is quite real. As [the late President Charles] de Gaulle intended, it is virtually certain to give France a larger voice in the evolution of European affairs than it otherwise would have.” (W Post, 3/5/73, 26) May 3-4:	European Space Research Organization (esro) representatives met with U.S. space officials in Washington, D.C., to negotiate a draft Intergovernmental Agreement and draft a nasa-esro Memorandum of Understanding. Both agreements would cover U.S.-European cooperation in sharing costs of space shuttle development. The European countries, through ESRO, would fund and develop the $300- to $400-million Spacelab, a supporting system important to realization of the space shuttle’s full potential. The Spacelab would facilitate joint-use programs with U.S. and foreign astronauts, (nasa Release 73—191) May 4:	Major countdown demonstration testing of the first two Skylab launch vehicles and their spacecraft on Kennedy Space Center Pads 39A and B, with crew participation, had been completed, NASA announced. Both launches remained on schedule for May 14 and 15. The three astronauts earlier in the week had been pronounced physically fit for the 28-day mission, after completing medical examinations at Johnson Space Center, (nasa Release 73-92)
NASA released to industry a request for proposals for design, development, and production of the space shuttle external tank. Invited to bid were McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and Martin Marietta Corp.’s Aerospace Div. (nasa Release 73-64)
Two European space consortiums were in competition to develop the manned spacelab to be flown on the U.S. space shuttle, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Groups led by ERNO—VFW—Fokker and Messerschmitt-Boeklow-Blohm GmbH were in Phase B studies to define Spacelab (sortie lab) costs and configurations. The studies would end in July to allow the European Space Research Organization to decide on supporting Spacelab development. ERNO planned to offer two Spacelab configurations. One would be certain of meeting the established cost criteria. The second would be more expensive but technically more advanced. The MBB system used a common support system of a single module housing all general-purpose subsystems, with separate individual payload systems inserted as needed. Scientific payloads could be prepared independently of launch cycle constraints. One set of payload experiments could return to earth and another set be slid into place within two weeks. (Av Wk, 4/9/73, 22)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of two study contracts. Florida Institute of Technology would study hypergolic propellant liquid- and vapor-disposal methods for use in space shuttle operations under a $75 000 contract. The Univ. of Florida would receive $25 420 to study the application of remote-sensing devices for temperature evaluation to assist Florida fruit and vegetable growers, (ksc Releases 209-73, 21073)
NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Corp. for negotiation of a $ 107-million cost-plus-award-fee contract for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the space shuttle external tank. The development phase would include fabrication of three ground-test tanks and six developmental flight tanks. The contract would run through 1978. (nasa Release 73-163)
A New York Times editorial praised Skylab 3’s solar observations: “The special value of the observations on the sun arises from that body’s extraordinary behavior this month.” An unexpected burst of tremendous solar activity had occurred. “An unprecedented wealth of data on this startling phenomenon [had] been gathered . . . , which should contribute significantly to helping scientists understand the physics and chemistry of the vast celestial body that is the source of almost all the energy available on earth.” (NYT, 9/23/73) September 24:	A Memorandum of Understanding on international cooperation in NASA’s space shuttle program was signed in Washington, D.C., by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Alexander Hocker, Director General of the European Space Research Organization (esro) . Nine ESRO-member countries would design, develop, manufacture, and deliver a Spacelab flight unit to be carried in the space shuttle orbiter. The Spacelab would comprise a pressurized manned laboratory module and an instrument platform, or pallet, to support telescopes, antennas, and other equipment requiring direct space exposure. The Spacelab would be transported to and from orbit in the orbiter payload bay and would be attached to and supported by the shuttle orbiter throughout 7- to 30-day missions. At the mission’s end, the Spacelab would be removed and prepared for its next mission. The estimated $300-million to $400-million Spacelab cost would be borne by Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland—the European nations that signed, with the U.S., the Intergovernmental Agreement for space shuttle cooperation [see Aug. 14]. The agreement was open for signatures by other nations as well. Under Memorandum of Understanding terms NASA would manage all operational activities, including crew training and flight operations, following delivery of the Spacelab unit in late 1978, about one year before the space shuttle’s scheduled first operational flight. NASA planned to carry a European flight crew member on the first shuttle flight and subsequent European flight crew opportunities would be provided in conjunction with ESRO or ESRO-member-govern-ment projects. NASA would make the shuttle available for Spacelab missions on either cooperative or cost-reimbursable basis. NASA would procure from ESRO any additional Spacelab units needed for U.S. programs and would not develop any further units duplicating the Spacelab’s design and capabilities. Final signature of the Memorandum of Understanding having established the cooperative Spacelab program, NASA had decided to use Spacelab terminology. Steps were instituted to change designations of the Sortie Lab Task Force and Task Team at Marshall Space Flight Center to Spacelab Task Force and Task Team, (nasa Release 73-191; nasa Shuttle Off, omsf; Spacelab Newsletter, 9/26/73)
Chairman Maurice M. Levy of the European Space Research Organization Council described steps to complete plans for European participation in the space shuttle program, during FY 1974 nasa authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “The ESRO Council has already approved the text of an agreement laying down the arrangements under which the Spacelab [sortie lab] will be developed, first in esro and subsequently within the European Space Agency which, in conformity with the decisions taken in Brussels, is expected to be set up in 1974. This agreement is open for signature between March 1 and the end of July. It will probably be implemented very shortly.” A technical agreement would have to be negotiated between nasa and esro as to Spacelab’s procurement and its integration into the space shuttle. A second agreement between governments would be necessary to cover commitments for nonduplication of efforts, the possibility of transferring technology to other European programs, access to the whole shuttle system, and the availability of conventional launch vehicles. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, testified that the $8.9-million budget request for space shuttle facility planning—in addition to $67.2 million for shuttle facility modification projects—included studies, engineering support, and preliminary engineering reports for upcoming projects and the final design for the pending FY 1975 facility needs. “This specific final design, when accomplished, will essentially complete facility design for the shuttle ground test program, the early and initial phase of Solid Rocket Booster (srb) production and test facilities,” and the pads and mobile launchers at the Kennedy Space Center. (Transcript; Text) *	Microwave measurements of the atmosphere of Venus were described by Univ. of California scientists in Science. Two sets of passive radio observations—measurements of the spectrum of the disc temperature near the 1-cm wavelength and interferometric measurements of the planetary limb darkening at the 1.35-cm water vapor resonance—had shown no evidence of water vapor in the lower atmosphere of Venus. The upper limit for the mixing ratio of water vapor to dry air was substantially less than the amounts derived from the Venus probes. The amount of water vapor could not produce dense clouds nor contribute significantly to a greenhouse effect. (Janssen et al., Science, 3/9/73, 994-996)
Experiments by 50 European scientists at the European Nuclear Research Center (cern), near Geneva, had indicated that electromagnetism and the “weak” force of radioactive decay—two of nature’s four basic forces—might be expressions of the same phenomenon, the New York Times reported. The findings had been supported by experiments at the National Accelerator Laboratory near Batavia, 111. If accurate, the findings would support the long-sought goal of a “unified field theory” relating the four seemingly diverse forces, which also included gravity and the “strong” force that bound together particles of the atomic nucleus. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/30/73, 29) NASA and the Dept, of Defense were in the final phase of a joint study to determine the most efficient development method for the shuttle space tug, or upper stage, for high-energy orbit missions. “One consideration is the adaptation of existing stages such as the Agena, Centaur, or Tran-stage, which could be modified for use with the shuttle. Since the modification . . . would not satisfy all of the science, application and DOD requirements that are now projected for the 1980s, we are also examining costs and technical characteristics of new configurations which would have the performance capability required to accommodate the entire range of prospective payloads. It may be possible to phase these two Tug approaches in a way that will provide adequate transportation capability when needed while reducing near-term funding requirements. We . . . expect to reach a final decision by the end of this calendar year.” Dr. Fletcher presented 1973 Payload Model: Space Opportunities 1973—1991, a study of the number and kinds of payloads that could be launched through 1991 with the space shuttle and Spacelab using budgets at the FY 1973 level. The study was not a program plan but an estimate of kinds of payloads that could be flown. Dr. Fletcher felt “the full range of the space capability offered” by the Shuttle was even greater than the model indicated. Anticipated possible annual space payloads for all NASA programs and the user community, excluding DOD, began with 12 in 1973 and moved through 18 in 1974, 38 in 1980 (when the shuttle was to begin its operational phase), 61 in 1985, to 70 in 1990 and 59 in 1991. The 70 payload opportunities in 1990 included 21 automated and 27 sortie (Spacelab) payloads for nasa and 17 automated and 5 sortie for non-NASA, non-DOD users. Anticipated requirements through 1991 totaled 810 payloads, 572 for nasa and 238 for non-NASA, non-DOD users, nasa and other non-DOD agencies were expected to use 69% of the shuttle traffic and dod 31%. The model anticipated NASA automated payloads through 1991 might include 77 for astronomy, 43 for physics, 49 for planetary exploration, 8 lunar, 26 life science, 53 earth observations, 22 earth and ocean physics, 2 communications and navigation, and 6 space technology. Anticipated user totals were 120 automated communications and navigation payloads, 59 earth observations, and 9 earth and ocean physics. Possible nasa sortie payloads were forecast at 58 in astronomy, 52 in physics, 24 in earth observations, 43 in space processing, 24 in earth and ocean physics, 11 for communications and navigation, 28 in life science, and 46 in space technology. User sortie payloads might be 10 for space manufacturing and 40 foreign payloads. (Transcript) October 31:	The first powered flight of the X-24B lifting body was aborted when the igniters failed to function properly during the prelaunch sequence check. The B-52 aircraft and the captive X-24B returned to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., without mishap, (nasa prog off) October 31—November 22: The U.S.S.R. launched biological satellite Cosmos 605 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 400-km (248.6mi) apogee, 214-km (133-mi) perigee, 90.7-min period, and 62.8° inclination. Tass reported that Cosmos 605 carried white rats, steppe turtles, insects, fungi, and instruments to monitor their condition. Objectives of the mission were to study the effects of space on living organisms and to test life-sustaining systems for biological subjects. The spacecraft was recovered Nov. 22. Dr. Avetik I. Burnazyan, U.S.S.R. Deputy Minister of Public Health, said in a Pravda article on Nov. 9 that the satellite was a continuation of earlier Soviet experiments designed to gain statistically reliable data on the effects of weightlessness on individual cells of organisms and the effects of radiation on the genetic properties of organisms. Previous Soviet biological satellites included Cosmos 110 (launched Feb. 22, 1966, carrying two dogs for a 22-day mission) and Cosmos 368 (launched Oct. 8, 1970, carrying yeast cells, seeds, and onion bulbs all of which were exposed to radiation during a 6-day mission). (gsfc SSR, 10/31/ 73, 11/30/73; fbis-Sov, 11/1/73, Ul; 11/9/73, Ul; 11/13/73, Ul-U3; NYT, 11/25/73, 23; SBD, 11/2/73, 10) During October:	Selection of Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) to receive the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for 1973 was announced by the National Aeronautics Assn. The trophy would be presented Dec. 17 in Washington, D.C., for “leadership and inspiration to all elements of aviation in the United States, both military and civilian, and for serving as an articulate spokesman for American aviation and space in the Congress and throughout the world.” (naa News, 10/73, 1)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed a joint symposium on space program planning of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and the Society of Automotive Engineers in Denver, Colo. Points paramount for the U.S. space program, in his mind, were: “First, despite a year with all the trappings of potential disaster, NASA is coming through in pretty good shape. Second, now is the time for space planners—inside and outside the NASA family—to get serious about how best to use the space shuttle. Third, the single most important need for a healthy future space program is a substantially higher NASA budget request for Fiscal Year 1975. Fourth, Congress is willing to leave overall planning for future space options to the Executive Branch, but cavalier disregard for specific congressional decisions—such as we witnessed last January— is not likely to be so lightly accepted in the future.” (CR, 7/14/73, S13479)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations reported H.R. 8825, FY 1974 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation bill that included a $3.002-billion NASA appropriation, $13 million above the $2.989-billion version passed by the House June 22. The bill increased the appropriation for construction of facilities from $89 million to $101 million, including $56.3 million for space shuttle facilities at various locations. (CR, 6/28/73, D771; S Rpt 93-272)
Declining jobs at Kennedy Space Center would level off at about 9600 total for contractors and Civil Service in 1976 when the space shuttle buildup began, Today quoted KSC Director of Administration George A. Van Staden as saying. The number would be a drop from the current 14 500 but would mean community stability in employment for the first time. Previously NASA had projected 6000 to 7000 jobs for shuttle operations. Employment would fall by 3000 at the end of 1973, with completion of Skylab, and would drop again after the mid-1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. When the 9600 level was reached in 1976, jobs would gradually build up for two years, to about 10 800 in 1978 when shuttle testing began. (Today, 3/22/73, Al)
A New York Times editorial commented on the successful Sept. 27—29 Soyuz 12 manned mission: “The purpose . . . was not primarily to set new records. Its main goal was to test the latest improved version of the Soyuz spacecraft. . . . Americans as well as Soviet citizens have reason to rejoice. ... In 1975 present plans call for the historic docking of a Soviet Soyuz craft with a United States Apollo vehicle. Thus Soviet and American astronauts must want each other’s space ships to be as safe as possible. And beyond the docking experiment in 1975 lies the prospect of a future fully integrated Soviet-American joint space program.” (.NYT, 9/30/73, 12) During September:	Soviet plans for a reusable space shuttle had been revealed by Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov and Soviet Academician Andrey Shikarin, according to a Vienna correspondent quoted by Interavia. The Soviet shuttle would consist of two vehicles coupled pick-a-back, each in delta configuration and designed for hypersonic operating speeds. One would be the booster, the other the orbiter. The spacecraft was designed for horizontal takeoff from a runway. The manned booster would carry the orbiter until it attained a 22-km-per-sec (4900 mph) speed corresponding to a 2- to 3-g acceleration. The stages would separate at about a 30-km (19-mi) altitude and the booster would descend in a controlled glide to land on the runway. The orbiter would accelerate to a more than 100-km (60-mi) altitude, complete its mission, and glide back to the earth. Construction was expected to begin during the 1970s. {Interavia, 9/1973, 945)
The 1972-73 edition of Jane’s Fighting Ships was published in London. In the foreword, editor Capt. John Moore said the Soviet navy was “a pre-eminent force with its own air power and with a greater range of submarines than any other. Above all, it has a far greater proportion of ships less than 10 years old than any other major fleet.” (AP, P Inq, 7/26/73, 11)	_ July 24-Aug. 8:	A summer school on manned space flight—sponsored at Nottingham Univ., England, by the European Space Research Organization (esro)—was attended by 63 graduate scientists and engineers from 13 countries and by NASA representatives. Its theme, “The Implications for European Space Programmes of the Possibilities of Manned Mission,” was based on use of the space shuttle Spacelab. (ESRO Newsletter, 10/73, 1)
Dr. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on manned space systems in development, before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Dr. Culbertson said 986 payloads were projected for the 12-yr period beginning in 1980, with one third each for applications, science, and the Dept, of Defense. Duplication of the accomplishments expected from the space shuttle sortie (Spacelab) program would require automated spacecraft, sounding rockets, a manned space station, and a system for manned transport. The shuttle, with effective integration of payloads and the ability to service in-orbit spacecraft, offered a potential savings of $14 billion over expendable systems from 1980 to 1991. Studies had shown that 725 flights were required to fly the projected 986 payloads, an average of 60 flights a year. At a 10% rate of discount and a 10% rate of return, the space transportation system would break even if the shuttle were flown only 25 times a year. (Transcript) industry unwillingness to risk capital on advanced communications research and development. Private industry could meet short-term commercial needs but “continued NASA activity is essential to identify and meet long term national needs.” The investment level in advanced communications r&d would increase from $1.0 million in FY 1974 to $1.4 million in FY 1975. R&d included investigations into advanced antenna techniques to define radiation pattern contours to fit geographical boundaries and eliminate unwanted spillover; technology to open near-and far-infrared wavelengths for communications; new techniques in solid-state, high-power devices to replace traveling wave tubes; and use of millimeter-wave regions to expand the spectrum for satellite communications. The ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite scheduled for 1974 launch would conduct health and education telecommunications and radio beacon experiments and measure charged particles and magnetic fields over the U.S. for one year. The satellite would then be moved over India to beam educational TV to 4000 villages, ats-f (to he Ats 6 after launch) also would be used to extend coverage during the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission. Following completion of the Indian experiments, ats-f would he moved back over to the U.S. to continue experiments there. (Transcript)
The Army was issuing a $1 988 000 firm-fixed-price contract to Algernon Blair Industrial Contractors, Inc., for modifications to orbiter propulsion system test facilities for space shuttle engine testing at NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility, the Dept, of Defense announced, (dod Release 59—74)
NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on applications programs before the Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1975 authorization hearings. In NASA’s weather and climate program, satellites were providing increasingly valuable information for short-range forecasting: day and night cloud-cover images around the globe, temperature profiles (although still cloud-limited) and surface temperature maps, gross moisture profiles, and sea ice mapping. NASA had begun microwave sounding experiments to overcome the cloud problem. Still needed were improved sounding accuracy and coverage, refined moisture profiles, and simpler and less expensive random-access data-collection systems. For one- to two-week prediction, space capabilities were contributing to progress but lacked complete coverage of critical wind and temperature areas around the globe. New measurement approaches and improved cloud tracking were planned. For severe storm and disaster warnings— which contained “the greatest potential payoff’—a long-term effort was studying advances in computer technology and display devices to assimilate and convey the mass of data produced. NASA had begun to develop primitive climate models for farmers that would have “high utility value to the agriculture section of our economy.” Remote sensing from space and research in a laboratory carried on the space shuttle could give data on weather modification possibilities and results. (Transcript)
A space shuttle launch processing system (lps) was being developed at Kennedy Space Center to provide a flexible, reliable, and cost-effective method of testing systems, controlling launch operations, and monitoring status of vehicle, ground support equipment and facilities during ground operations. A single automatic system, replacing the multiplicity of systems used in previous programs, would support every technical and management activity required to process the launch vehicles, their payloads, and all ground support equipment, (ksc Spaceport News, 24 Jan 74,4-5)
Johnson Space Center had issued requests to 11 interested aerospace companies to submit contract proposals for computing and data processing for space program software systems, JSC announced. Primary objective of the contract would be to define, design, .develop, and maintain software systems (for space shuttle, earth resources, and other science programs) that had maximum flexibility for supporting a wide variety of missions and future requirements. The cost-plus-award-fee contract would run from 1 July 1974 through 31 Dec. 1979. (JSC Release 74-30)
Columbia Broadcasting System newsman Walter Cronkite recalled the two most exalting moments in his years of TV space coverage, during an interview with the Christian Science Monitor. The first was “Alan Shepard’s little 15-minute plop-down into the Atlantic. Rocketry itself was so uncertain ... I just didn’t know whether or not I was going to he able to watch.” The second was the first lunar landing. “That was a highly emotional moment for me. The actual touchdown, not so much Neil Armstrong’s walk.” Cronkite, preparing for the TV documentary “Space: A Report to the Stockholders,” said he still believed the major achievement of the moon landing was that “it proves that we truly have the capability at this stage of man’s civilization to do any dam thing we want—the most outlandish or the most practical things.” Of course there were important spinoff values. “Probably one of the most important industrial spinoffs ... is the command that U.S. industry had gotten in the computer business. ... I attribute that almost solely to the space program.” Cronkite said that recent cutbacks in the manned program were proper. “It is just about where it ought to be— most of the concentration now is in unmanned satellites” and a deliberate, but not crash, program toward the reusable space shuttle. If newsmen were allowed to travel on the space shuttle, he’d go “on any flight they offered me.” When asked if he wouldn’t he missed by American TV viewers at blastoff, he said, “What do you mean. . . ? I hope to he broadcasting all the time from inside!” (CSM, 19 July 74)
The space shuttle would introduce a new mode oi space research in the 1980s, Dr. John E. Naugle, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, said at a space transportation system press briefing in Washington, D.C. Sounding rockets gave the scientist an immediate return of data but only for a very short-duration flight. Satellites provided longer mission times but it might be five to seven years from the initiation of the project until data were received. Experiments flown on the shuttle could remain in orbit from 7 to 30 days and then be returned immediately for evaluation. This capability would be a powerful tool in the development of new technology. Dr. Myron S. Malkin, Space Shuttle Program Director, said NASA’s commitment to Congress called for a total development cost of $5.15 billion in 1971 dollars for two operational shuttle vehicles plus $10.5 million for each of 725 missions projected for 1980-1990. Mission costs would be shared by participating experimenters, and estimates were now running at $9.05 million per flight because of reduced estimates for external tank development. Cost for a shuttle flight, which could take 29 500 kg into orbit, contrasted with $18 million for a 4500-kg payload launched on an expendable Atlas booster and up to $58 million to orbit 14 000-18 000 kg on a Saturn IB. Shuttle development was on schedule; the first approach and landing tests were to be in the second quarter of 1977 and the first manned orbital flight in 1979. Orbiter manufacture was under way. The main engine oxygen burner had been tested 14 April and the first big engine firing was scheduled for the end of 1975. NASA would need a fleet of seven orbi-ters at $250 million each if the projected missions were flown. Elwood W. Land, Jr., of the Space Shuttle Systems Office said a 25-astronaut flight corps probably would be maintained to fly missions averaging more than one a week. LeRoy E. Day, Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, reported the main engine was being designed to make 55 starts before refurbishment was necessary. Engine lifetime would be much longer. The solid boosters were being designed for 20 flights. Phillip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration, said that all but the smallest expendable launch vehicles would be phased out about three years after the shuttle became operational. (Transcript)
The economic return from the U.S. space program amounted to 33% per year, exceeding the typical yield from investments in stocks, bonds, and real estate, Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Johnson Space Center Director, said in a speech at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. at Blacksburg, Va. Among returns not immediately visible to the public were some 30000 inventions available by the end of the Apollo program. The price of Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite—surveying the earth since its launch 23 July 1972—was less than 50 cents per American. “Given its potential for aiding us in the coming years, who would not support a program that costs less than a . . . half-pound [one fourth kilogram] of ground beef?” Dr. Kraft estimated that the space shuttle, at an annual cost of $5 for each American, was an investment that would “pay, perhaps, the greatest return to future generations.” With such a vehicle we could not only perform a variety of scientific studies with immediate application to life on earth but build permanent, space stations and launch planetary vehicles and eventually starships. The space shuttle program, with its international cooperation, would unite “many nations for the benefit of all.” (Text)
A golden age of planetary exploration was a realistic possibility, Science quoted Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as saying in an interview. Dr. Fletcher believed space science was likely to be a major thrust of the space program in the 1980s, although NASA’s budget was vulnerable to cuts in the present political climate. He ruled out manned programs other than the space shuttle, but NASA would not become an all-purpose technology development agency for energy, ground transportation, and similar nonspace systems. Applications and materials processing would be important. Dr. Fletcher believed NASA’s program was acceptable to Congress and to the White House and that its future problem would not be wholesale cancellation of the space program but surviving annual budget cuts. Increased competition for money and staff attention in congressional space-related committees could aggravate NASA’s budgetary problems, according to Science. Observers had predicted that Congress would be faced with a choice between the shuttle and continuation of the space science and applications program. The decision could rest on the support of the shuttle program by organized labor, as it had in a 1972 Senate attempt to kill the shuttle. Some scientists had suggested that a $l-billion NASA budget cut would be better for science than a $100-million cut because the former would entail canceling the shuttle, in theory freeing money for space science. Dr. Fletcher had maintained, however, that a balance between programs would be kept. (Hammond, Science, 13 Dec 74, 1011-3) .
An Aviation Week <& Space Technology editorial said the FY 1975 aerospace budget request offered the aerospace industry “its best prospect in a decade.” The dollar increases were “significant because they were aimed at alleviating problems caused by a decade of neglect in basic weapon system development and diplomatic euphoria” and recognized that aerospace was an “important sinew of national power and economic strength.” It was the first budget in many years that had no major program cancellations or cuts. The worst cut, $89 million, meant a six-month delay in the first shuttle flight but was accompanied by a written guarantee of future support for full funding of the program. The military budget was well balanced between research, development, and procurement. While the NASA program would not satisfy the space buffs, it was a strong continuing effort supplemented by $500 million in military space activities and the growing communications and applications space activity in other agencies. The aerospace industry must now spend extra effort in delivering the hardware and performance to meet the challenge required by this budget. (Holz, Av Wk, 11 Feb 74,7) # _
The nasa Space Shuttle Cost and Review Committee recommended program changes to Dr. James C. Fletcher, Administrator, to reduce rising costs. It also reported design changes made necessary by thermal weight constraints. The committee, headed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, recommended delaying the second shuttle orbiter flight, refurbishing the first test orbiter earlier than planned instead. Deferrals of three months to two years were recommended for components of the second shuttle launch complex at Kennedy Space Center, which had originally been scheduled for completion about the time of the first shuttle flights. Also recommended was a delay in the development of improved spacesuits and portable life support systems for extravehicular activities from the space shuttle. Instead, evas would use Apollo-style hardware. Emergency barriers on shuttle runways and a building at Ksc for installing fairings and parachutes on solid-fueled rocket motors were judged unnecessary. Some tests were recommended for cancellation. Design changes to accommodate thermal and weight constraints included payload doors of a graphite epoxy composite that expanded less when heated and weighed 400 kg less than die aluminum composite originally planned for use. Solid-fueled-rocket separation motors that would provide a higher thrust level for a shorter time when separating die large solid-propellant boosters from the orhiter after launch were found to cause no orbiter damage—solving a possible problem anticipated with the original separation motors. The committee also recommended switching to a new thermal coating material for the external liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen tank to prevent tank overheating during launch, (nasa prog off, interview, 22 Sept 75; Av Wk, 9 Sept 74, 9-10; NASA Off of Admin, Daily Appointments Calendar)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a 90-day $950 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp. for studies, analysis, planning, and design required to define the interface and performance relationships of the solid-fueled rocket motor to the solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tank, and orbiter of the sDace shuttle. Award of the 90-day contract was necessary to continue the overall development schedule of the total space shuttle system. A contract award to Thiokol in November 1973 to develop the motors for the shuttle had been delayed pending the resolution of a protest filed by Lockheed Propulsion Co. (NASA Release 74-130; Huntsville Times, 17 Feb 74)
Key appointments in the space shuttle program at Marshall Space Flight Center became effective. Robert E. Lindstrom became Manager of the Space Shuttle Office, replacing Roy E. Godfrey, who became Special Assistant to the msfc Director. Within the Shuttle Office, James R. Thompson became Project Manager for the space shuttle main engine. John A. Chambers became Deputy Manager of the Shuttle Engine Office and Frank M. Stewart became technical assistant to the Manager of the Shuttle Projects Office, (msfc Release 74-41)
Manned space spectaculars were gone, at least until the 21st century, Thomas O’Toole said in the Washington Post. The similarities between the air age when men had begun flying and the space age were striking. Aviators had been considered stuntmen until they began to carry the mail. The Apollo flights, with their “vaguely circus air,” had struck many pepple the same way. The space shuttle promised to change all that. The U.S. planned to operate five shuttles, each one carrying more than 27 000 kg of satellites and space machinery into orbit 12 times a year, to “improve the quality of life on earth and to find out if life exists elsewhere in the solar system.” By the end of the 1980s the U.S. would have visited eight of the solar system’s nine planets; the only exception was Pluto. While one part of the space agency looked at the other planets, another would be looking down to learn more about the earth’s health. The next 20 yrs would see an unprecedented use of earth orbit to observe and communicate with the earth. O’Toole quoted Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as saying that the earth orbit might become overcrowded. Not that things would bump into each other but “there will not be enough radio frequencies to communicate back to earth.” (W Post, 24 March 74, Cl)
NASA had selected International Business Machines Corp. Federal Systems Div. for a $636 000 one-year contract, with options for renewal, to provide system engineering and software development support to the Design Engineering Directorate at Kennedy Space Center for space shuttle launch processing systems. IBM would help provide a flexible, reliable, and cost-effective means of system-testing, launch operations control, and status monitoring of the space shuttle, ground support equipment, and facilities during ground operations, (nasa Release 74-104)
Marshall Space Flight Center began a six-month study of the feasibility of adapting the backup Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount to fly on the space shuttle for solar observations. NASA anticipated that modified atm instruments positioned in the shuttle payload bay could provide low-cost scientific returns on early shuttle flights, (msfc Skylab Off, interview, Jan 75; Covault, Av Wk, 15 April 74,24-5)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced his decision to award Thiokol Corp. immediately a 5.5-million, 180-day letter contract to develop the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motors. The definitive contract would be awarded later. Lockheed Propulsion Co. had protested to the General Accounting Office the original, 20 Nov. 1973 contract award to Thiokol. gao validated NASA’s selection procedures 24 June 1974. gao stated, however, that the NASA cost analysis had contained an overstatement of the cost differential favoring Thiokol’s proposal over Lockheed’s and recommended the NASA Administrator determine whether the award should be reconsidered. Dr. Fletcher advised the Comptroller General that the decision to proceed with Thiokol was based on the conclusion that the rationale used for the initial selection remained valid, (nasa Release 74-178; 74-180; A&A 1973)
The first few space shuttle flights would land at Flight Research Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced in a talk before the Antelope Valley Board of Trade, Lancaster, Calif. First horizontal test flights would be made from FRC and first orbital test flights would return there because of added safety margins and good weather conditions. FRC would also he a secondary landing site for operational shuttle flights when weather or other conditions made it desirable. (nasa Release 74-279)
NASA had awarded the Planning Research Corp., Huntsville, Ala.,- a oneyear $6-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, with an additional one-year SlO-million option, to provide design engineering support services for development, test, and mission operations primarily in support of the space shuttle at Kennedy Space Center, ksc announced, (ksc Release 75-74)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 2 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1975 NASA budget plan for new authorization of $3,247 billion and spending of $3,273 billion, although a “constrained budget,” would carry forward the programs planned in FY 1974. Goals and major programs were the same, with three new projects in space science and applications, but the space shuttle had been slipped four to six months. NASA’s FY 1974 budget had “reflected a sharp temporary reduction, because of Government-wide fiscal problems . . . , below the $3.4 billion level previously planned as the long-term level.” Increases in FY 1975 and later years were therefore “in order to approach again the level required to maintain . . . advances in space and aeronautics for the rest of the decade.” The FY 1975 increase of “about $100 million,” however, was less than required to return to NASA’s complete program as planned, and adjustments had been necessary. Principally, the first manned orbital flight of the shuttle was rescheduled to the second quarter of 1979, instead of the end of 1978, but NASA had a “firm commitment now” that there would be no more slips for budgetary reasons, and none was expected for technical reasons. NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly said at the briefing the stretchout was expected to increase shuttle costs about $50 million “in 1971 dollars.” The $800 million requested for the shuttle was $89 million less than NASA had submitted to the Office of Management and Budget. In the three new space flight projects, Pioneer Venus had top scientific priority as the next step in planetary exploration. Two missions launched in 1978 would study the Venus atmosphere for a better understanding of that planet and of the earth’s atmosphere, meteorology, and climatology. In the second new start, seasat, an experimental applications satellite, would measure ocean characteristics to aid scientific understanding of ocean dynamics and determine if a forecasting system could be developed, seasat-a was to be launched in 1978. The third start, the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm), would launch an Explorer satellite in 1977 to make thermal measurements of the earth’s surface to help find mineral resources and potential geothermal energy sources and to discriminate rock structures for planning civil works such as highways. NASA was asking $6 million to build the world’s first large infrared telescope, on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for planetary research to complement planetary space flights, especially to provide data for the 1977 launch of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn probe. Another new thrust, still in the planning stage, was the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , to return the large amounts of data expected from the shuttle in the 1980s and permit phase-out of some tracking stations. NASA would not develop the spacecraft for the TDRSS but would lease satellite services from a private organization, beginning in CY1979. Analysis of data from the Skylab missions that were ending with the 8 Feb. splashdown of Skylab 4 would continue for many years. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joint engineering and training activities with the U.S.S.R. were on schedule. All shuttle hardware prime contractors and most subcontractors had been selected, and the Dept, of Defense tentatively planned to modify an existing upper stage for use as an interim space tug with, the shuttle. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, was still working well, exceeding its design life by more than six months. ERTS-b, previously planned for 1976 launch, had been moved to 1975. A number of nasa and 11 commercial applications launches were scheduled during the year. A nominal communications satellite research program would be continued. In space astronomy, oso-i was scheduled for 1975 and the heAo series would be resumed, with launches planned for 1977, 1978, and 1979. Astronautics programs would continue to develop technology to improve fuel economy, reduce noise, and improve performance of U.S.-built civil transport aircraft. nasa’s Civil Service employment was to be stabilized at the end of FY 1974 levels except for a further reduction of 354 persons at Marshall Space Flight Center following completion of Skylab. NASA’s FY 1975 total would be 24 616, about 2200 less than in FY 1973 and 354 less than in FY 1974. Support service contractors at the Centers had reductions planned at about the same level, the 25 000 FY 1973 total dropping to 24 000 in FY 1974 and to 22 000 in FY 1975. (Text; NASA, FY 75 Budget Briefing transcript & background material)
The House passed, by a roll call vote of 407 to 7, H.R. 15572, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans FY 1975 appropriations bill. The bill—passed as recommended to the House by its Committee on Appropriations 21 June—appropriated $3,203 billion to NASA, $44.1 million below the FY 1975 budget request and $63.9 million below the FY 1975 authorization. Research and development funds totaled $2,327 billion, construction of facilities $135.67 million, and research and program management $740 million. An additional $4,435 million had been provided in the Special Energy Bill. The House cut $6.2 million authorized as planning funds for the Large Space Telescope, noting that the lst was not among the top four priority telescope projects selected by the National Academy of Sciences. Also the House deferred the $8.0 million requested to initiate seasat and recommended that the satellite be configured to fly on an early mission of the space shuttle. The Committee urged NASA to reprogram funds to begin work on erts-c as soon as possible but directed the agency not to reprogram any funds for cost overruns on the Viking project without requesting additional funds from Congress. Other cuts from the authorization included $15.8 million for the construction of facilities and $9.6 million for research and program management. (CR, 26 June 74, H5746-73; Com Rpt 93-1139)
The space shuttle had no imaginable use which could not be met more cheaply and expeditiously by rockets already in existence, columnist Nicholas von Hoffman charged in the Washington Post. Of the justifications for the space shuttle program, one of “the most persuasive is the large amounts of money that will be pumped” into an ailing economy. However, “it would be difficult to think up a more inflationary way to provide jobs for people.” (W Post, 8 July 74) '
Johnson Space Center had awarded a $6 598 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Inc., for Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and space shuttle orbiter software development, jsc announced. (jsc Release 74-62)
Skylab . . . has demonstrated that this nation is capable of conducting broader and more useful beneficial activities in space that directly relate to our own planet Earth,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a postrecovery press briefing at Johnson Space Center. It had “moved the space program from the realm of the spectacular into a new phase that can be characterized ... as almost businesslike if not yet quite routine.” The Skylab experience was necessary for the future in space and had confirmed that NASA was proceeding in the right direction with development of the space shuttle. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said 30 earth resources passes had been planned and 39 accomplished during the Skylab 4 mission. There had been 350 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount observations planned and 338 hrs completed. Observations of Comet Kohoutek included 13 by the Apollo Telescope Mount and 111 by other instruments. All 28 planned corollary experiments and all major medical and student experiments had been completed. Original planning had called for 140 days in orbit for the three manned missions; 172 were accomplished. Skylab’s greatest achievement “was to prove . . . there is no limit in our space research”; the limit “is only our resolve, not our ability to do work, not the ability of men to work and not our technical knowledge.” (Transcript)
Johnson Space Center announced selection of Singer Co. Simulated Products Div. for an $8-million cost-plus-award fee contract to develop a space shuttle orbiter aeroflight simulator for crew training. Singer would design, manufacture, and test a simulator that would include a high-fidelity crew station, out-of-the-window color visual scene, motion base, and flight computer and simulator interface to simulate vehicle flight dynamics and motion during the atmospheric phase of missions, (jsc Release 74-276)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of six contracts, totaling $1.8 million, for development studies of the interim upper stage (ius) and space tug. The ius—a predecessor to the space tug, to be used with the space shuttle by both the Dept, of Defense and NASA until the more sophisticated and capable tug was ready for use in 1983—was being developed as the orhit-to-orhit stage (oos) by the Air Force. General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. was awarded a $290 000 contract to study space shuttle and tug compatibility and develop detailed interface requirements. A second contract to General Dynamics, totaling $268 000, was awarded for a definition study of space tug avionics systems with emphasis on areas where transition from the ius to the tug would require significant hardware or operational changes. United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. received a $375 371 contract to evaluate and verify the RL-10 high-area-ratio nozzle engine performance for space tug application. Under a $246 000 contract, Martin Marietta Corp. would develop concepts, techniques, and tools for tug fleet and ground operations, mission assignments, payload and orbiter integration, tug scheduling, and physical status, msfc awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $293 277 contract to study ius-tug payload requirements compatibility and International Business Machines Corp. a $337 250 contract to study ius-tug orbital operations, (msfc Release 74-135) <f
Design work on the primary rescue system for space shuttle passengers proceeded at Johnson Space Center. A prototype “beach ball” large enough for a person to crawl into, zip up, and pressurize had been demonstrated and given a go-ahead at NASA Hq. in December 1973. Assistant Chief for Shuttle Larry E. Bell in jsc’s Crew Systems Div. had told a news interviewer the balls could be packaged into cylinders to accompany each passenger aboard the shuttle in the 1980s, “almost like a parachute.” Simplicity, size, light weight, structural strength of the ball shape, and low cost had won approval over expensive and complicated spacesuits for nonastronauts on flights and eliminated the requirement for a rescue docking module. In an emergency, passengers could enter the balls—each with its own window—an hour or two before rescue by a second shuttle. Oxygen containers connected to the shuttle supply system would be used until just before rescue; a device would remove carbon dioxide. Once disconnected, each container would last an hour; transfer through space to the rescue shuttle was expected to take 30 min. (Bell interview, 4 March 75; Hill, H Chron, 21 April *74)
NASA announced selection of International Business Machines Corp. for an fill-million, two-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to design, develop, and implement a ground-based computing and data-processing system for the space shuttle and other programs. (NASA Release 74-132)
nasa announced a 45-day $500 000 continuation of a 13 Feb. contract with Thiokol Chemical Corp. for the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motor design study. In addition to original contract requirements, the continuation contract required that Thiokol assist nasa in idenifying materials, independent of the specific final motor design, that had long-lead-time supply times, (nasa Release 74-130)
NASA announced two Kennedy Space Center contract awards for space shuttle facilities. Morrison-Knudsen Co., Inc., had been given a $21 812 737 contract to construct a space shuttle runway with overruns, apron, taxiway, and access roads. The runway—to be completed within 850 days after the notice to proceed—was to be built northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. Reynolds, Smith, and Hills received a $1 463 000 fixed-price contract to design modifications to Launch Complex 39 and Mobile Launcher 3 for shuttle operations. Complex 39, Apollo and Skylab launch site, would next be used for a manned flight in 1975, for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Releases 74-66, 74-67)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $69 316 six-month contract to International Telephone & Telegraph Corp. ITT Gilfillan Div. to analyze a two-way optical data link, using laser beams and operating between the ground and payloads in low earth orbit. The study, which could lead to a laser communications system for the space shuttle, was expected to provide information on the most effective lasers and frequencies and the effects of orbital dynamics, (msfc Release 74-105)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to negotiate a twoyear, $13.2-million, cost-plus-award fee contract to support the space shuttle program in system analysis; avionics system engineering; mission planning, analysis, and software formulation; computer systems and software; and crew procedures and flight planning, (nasa Release 74-83)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Division, prime contractor for the space shuttle orbiter, signed a $16.5-million supplemental agreement with NASA. This 27th supplemental agreement since the contract was awarded 9 Aug. 1972 brought the estimated contract value to *$995 million. It incorporated authorization for sneak circuit analysis, vertical flight-test support, midfuselage mockups, integration of all shuttle elements, and other changes. (jsc Release 74-258)
A giant nylon parachute was demonstrated at Kennedy Space Center as a possible design for the recovery of the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket booster casings. The parachute—built by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. to provide knowledge of handling heavy parachutes—had a base diameter of 40 m, base canopy circumference of 120 m, and total weight of 940 kg. Plans called for the use of three or four chutes of this kind in addition to a drogue chute to land the shuttle’s two 73 000-kg booster casings in the Atlantic, where boosters and parachutes could be retrieved by ships. (Spaceport News, 27 June 74, 5)
Martin Marietta Corp. had been awarded a $26 453 600 NASA contract for support of the external tank effort of the space shuttle program, NASA announced. The consolidated facilities contract, which would run through 31 Aug. 1978, provided for acquisition of plant equipment at Michoud Assembly Facility, rehabilitation of existing facilities, and construction, modification, maintenance, and repair of facilities, (nasa Release 74239)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had signed a protocol agreement in Moscow with the U.S.S.R. on possible future cooperation, including development of civilian transports and helicopters, air traffic control, and navigation and communications systems, Lockheed announced. The protocol was one of 20 agreements the U.S.S.R. signed with U.S. companies. (Lockheed Release, 30 Jan 74) 30 January—4 February: Two representatives of the 10-nation European Space Research Organization that would develop and build Spacelab for use with NASA’s space shuttle accompanied U.S. scientists on the Ames Research Center’s Galileo II Convair 990 aircraft on flights evaluating electronic instruments designed to measure sea conditions. Dr. D. J. Shapland of the United Kingdom and J. De Waard of The Netherlands observed the flying laboratory, which would serve as a pattern for shuttle sortie missions carrying Spacelab. Spacelab was to have two elements: a manned laboratory module permitting scientists and engineers to work in a shirt-sleeve environment and an instrument platform, or pallet, for telescopes, antenna, and other equipment requiring space exposure, (nasa Release 74-31; arc Aerospace Sci Div, interview, 17 July 74)
Johnson Space Center announced award of a 12-mo, $300 000 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. Denver Div. to study technical and operational concepts for manned and automated assembly of space systems from the space shuttle orbiter. Martin was asked to consider use of manipulative devices, an astronaut maneuvering unit, and simple docking systems, (jsc Release 74-251) _ _
President Ford signed an $82.1-billion FY 1975 Dept, of Defense appropriation bill, almost $5 billion below the Administration request. The conference committee bill had been approved by the House 23 Sept, and the Senate 24 Sept. Research, development, test, and evaluation funds included $445 million for the B-l advanced strategic bomber, clearing the way for construction of a fourth developmental prototype during FY 1975. The Navy vfax fighter program was allocated $20 million for adaptation of the air combat fighter to be selected by the Air Force— either the General Dynamics Corp. YF—16 or the Northrop Corp. YF-17. Other funds included $81.4 million for six A-10 close-air-support R&D aircraft (in addition to $138 million for purchase of 25 production aircraft); $175 million for F—15 air superiority fighter R&D, and $8.6 million for Navy v/stol development. {PD, 14 Oct 74, 1250; CR, 23 Sept 74, D1125; 24 Sept 74, D1130; Av Wk, 23 Sept 74,17-8) Donald Stone of msfc’s Electronics and Control Laboratory reported a scanning laser radar for automatic rendezvous and docking had been tested for possible use on the space shuttle, space tug, and solar electric propulsion stage. Plans called for delivery of the radar to a simulator of the space tug flight system for evaluation under conditions similar to actual use. (Proceedings; msfc Release 74-182)
NASA announced the award of a $483 000 000, costplusfixedandaward-fee supplemental contract and 11-mo contract extension to Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. for development of the space shuttle orbiter and integration of all elements of the shuttle system. The supplement brought the total value of the contract, which would continue through 30 June 1975, to $943 248 000. Rockwell was to subcontract more than 50% of the dollar value of the contract. (NASA Release 74-195)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998 was reported to the Senate by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The Committee authorization of $3,267 billion was $8,145 million higher than that passed by the House 25 April. It was equal to 1% of the total FY 1975 Federal budget and was $0.5 billion below the constant-level NASA budget endorsed by Congress two years earlier. The Committee had added $16 million to NASA’s 4 Feb. budget request, to fund procurement and launch of a third Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-c) for continuity of remote-sensing data. The Committee also had added $6 million to support activities under way and the initiation and application of new ideas in energy and environmental areas. It refused to concur in $20 million added by the House to the space shuttle program. (SRpt 93-818)
Skyrocketing fuel prices had added almost $1.5 billion to the cost of producing aluminum, titanium, and magnesium, threatening serious inflation for military aircraft programs and NASA’s space shuttle, the Washington Post reported. The price of aluminum had jumped from 6.5 cents for a half kilogram to 31.5 cents in the preceding six months. One aerospace company was quoted as telling the Pentagon and NASA that the rising aluminum prices would increase its program costs 16%. Grumman Aircraft Corp. had said it was paying 25% more for titanium and aluminum than one year ago. Grumman manufactured six models of aircraft, including the Navy’s F-14, which used more titanium than any other aircraft. Rockwell International Corp. had raised the estimated delivery cost of each of its B-l bombers from $45 million to $61.5 million, at least partly because of soaring aluminum and titanium prices. Each B-l required 12 000 kg of titanium and 24 000 kg of aluminum. (O’Toole, W Post, 8 May 74)
Johnson Space Center had requested proposals from 21 firms to design, develop, fabricate, install, and check out one orbiter aeroflight simulator to support crew training during Orbiter 1 development flights in the space shuttle program, JSC announced, (jsc Release 84[74]—150)
Wind-tunnel tests of almost all supersonic portions of a typical NASA space shuttle flight were completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center. The simulated flight profile included separation of the orbiter and its fuel tank from the two large solid-fueled rocket motors, orbiter flight with and without fuel tank, and orbiter reentry into the earth’s atmosphere. The tests, begun September 1973, showed orbiter flight characteristics and the heat levels segments of the system could be expected to experience while traveling 4% to 20 times the speed of sound, (afsc Newsreview, June 74, 8-9; aedc proj off, interview, 27 March 75) 6-7, 12-13 March: nasa Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Edwin C. Kilgore and other NASA officials testified on the FY 1975 nasa oast budget in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Kilgore testified 6 March that in FY 1975 oast would modify its “program again to meet the changing needs of the Nation.” Energy conservation “is an inherent part of our aeronautics and space research and I believe we have the capability also to provide significant support to civil needs for energy technology. At the same time, we must continue our effective response to the Nation’s need for a quiet, clean, economical air transportation system, for support to military aviation, and for a viable program to exploit and explore space.” Much of the aeronautics program [see 26 Feb.] already was “contributing to aircraft fuel conservation.” Advanced avionics systems to relieve terminal congestion, more highly maneuverable aircraft and operational procedures, more efficient engines, composite materials for weight reduction, and aerodynamic drag reduction techniques—“all contribute to fuel economy.” And the program was being examined to increase emphasis in areas related to the national energy problem, both in conservation and in long-term technology. For space exploration, propellants with more powerful liquified-gas oxidizers—storable in cold space conditions—offered up to 30% increase in payloads over those permitted by earth-storable propellants. Nuclear energy studies included investigation of low-temperature thermionic converters, gaseous uranium reactor concepts, and use of heat from high-temperature reactor sources for industry use. In stationary power, NASA was working with the Dept, of Interior’s Office of Coal Research to increase power produced from coal 40%. [See also During March.] George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs, oast, said 12 March that research and development on shuttle systems had contributed to substantial improvements in both high- and low-temperature reusable insulations, coatings, bearings, seals, and hydraulic fluids, all applicable on the earth. The requirement that a reusable space tug return to the shuttle for return to the earth had doubled the velocity requirement of the vehicle, speeding the development of a high-performance propulsion system. (Transcript)
A declassified feasibility study by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. had indicated that reflector satellites 200-900 m in diameter could illuminate ground areas continuously at night, the Huntsville Times reported. Pointing out commercial uses, an official from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had managed the Project Able study, told the Times that potential applications included reflecting microwaves from space for conversion to electrical power, beaming rays on Florida’s orange groves should frost threaten the fruit crop, and lighting Alaska during its extended darkness. Launched on a Saturn V booster or on the space shuttle, a 640-m-dia, 20 000-kg reflector satellite could provide twice the light of the full moon and raise the temperature of the area covered by several degrees, (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 11 Sept 74)
The European Space Research Organization decided to award a $226million, six-year contract to vfw—Fokker/ERNo Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor heading a European team to design and develop Spacelab, the reusable, manned laboratory to be carried into orbit on NASA’s space shuttle in the 1980s. The unanimous decision, made at a Paris meeting of esro’s Administrative and Finance Committee, followed six weeks’ evaluation of two industrial proposals. The second proposal had been submitted by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm. The contract provided for delivery of one Spacelab flight unit, fully qualified and ready for installation of experiments, by April 1979. Two engineering models and three sets of ground support equipment and initial spares would also be delivered. Spacelab, to be reusable for 50 missions of 7 to 30 days each, would permit scientists and engineers to work in earth orbit in shirtsleeve comfort and without extensive astronaut training. The first launch was scheduled for 1980. (esro Release, 5 June 74)
Marshall Space Flight Center had requested quotations from industry on a contract to study a two-way data link using laser beams and operating between ground and payloads in low earth orbit, msfc announced. The study, which could lead to a flight system on the space shuttle, would indicate the most effective lasers and frequencies and analyze effects of orbital dynamics on acquisition, tracking, and pointing systems, (msfc Release 74-28)
A Boeing 747 aircraft had been chosen to transport the space shuttle orbiter and related hardware from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, NASA announced. The 747 would also be used in approach and landing tests of the reusable orbiter. Bought from American Airlines, a used 747 would be modified and equipped with fittings to permit quick installation of the orbiter or hardware on top of the aircraft. Flight profile tests would begin immediately; modifications were to begin after November. Ground and flight tests would begin in late 1976. Takeoff weight with the orbiter was estimated as 35 000 kg. (nasa Release 74-160)
The U.S.S.R.’s Cosmonautics Day and 13th anniversary of the first manned space flight, made by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin in 1961, was marked by articles in the Soviet press. “Cosmonautics is one of the most important testing ranges of science in which many directions of science and technology are being synthesized into a single constantly perfecting system,” Soviet Academician Valentin Glushko wrote in Pravda. The successes of cosmonautics in the preceding 15 to 20 yrs had given a powerful impetus to various branches of knowledge. The initial accumulation of facts by spacecraft had been completed. On the agenda now was the detailed study of dynamic processes, the interconnection of phenomena, and the verification of hypotheses and models. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, acknowledged in an interview with Sovietskaya Rossiya the importance of orbital stations for future space experiments. He also acknowledged that Soviet designers had not yet been able to develop a satisfactory space shuttle. He said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned landing on the moon. His impassioned defense of the Soviet space program suggested that it, like the U.S. program, was under fire by domestic critics; “many millions of rubles” had been saved because of the use of meteorological satellites. In Trud, Academician Boris N. Petrov, head of the Council of International Cooperation in Space Exploration and Use under the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that manned flights “must become more frequent and more extended” to produce “really creative work for specialists of many branches of science.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 16 April 74, Ul-2; Wren, NYT, 13 April 74) to meet mission lifetime requirements—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 23 April. Westar 1 was acquired by a mobile ground station at 9:38 pm edt and control was turned over to Western Union. The satellite apogee motor was successfully fired at 5:21 pm edt 16 April and Westar 1 was placed in geosynchronous orbit with a 35 592-km apogee, 35 166-km perigee, 23-hr 35-min period, and 0.6° inclination. An onboard hydrazine reaction control system was moving the satellite toward its final position above the equator at 99° W longitude. Each of 12 transponders aboard Westar 1 could relay 1200 voice circuits, 1 color TV channel with program audio, or data at 50 megabits per sec. The Westar system-including one satellite to be launched in June, one satellite to be held in reserve, and five earth stations—would greatly increase Western Union’s capacity for commercial and personal communications. Expected to be operational in August, the system would be the first to interconnect, under one company, satellites and an existing continent-wide, computer-switched, multipurpose terrestrial network. (nasa mors, 19 March 74,24 April 74; gsfc Wkly SSR, 11-17 April 74; nasa Release 74-77; McElheny, NYT, 15 April 74, 1; AP, CSM, 18 April 74; SBD, 26 April 74, 322; gsfc proj off, interview, 7 Nov 75)
Personnel from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, operator of the solar observatory at Johnson Space Center since 1970, would move to Marshall Space Flight Center, jsc announced. NOAA would continue at msfc as co-investigator in an experiment conducted with the Apollo Telescope Mount on the Skylab Workshop during its 1973— 1974 mission. The experiment had gathered solar radiation data in the x-ray region of the solar spectrum. The jsc-noaa solar observatory would reopen for space shuttle operations, (jsc Release 74-253)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Aerospace Co., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., and Martin Marietta Corp. for negotiation of parallel contracts of about $300 000 each for preliminary design and program definition studies for the support systems module (ssm), a major element of the Large Space Telescope (lst) . The lst was scheduled for launch into orbit on the space shuttle in the 1980s. The ssm, attached to the structure housing the telescope, would provide electric power, data storage, communications, and automated attitude sensing, pointing, and control. The unit would also contain some of the elements for orbital servicing and retrieval of the telescope by the space shuttle, (nasa Release 74-308)
Astronaut-physician Dr. F. Story Musgrave and Dr. Dennis R. Morrison of Johnson Space Center’s Bioscience Payloads Office spent one week in a mockup Spacelab at JSC in a shakedown' test of operational procedures and experiments. Spacelab, a scientific space laboratory, was being developed and built by the European Space Research Organization for orbital missions aboard NASA’s space shuttle. A rehearsal for future tests and a means of perfecting operational procedures, this first test also evaluated proposed space shuttle ground support and flight crew operational procedures, data-handling techniques, man-machine integration, and biomedical demonstrations representative of Spacelab medical experiments, (jsc Release 74-255; jsc Roundup, 11 Oct 74, 1)
Wind-tunnel tests of 4% scale models of the space shuttle orb iter had begun at Air Force Systems Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force announced. The tests of heat buildup on the forward half of the orbiter during the critical period of reentry and at other points in the flight trajectory were scheduled to continue through the remainder of the year. The 4% model, the fourth size to be tested in the aedc tunnels, reflected the latest design details on the forward half of the orbiter. (afsc Release oip 207.74)
Construction of the $22-million runway for the space shuttle was begun at Kennedy Space Center after a brief ground-breaking ceremony at the construction site northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. Dr. Debus, KSC Director, said the shuttle would lead to a “new era of international transportation to and from space” and the “boom and bust of the 1960s of this community and the activities of the government will be changed to a more steady—more reliable—situation.” The 90-m wide, 4600-m long, 40-cm thick runway would accommodate a 75 000-kg spacecraft returning from space at a 15° to 20° angle and at a speed of nearly 295 km per hr. More than 8000 km of grooves in the surface would permit drainage and prevent hydroplaning while " landing in the rain. To reduce the speed of the returning shuttle, astronauts would have the help of brakes, parachutes, and a net at the end of the runway. The runway was scheduled for July 1976 completion. (Spaceport News, 4 April 74, 1, 5; McElheny, NYT, 2 April 74, 22)
NASA announced selection of General Electric Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., and TRW Systems Group to negotiate three six-month, $600 000, fixed-price contracts to make parallel system definition studies for the Earth Observatory Satellite (eos) mission. The studies were to design a low-cost modularized spacecraft with a space platform for testing sensors and collecting remotely sensed data for a variety of applications missions, eos would be designed for launch by both conventional boosters and the space shuttle. (NASA Release 74-80)
A Washington Star-News editorial commented on the triumph of the Skylab program: Although a “fellow wondering where his next tank of gas is coming from has difficulty getting excited about the cosmos,” the country “could take much encouragement from the successful completion of the $2.6-bilIion Skylab program.” We could expect that this had been well worth the effort and that a similar crash program on energy could meet with the same success. Americans would not venture into space again until the space shuttle project at the end of the decade, except for the 1975 linkup of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft. If all went well, that “could be the most fascinating and heartening adventure since that first landing on the moon.” (W Star-News, 14 Feb 74, A18)
A nine-month, $321 394 study contract to provide NASA with engineering concepts, requirements, and design trade-offs for a zero-gravity atmospheric-cloud-physics-experiment laboratory to fly on the space shuttle had been awarded to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The proposed laboratory would permit study of “trigger” actions in clouds, such as the formation of ice crystals or water droplets, electrical charges on droplets, and waterdroplet—icecrystal interactions to aid in the ultimate control and modification of hazardous weather conditions. The laboratory could be reused on at least 20 Spacelab missions. ( msfc Release 74-27; msfc pao)
Federal research and development support of space programs had declined steadily in proportion to civil projects from 1969 to 1975, the National Science Foundation reported in its Analysis of Federal R&D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969—1975. Energy and environment programs had outpaced other major civil programs, while space programs had been reduced more than any other R&D function in the period. In FY 1975, the space budget was 13% of the planned $19.6-billion Federal r&d funding, a decline from 23.9% in 1969. Manned space flight, including the space shuttle, would account for more than half the 1975 total, (nsf Report 74-313)
The first system to use solar energy to heat a U.S. school began operation in Timonium, Md. The $568 000 project, jointly sponsored by the National Science Foundation and AAl Corp. [see 2 Feb.], was rushed into operation in six weeks to use the remainder of the winter’s chilly days to gather experimental data for future solar heating systems. (Richards, W Post, 8 March 74, C2) 7, 12-14 March: Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on NASA’s space science program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1975 authorization hearings: A Solar Maximum Mission (smm) satellite was proposed for FY 1975 design study and launch in the next period of maximum solar activity, 19781979. smm would investigate solar flares and related phenomena and their effects on the solar-terrestrial system, making, for the first time, simultaneous measurements of flares across the electromagnetic spectrum—within a national program of satellite, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations of the sun during maximum activity. The spacecraft would be shuttle-retrievable for refurbishment and reflight with advanced solar physics experiments in the 1980s. Requested funding for the Large Space Telescope (Ls’r) for FY 1975 was $6.2 million, to proceed with design of telescope optics, detectors, and support systems. NASA had originally planned to spend about $10 million in FY 1975 on the lst—to be launched on the space shuttle in 1980—but reduced the request to reflect the four- to six-month delay in shuttle development. NASA—in cooperation with the Naval Research Laboratory, Sandia Laboratories, and West Germany—was developing an Aries sounding rocket to support the physics and astronomy program. Aries, which used the 2nd stage of surplus Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missiles, would provide a greater lift and longer flight time than possible at the price of rockets now in use. Cost overruns on the 1975 two-spacecraft Viking mission to Mars could total 10% of the original $838-million estimate for the program because of hardware development problems. Major problems with the biology instrument included packing the sophisticated instruments into a small volume, development of very small valves to inject sufficiently small amounts of nutrients into Martian samples, and thermal control. The instrument was running $21.2 million over the budgeted cost. Difficulties also had been encountered in producing enough 0.005-cm plated magnetic wire of uniform characteristics for the onboard computer. Dr. Naugle said that, although the overall coniplexity of the spacecraft had been underestimated, “we expect these problems to be solved and to launch both Viking spacecraft on schedule in 1975.” (Transcript) Experiments were designed to demonstrate an attitude control accuracy of better than three arc minutes using a gas jet system, measure the performance in orbit of operational infrared sensor components, demonstrate an inexpensive Canopus sensor of high reliability, measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft, determine interference generated by the propane gas control system, demonstrate a basic sensing element with application in digital sun and earth albedo sensors, and measure degradation of silicone solar cells in orbit. NASA’s objective of placing the satellite in an earth orbit that would permit achievement of the scientific objectives was met, and the mission was adjudged a success 19 March. Under a December 1972 Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the U.K.’s Dept, of Trade and Industry, NASA would be reimbursed for launch vehicle and services. Developed for the U.K. by Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., the 83.5-by 66.5-cm, 92-kg spacecraft was powered by a four-panel 250-cm-long solar array of 1800 solar cells. Miranda was deployed in a fully sunlit polar orbit with a yo-yo despin system and its attitude control system acquired the sun through three sun sensors. The eighth NASA launch of a U.K. satellite and the fourth on a Scout vehicle—Miranda carried the names of 80000 Boy Scouts from nine U.S. states on a microdot. (NASA MOR, 21 March 74; NASA Releases 74-36, 74-53; UN Reg;- Newport News, Va, Daily Press, 22 Feb 74; SBD, 12 March 74,59)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers testified during the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1975 NASA authorization that space shuttle subcontractors, vendors, and suppliers had been selected in 32 states. Of the major subcontractors, 30 had already begun work. By June 1974 the total major subcontractor team would be at almost 100% of the required level. Shuttle employment was 16 000 and would reach 27 000 by June 1974 and 37 000 by June 1975. The first major subsystem test of the shuttle main engine would be made before the end of June 1974. Fabrication of Orbiter 1 would begin by the end of 1974, with the first horizontal flight test scheduled for the second quarter of 1977, the first manned orbital flight for the second quarter of 1979, and initial operational shuttle capability for 1980. (Transcript)
The Shuttle Avionic Integration Laboratory (sail) was being established at Johnson Space Center to provide a central facility for testing and evaluating avionics, flight software, flight procedures, and ground equipment for the space shuttle. Testing in sail would provide information on system operation before each major step in the shuttle flight tests. (jsc Roundup, 4 Jan 74)
Ames Research Center awarded a $400 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for a design study of an infrared telescope to be carried on the space shuttle above the impeding effects of the atmosphere. The telescope, to operate in orbit attached to the shuttle orbiter, was to have a one-arc-sec pointing accuracy, a 1- to 1.5-m aperture, and cooled optics and sensors. The study would include the telescope facility concept, interfaces with the shuttle orbiter and Spacelab, operating requirements for shuttle and telescope, and ground station requirements including data transfer from the telescope to the ground and control of the telescope from the ground if necessary, (arc proj off, interview, 29 July 75; AvWk, 19 Aug 74,18)
Lockheed-California Co. had received a $25-million letter contract from Rockwell International Corp. for structural testing of the space shuttle orbiter, the Huntsville Times reported. (Huntsville Times, 12 Sept 74)
Permanent nasa employment had decreased 4.2% during FY 1974, dropping from 25 955 to 24 854 employees, NASA’s Office of Personnel reported. Despite a numerical decrease of 470, employment in professional occupations had risen to 61.4% of the NASA total. The minority component increased to 6%. The increase in average age slowed to 0.2 year, reaching 42.7 years, while the average GS grade remained the same at 11.0. The 2358 separations were almost twice as many as the 1246 accessions, with most of the reduction-in-force separations occurring in technical support, wage grade, and clerical occupations, (nasa, “The In-house Work Force,” FY 1974) During June: NASA began “Outlook for Space,” a comprehensive planning study to identify potential roles for space exploration and exploitation 1980-2000. The year-long study, headed by Deputy Director Donald P. Hearth of Goddard Space Flight Center, would seek to relate goals of potential civilian space activities to national interests, to develop a list of desirable and practical U.S. civilian space activities, to group activities with specific sets of goals, to define research and development tasks required for potential commercial and operational uses of space, and to identify social and economic challenges that could benefit from the use of space. NASA would consult representatives from universities, other Government agencies, and' industry. The study would supplement “The 1973 NASA Payload Model” planning effort, which had evaluated potential uses of the space shuttle, space tug, and Spacelab and which had been completed in October 1973. The new study would continue through June 1975. (NASA Activities, 15 Sept 74, 2-6; gsfc proj off, interview, 17 July 74)
President Nixon was briefed on the space shuttle and the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at Johnson Space Center. Following a tour, the President and Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented the Sky lab 4 astronauts with NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal. Nixon praised the efforts of the “great American scientific, mechanical, and clerical communities” for their contributions to the space program. “You have contributed to . . . the spirit of a great country, which means always look out toward the unknown, go there, take any risk, make any sacrifice, and never be discouraged because sometimes you may fail.” Of the astp, President Nixon said that although systems of government were different, the U.S. wanted “to cooperate with the Russian people and with all the people on the earth in anything that will advance the cause of science, the cause of health, the cause of a better life foT all our children, as well, of course, as the cause of peace.” (jsc Roundup, 29 March 74,1; PD, 25 March 74,345-347)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a two-phase planning study contract for the space transportation system (sts) to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Phase 1, funded at $116 214 for six months, would define a master scheduling concept for effective use of the space shuttle, interim upper stage, space tug, and Spacelab. Phase 2, funded at $183 240 for an additional nine months, would validate a master planning technique and establish specifications for scheduling. (msfc Release 74-242)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998, a clean bill introduced 4 April to replace H.R. 12689, was reported out of the House Committee oh Science and Astronautics. The revised bill would authorize $3,253 billion in FY 1975 funding, an increase of $6 million over the original request. Authorizations for research and development increased $11 million to $2,357 billion, and construction of facilities decreased $5 million, to $146.5 million. Funding for research and program management remained the same. Iiicluded in the k&d increases was a $2Q-million addition, to a total $112.3 million, for the space shuttle main engine, which had encountered technical problems during early development. The increase was proposed to add confidence in meeting schedules and hold total program costs at the current projection. A $4.3-million increase, to $170.7 million, was added for aeronautical research and technology. A $1.8-million increase brought the total for space and nuclear research and technology to $76.6 million. Manned space flight operations funding was decreased $15 million, to $308.3 million, including a $5-million decrease (to $109.6 million) for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and a $10-million decrease (to $165.2 million) in development, test, and mission operations. Changes in facility construction authorizations included an increase of $4 million, to $10.04 million for construction of the infrared telescope facility in Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The Committee also requested that NASA make a scientific and technological inventory of its capability to contribute to such critical national needs as energy, transportation, and environmental control. NASA was to report to the Committee by 1 Aug. (H Rpt 93-983)
The Senate approved the House-Senate Conference report on H.R. 13998 recommending a $3.267-billion FY 1975 NASA authorization. The compromise between the 9 May Senate bill and the 25 April House bill would authorize $805 million for the space shuttle, a $5-million increase over the President’s requested funding instead of the $20-million increase voted by the House. An $18.8-million increase in space applications, instead of the Senate’s $23-million increase, dropped specific designation of $13 million for the erts-c spacecraft, but the Conference report recommended that the project be promptly initiated and it retained the Senate’s $3-miIIion addition for a Thor-Delta to launch erts-C. The Conference bill would decrease manned space flight operations funding by $10 million, instead of the Senate’s $5-million cut and the House bill’s $15-million cut. It would retain the Senate’s $5.1-million addition for aeronautical research and add 4.9 million for energy research, as well as the House-and-Senate-voted $2 million for research in shortterm weather phenomena and the House-added $1 million for ground propulsion research. (CR, 30 May 74, S9349-52)
Chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and members of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics received an annual program review at Kennedy Space Center, preliminary to FY 1975 congressional space budget hearings. The Subcommittee was briefed on preparations for the space shuttle, manpower, and plans for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Center personnel would be' further reduced in the next five months, with the closeout of the Skylab program. Runway construction was to begin in the spring for the shuttle, (ksc Release 18—74)
Tentative NASA plans for launching 810 payloads into space in the next two decades were outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. The total, for late 1973 to 1991, included non-NASA payloads for Government agencies (other than the Dept, of Defense), foreign agencies, and private industry. The tentative payload model—presented to Congress in October 1973 to show “what could be done in the 1980s” when the space shuttle was in use—included as many as 10 missions to the outer planets Uranus, Neptune, Jupiter, and Saturn. In 1990 and 1991 two very heavy payloads might be sent to orbit one of Jupiter’s moons and land an instrument package. Tentative missions to the inner planets included five missions to Venus, one of them with a lander, and two spacecraft to orbit Mercury. Tentative Mars missions included one spacecraft to orbit the planet, two landers, and two to return samples from the two moons of Mars. Lunar missions under consideration included a lunar polar orbiter in 1979, two other orbiters in the 1980s, two lunar rovers in the 1980s, a lunar halo satellite to ensure communications with the hidden side of the moon, and two lunar rovers in 1990 and 1991 that could return samples to the earth from any point on the moon. Other plans under consideration were a flyby and rendezvous with Comet Encke and a landing on the nucleus, a flyby of Haley’s Comet in 1985, and two missions to asteroids in 1986. Of the 810 total payloads, 57 were designated for planetary exploration and 753 for earth orbit. Scientific satellites for earth orbit were Large Space Telescopes, High Energy Astronomical Observatories, Large Solar Observatories, Large Radio Astronomy Observatories, and x-ray telescopes. The large spacecraft would be unmanned but visited regularly by space shuttle crews and brought back to earth for refurbishing. In the applications field were large Earth Observatory Satellites. And NASA expected to orbit 120 communications and navigation satellites for other agencies or private industry through 1991, not including those for DOD. Of some 300 payloads to be flown in the Spacelab, most would be NASA payloads in the fields of astronomy, physics, earth observations, earth and ocean physics, communication and navigation, life science, and space technology. Of non-NASA payloads, 10 would be for private industry space processing, beginning in 1985. Some 10% were expected to be flown for foreign users. The large number of contemplated missions, even with the increasing number of U.S.S.R. launches, was expected to have very little impact on the environment. Effects of the major constituents of the solid-fueled rocket booster exhaust—water vapor, carbon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, and aluminum oxide—would be negligible. (Text)
President Ford as a Congressman had been a “staunch defender of space spending” whenever critics suggested cuts in NASA’s budget, the San Diego Union reported. As minority leader, Ford had declared that the space program could be justified by its spinoffs. In April 1972, Ford had defended a $200-million space shuttle appropriation because he had believed that its loss would end the space program. (Macomber, SD Union, 8 Sept 74,19) With President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Mstislav V. Keldysh, Dr. Fletcher visited the space flight control center near Moscow, from which the ASTP mission would be controlled in July 1975. Dr. Fletcher also visited the cosmonaut training center and the Apollo-Soyuz laboratory center with the head of the Intercosmos Council, Academician Boris N. Petrov, and discussed Soviet-American cooperation in exploration and peaceful uses of outer space with Deputy Chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers Vladimir A. Kirillin, (nasa Off of Admin, Daily Appointments Calendar; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12 Sept 74, U1; 13 Sept 74, U1)
The success of the Skylab program had made the idea of continuous occupation of an orbital base more concrete to the directors of the American space efforts, a New York Times article reported. Such a base could be assembled by flights of the space shuttle being developed by NASA and could be used to observe the sun and the earth and for manufacturing special materials under weightless conditions. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider had said in an interview, “We have shown that there is no man or machine limitation on whatever we want to do in space.” The confidence of space scientists had been strengthened by the apparent adaptation of the astronauts to space, although the Times reported Skylab 2 Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin and Johnson Space Center Director Christopher C. Kraft as cautioning that nine men “is a very small statistical sample.” More long test flights would have to be made. However, if the medical data held true, the design of future space stations could be made much simpler and the number of space shuttle flights to establish it would be fewer. Schneider had noted that the conflict between the Workshop’s need for power and its program for observation was still to be solved. The current design called for Workshop solar panels to point toward the sun rather than the earth. In a future space station, observatories might be placed on long booms which could turn on their own, minimizing the station’s need to maneuver. (McElheny, NYT, 10 Feb 74,40)
A mainshaft seal for turbine engines was being developed at Lewis Research Center to reduce wear, maintenance, and fuel consumption. By creating a thin gas film, the self-acting lift-pad seal eliminated contact between the seal bore and the rotating shaft shoulder except at startup and shutdown. The seal functioned at higher pressures, speeds, and temperatures than conventional contact seals and, with its low wear and leak rate, would be used in the NASA space shuttle liquid-oxygen pump. (LeRC Release 74-55)
Static test firings of a 6.4%-scale model of the space shuttle to gather acoustical data for design and development activities began at Marshall Space Flight Center. A series of 24 acoustic test firings would continue through November, with 7 additional tests later to study possible sound-suppression methods. The test model’s two solid-propellant engines, representing the shuttle vehicle’s solid-fueled-rocket boosters, were being tested first, to be followed by full system firings, including the three model liquid-propellant engines representing the main engines, which would use liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. On each firing, 60 acoustic measurements were taken by specialized microphones to monitor areas potentially sensitive to high sound-pressure levels: vehicle skin panels, thermal protection devices, electronic guidance components, and ground support and related structures, (msfc Release 74-154; msfc pio, interview, 15 July 75)
Major reorganizations were announced at NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director. Dr. Fletcher said the Headquarters reorganization and key personnel appointments would consolidate planning and direction of research and development programs under the Associate Administrator and overall planning and direction of the field center operations under the newly created position of Associate Administrator for Center Operations. Dr. Petrone was named Associate Administrator. He would remain as msfc Director until early summer when he would be replaced by Dr. William R. Lucas, msfc Deputy Director. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator. He would also continue as Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science until a successor was named. Dr. George M. Low, in addition to his duties as Deputy Administrator, would serve as Acting Associate Administrator for Center Operations until the new position was filled. He would be assisted by Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), who would also continue as the Assistant Administrator for Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs, was named Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. Bernard Moritz was appointed Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. The reorganization, effective 15 March, followed completion of the Apollo and Skylab programs and would provide mechanisms for the phaseover from conventional launch vehicles to the space shuttle and new programs, Dr. Fletcher said. At msfc, Dr. Petrone said that the reorganization, effective 30 May, would enable the Center to fulfill requirements of its varied assigned programs and improve its competitive position to obtain new assignments. The major changes were in the Science and Engineering Directorate. A Deputy for Operations and a Deputy for Systems had been established. Business operations and control of all resources had been consolidated into a centralized office at the directorate level. Elements under the s&E Directorate included two associate directors, an Associate Director of Engineering and an Associate Director of Management; two offices, Reliability and Quality Assurance and Research and Technology; and eight laboratories. The laboratories were being restructured to emphasize system engineering and integration, analysis, design, and testing. The in-house capability to manufacture, inspect, and check out major hardware projects had been eliminated, with the associated supply, warehousing, and procurement capability. Reorganization in msfc’s Administration and Program Support Directorate included consolidation of Center-wide automatic data-process-ing functions within A&PS. Offices under a&PS would include Technology Utilization, Manpower, Financial Management, Facilities, Procurement, Management, Services, Logistics, and Computer Services. (NASA Ann, 5 March 74; NASA Release 74-76; msfc Release 74-31)
The National Academy of Sciences issued Scientific Uses of the Space Shuttle, report of a July 1973 conference in Woods Hole, Mass., sponsored by the nas Space Science Board. The conference, attended by 61 U.S. and European scientists from seven scientific disciplines, concluded the shuttle could be an important asset to scientific research. Increased size, weight, and simplicity permitted for payloads would be of chief importance. But many potential advantages depended on innovative management and clear-cut, efficient, and flexible procedures for flying multipurpose missions. Small experiments could be flown cost-effectively on small standardized pallets with integrated experiments, put on standby and flown when space was available. The projected 28-day sortie mission would be valuable for most disciplines but major programs requiring longer observation times should be carried out on free-flying automated spacecraft launched from a pallet in the shuttle’s payload bay. Cost-effectiveness of recovering and refurbishing payloads in orbit required additional study. A sophisticated Large Space Telescope—proposed for launch on the shuttle—might be worth the cost to revisit and service or return to earth. But visits to less expensive spacecraft in inconvenient orbits might prove too costly. Limits on recoverable payload weight might also restrict recovery. Scientists expressed concern that weight requirements for men in addition to a crew might limit scientific payloads. A manned Spacelab module was considered essential for biomedical research but other disciplines could often use a smaller module housing a payload specialist and his console. Because of weight penalties, real-time control and evaluation might be best supplied by a ground-based control using a shuttle-to-ground communications system, such as the proposed Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , giving continuous global coverage with a high rate of data interchange. (Text) July 1974
Dr. Robert A. R. Parker, scientist-astronaut and program scientist for the Skylab mission, had been named Chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, Johnson Space Center announced. Dr. Parker succeeded Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, who had been named Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs at NASA Hq. in May. The s&ad would serve as an interface between eventual space shuttle payload users and nasa and participate in the shuttle flight research program. Dr. Parker had been named a nasa scientist-astronaut in 1967 and had been a member of the support crews for the Apollo 15 and 17 missions. (JSC Release 74-186)
Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, Dept, of Defense Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testified on dod space programs before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1975 NASA authorization hearings: dod would provide an interim, upper, orbit-to-orbit stage (oos) for initial use with NASA’s space shuttle until NASA could develop a permanent space tug. The oos, which would provide the high orbits necessary for about 60% of military payloads, would be a low-cost modification of an existing upper stage and would be phased to coincide with the first operation of the shuttle orbiter in 1980. About $3.0 million would he spent in FY 1975 to select stage configuration and initiate detailed specifications. The oos would have no payload retrieval capability and might not be reusable but could be used by NASA or any other shuttle user during early shuttle operations, dod would install facilities to provide initial shuttle capability at Vandenberg Air Force Base in December 1982. Shuttle hardware, software, operating procedures, and ground equipment would be common and interchangeable to the maximum extent possible between KSC and Vandenberg. During FY 1974 DOD had initiated the development and validation plan for the navstar Global Positioning System, using satellites to provide worldwide precise positioning and navigation, accurate to tens of meters. The system, usable for civilian purposes as well as military, would halt the proliferation of specialized systems. The Navy’s Fleet Satellite Communications System (fltsatcom) , to provide reliable beyond-the-horizon communications for command and control of mobile DOD forces, was “well into development.” Terminal equipment for the fleet would be installed in FY 1975 and FY 1976 and would be operated through minimal leased transponders in Communication Satellite Corp.’s Maritime Communications Satellite System pending full operation of fltsatcom in 1976. Three operational early warning satellites were in geostationary orbit. DOD would seek to improve coverage and mission duration and continue development of a simplified processing station. Two Lincoln Experimental Satellites, comsats les 8 and 9 scheduled for 1975 launch, would use radioisotope thermoelectric generators instead of solar cell arrays. The Space Detection and Tracking System (spadats), which could cover up to 5600 km, would he expanded. DOD was working on detectors, target discrimination, data processing, and other critical optical and radar components, to reach a near-real-time ground-based capability by FY 1978 to detect, track, and identify all objects up to 36 000-km altitude. (Transcript; Av Wk, 1 April 74,20)
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $3 850 000 contract modification to Rockwell International Corp. for architectural and engineering services and construction of test and industrial facilities for the space shuttle main engine, NASA announced. (NASA Release 74-97)
Congressmen and staff of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were briefed at Marshall Space Flight Center and Michoud Assembly Facility in preparation for hearings on NASA’s FY 1975 budget. Committee members were briefed on Skylab, space shuttle, tug, Spacelab, concept verification test, and use of space transportation systems at MSFC. On 2 Feb. they were briefed on the space shuttle external tank at Michoud. {Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 2)
The International Aeronautical Federation held its 25th Congress in Amsterdam with the theme “Space Stations, Present and Future.” Among speakers, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, U.S. and Soviet commanders in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, stressed how well joint work and understanding had advanced. A paper by Daniel J. Shramo of Lewis Research Center, with B. R. Foushee and P. J. O’Leary of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., described the Centaur primary upper stage for solar system exploration and its potential adaptation as an upper stage for the space shuttle. A Ukranian Academy of Sciences research team reported on experiments in the formation of melts in weightlessness with radiant heating and on prospects of using solar energy for space engineering. Comparative studies of metal solidification had suggested that a more uniform distribution of short-grained structures under weightlessness might become the basis of space technology, with the added attraction of using the sun as an energy source. The team had built a prototype solar plant that could be mounted on a spacecraft or used in a vacuum chamber on the earth. Soviet medical investigations during the flights of Soyuz 12 (launched 27 Sept. 1973), Soyuz 13 (18 Dec. 1973), and Soyuz 14 (3 July) were reported by Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko and others. Findings indicated that prolonged exercises, full and partial spacesuits, and gravity-simulating fittings had reduced effects of weightlessness during the space flight and after the crew’s return. Although reports of initial adaptation symptoms were similar to American findings, the Soviet paper also noted that cosmonauts had reduced vestibular symptoms by deliberately slowing down movements, especially head movements. Prof. Hilding A. Bjurstedt, Head of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, received the 1974 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for studies of physiological responses to environmental stress. Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, was elected iaf President (iaa Ann Rpt, 28 Aug 74; Parks, SF, Feb 75, 42-50; Program, 25th iaf Congress; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74, 21) During September: Large-scale verification tests of the “rectenna” receiving system for microwave energy transmission were run at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA. A microwave energy transmission system was being developed to determine the possibility of transmitting energy through space. The tests established a new record for microwave power transmission, delivering one kilowatt over a 1.6-km range. The 10-yr program had increased DC-to-DC efficiency of transmissions from 17% to 50% and efficiency of the rectenna in converting radio frequency to dc from 25% to 78%. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 15 Oct 74, 57-60)
A New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial advocated international cooperation in space: The U.S. was committed to a reusable space shuttle for possible use in the future with a permanent manned space station. The U.S.S.R. would probably embark on its own space shuttle and space station program. “The cost of establishing a space station ... is such that it would be foolish for each nation to assume the full burden when a common station could provide everything a separate one could—even a ‘secure section’ for each side for passive military uses.” {T—Picayune, 13 May 74,23)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in his article “Are Skylab and the Space Shuttle Worth the Investment?” in Government Executive that everything done in the Skylab program—with total runout costs of $2.6 billion through FY 1974—had been necessary for future progress in space. He believed the Skylab team had “taken another giant leap for mankind comparable to the first step upon the Moon or the first satellite in Earth orbit.” And even if the shuttle were not expected to save $1 billion a year in launch and payload costs, as it was—after an $8-billion 1972-1991 investment—the U.S. “should still build it. We cannot run Spaceship Earth without it.” We could not “begin to think of obtaining solar power from collectors in space without the Shuttle; we cannot hope to unlock the still hidden energy secrets of the Sun and stars without improved space observatories launched by the Shuttle; we cannot hope to develop the tools for management of natural resources and protection of our environment on a global scale without manned and unmanned Earth observatories launched and serviced by the advantages of a ‘hydrogen economy’ in the future unless we are willing to support such important steps toward that future as a hydrogen-fueled Shuttle. In short, there is no new frontier in space for America and mankind without the Shuttle.” (Govt Exec, Jan 74,38-42) February 1974
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center since its establishment in 1962, announced his retirement. Born in Germany, Dr. Debus had begun his career in U.S. military and NASA space programs in 1945, when with Dr. Wernher von Braun he had joined the Army’s ballistic missile program. He had supervised the launch of the first Redstone ballistic missile in 1953 and the flight-testing of Jupiter and Pershing missiles and Jupiter C and Juno launch vehicles until the Army team was transferred to NASA in 1960. He had directed the launch of the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, on 31 Jan. 1958, and NASA launch programs from the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1961 to preparations for space shuttle operations. Dr. Debus had received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award from the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics as well as the Army’s highest civilian decoration, the Exceptional Civilian Service Medal, and NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal. (ksc Release 135-74; Debus letter to ksc employees)
A standardized solar-electric propulsion stage (seps) that could become part of a space transportation system for payloads in planetary and earth-orbital missions was under study at Marshall Space Flight Center, seps, one of several concepts under study, would be able to accept modules such as a docking subsystem for earth-orbital missions or a science package for planetary missions. Another concept, for an attachable SEP module, would provide propulsion only and depend on spacecraft subsystems for all other functions, seps would carry a cluster of six to nine thrusters, fueled by ionized mercury, and two lightweight 27-m solar-array wings to supply 25 kw of power to the thrusters and payloads. It was being designed for use with the space shuttle and space tug, and application of an attachable Sep module to a Mariner spacecraft was being studied. The tug, supplemented by seps, would be able to deploy and retrieve a 2500-kg geosynchronous equatorial payload in 100 days, tripling the amount the unaided tug could deliver. After one delivery, the seps could continue to operate between the shuttle orbit and intermediate orbits, delivering and retrieving 20 more payloads before the thruster life was used up. (nasa Release 74r-38; NASA omsf, interview)
In the general purpose laboratory (GPL) at Marshall Space Flight Center, investigators from MSFC and Johnson Space Center were conducting experiments in high-energy cosmic-ray astronomy, superfluid helium, optical x-ray astronomy, and life sciences. The objective of the experiments, designated concept verification test (CVT) 5, was to verify operational and integration concepts for their applicability to Spacelab, the reusable manned space laboratory being built by the European Space Agency as a payload for the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the high-energy astronomy experiment was to demonstrate the use of minicomputers for experiment operation, control, and data management, and the real-time interaction of payload specialists with experiment operations. The superfluid helium experiment examined characteristics of helium droplets at temperatures near 2.2 K (—512°F), which would help in developing cryogenic techniques for use in Spacelab. The optical astronomy experiment, which demonstrated remote experiment operation by obtaining data from a Ferson 40.6-cm telescope 9.2 kilometers away, gave practice in investigator-experiment interaction and helped in developing computer control techniques, display requirements for telescope operation and data management, and astronomy training requirements for crew members. The four life-sciences experiments included studies of sporophore formation, the vestibular function, a clinical diagnostic system, and muscle-like contractile protein. Investigators also participated in an experiment to demonstrate the use of a computer in real-time mission planning, scheduling, and applications. By involving investigators in the CVT simulations, NASA would be able to plan the most cost-effective use of Spacelab. (MSFC Release 75-178)
Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)
A request for proposals for integrated electronic assemblies (IEA) for the Space Shuttle’s solid-rocket boosters had been issued by Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. The proposals would be for design, development, test and evaluation, fabrication, and assembly of 33 IEAs. The Space Shuttle would carry two refurbishable IEAs, one forward and one aft, to route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system to release the nosecap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket motor nozzle, detach parachutes, and turn on the recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—11)
NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration were near agreement on a plan to build a coal gasification plant near NASA’s Michoud assembly facility in La. to provide hydrogen gas for testing and operating the Space Shuttle, said Dr. Myron S. Malkin, director of the Space Shuttle program for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. In testimony before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Dr. Malkin said ERDA would hire a private contractor to build a $65-million plant and would operate it for 3 yr to obtain data on coal gasification; after that, it would turn the plant over to NASA. The facility would produce enough gas daily to provide 30 tons of liquid hydrogen for the Shuttle. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 858, 910)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two contracts to Martin Marietta Corp. for further studies on the Earth Orbiting Teleoperator System (EOTS). Under a $246 570 contract Martin would design EOTS, an unmanned remotely controlled spacecraft, to operate in earth orbit near the Space Shuttle Orbiter. The spacecraft would carry a TV camera for close-up inspection, have docking capability, and be propelled by cold-gas expulsion. Under a $64 000 contract Martin would develop a complete set of requirements for the control and display station, a unit in the Orbiter that would contain control equipment common to all experiments requiring a teleoperator system. (MSFC Release 75—29)
NASA had issued a request for proposals for the procurement of telecommunications services provided by a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) developed and operated by industry to meet NASA requirements, NASA announced. TDRSS, consisting of two specialized relay satellites in synchronous earth orbit and a U.S.-based ground terminal, would relay nearly continuous data and voice commands to and from mission spacecraft and the ground control center. The network could support all earth-orbiting spacecraft below 5000 km, including the Space Shuttle and Spacelab, and provide 85% coverage, compared with the current 15% coverage by the conventional ground tracking system. (NASA Release 75—37)
NASA announced the award of a $2 376 400 contract to Reinhold Construction Co. for phase 2 of the Space Shuttle landing facility, including the landing aids control building, Orbiter landing instrumentation facilities, and related communications and utility systems. Phase 2 was scheduled for completion by the end of 1976. Phase 1, which began in April 1974 as a $21 812 737 contract with Morrison Knudsen Co., included construction of the 4570-m-long, 91-m-wide runway, towway apron, and towway. Site preparation was nearing completion and the paving with nearly 200 000 cu m of cement would begin in July. Phase 1 was scheduled for completion by the summer of 1976. (KSC Release 62— 75)
The Air Force had announced operational concepts for Space Shuttle launches at Vandenberg Air Force Base. Construction, planned to begin in mid-1978, would cost $50 million less than original estimates through maximum use of existing facilities such as Space Launch Complex No. 6—constructed in the 1960s for the Air Force’s manned orbiting laboratory cancelled in June 1969—and existing roadways and railroad tracks. An “integrate on the pad” concept and modification of surplus Saturn IB rocket transporters to move the Orbiter and external tanks to the launch pad had eliminated the need for a new highway and railroad system. A study coordinated with the Navy showed that the solid-rocket booster that dropped off the main tank into the ocean could be successfully recovered with a minimum of new facilities by using an existing Navy dock and large stationary crane. Operations facility requirements would be programmed in two phases: Phase one, construction of a complete ground-support system, would allow the DOD to operate Space Shuttle missions from Vandenberg by December 1982. Phase two called for completion of a second launch pad in late 1986. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 16)
NASA’s basic goal in the U.S. stratospheric research program was to determine the normal makeup of the upper atmosphere with emphasis on understanding the dynamic processes occurring and the perturbations caused by natural and man-made events, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s current high-altitude program was being carried out by conventional and special purpose aircraft such as the U—2, instrumented packages placed on commercial aircraft, instrumented balloons, sounding rockets, and computer modeling techniques. Satellites still provided the best potential for continuing repetitive global observations of the upper atmosphere. The Nimbus satellites had measured properties affecting the ozone and had made vertical profiles of the upper atmosphere. Atmospheric Explorer (AE) satellites had made coordinated investigations of photochemical processes in the upper atmosphere caused by solar ultraviolet radiation. Dr. Fletcher said that NASA would continue these efforts and had plans for new atmospheric studies. In addition to payloads planned for launch on the Space Shuttle, NASA would use instrumented aircraft, balloons, and sounding rockets to study the effects of chlorofluorometh-anes, or Freon, on atmospheric ozone. (Transcript)
NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin as Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in the Office of Manned Space Flight, effective 1 Aug. In his new position Griffin would plan for the most economical and flexible operation of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. Griffin, who was Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs before this appointfnent, would be replaced by Dr. Joseph P. Allen, an astronaut assigned to the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. (NASA anno 17 July 75)
NASA had awarded a $152 565 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, and test of the Space Shuttle external tank, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The contract, which covered the first increment of the external tank project for 1 Sept. 1973 to 30 June 1980, called for a maximum production rate of 24 tanks per year and delivery of major ground-test articles and 6 flight-model tanks. The work would be done at Michoud Assembly Facility under the direction of MSFC. (MSFC Release 75—28) During January: Opportunities and Choices in Space Science, 1974, a report published by the Space Science Board of the National Research Council, recommended that NASA undertake the Large Space Telescope as the only new space research start in FY 1976. The telescope should be followed by a series of permanent national and international observatories in orbit. The report also recommended that, budget permitting, NASA undertake in 1977 a lunar—polar mission, a Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter, a Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission, and a solar maximum mission. However, NASA should compare the importance of the Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter with the Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission if current FY 1977 budget estimates would not support both missions. Other recommendations included an immediate reevaluation of strategy for missions to explore the outer solar system during the next decade and for returning a Martian surface sample to earth instead of landing an unmanned laboratory to perform analyses as current plans propose. The report strongly endorsed the High Energy Astronomical Observatories (HEAO), Pioneer—Venus mission, and Mariner— Jupiter—Saturn mission as vital to the nation’s space science efforts. (Text)
Design and fabrication of the first Space Shuttle Orbiter was progressing well, with all major structural elements—forward fuselage, tail, wings, mid fuselage—scheduled for final assembly in mid-1975, NASA Deputy Director of the Space Shuttle LeRoy E. Day told the Canadian Science Writers Association in Toronto, Canada. The main rocket engine, the most difficult development item, was being built on a 10-yr technology base in which government and industry had invested nearly $100 million. During 1974, initial component engine firings had been made, and firings of the first integrated subsystems test bed engine were scheduled for July. The emphasis for the expendable external tank had been on simplified low-cost production. An inexpensive spray-on insulation had been developed to protect the aluminum skin from excessive temperatures during ascent. ' In summary, NASA and its contractors were making steady progress, holding within cost and schedule commitments. The first Orbiter would be rolled out in 1976, with its first captive flight on the back of the Boeing 747 aircraft scheduled for the second quarter of 1977. The first approach and landing tests, in 1977, would be made by separating the Orbiter from the 747 at about 8500 m, permitting the Orbiter to glide down and land on the runway at Edwards Air Force Base. The second Orbiter would be used for the first orbital flight in 1979, with six developmental flights scheduled before the Space Shuttle became operational in 1980. (Transcript)
Air Force Systems Command Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory scientists were studying changes in human body weights and sizes as part of a NASA-requested anthropometric study to help engineers design cockpits and crew stations for future use. NASA engineers who wanted to lay out the Space Shuttle work station were concerned that body sizes of the pilots might change before the station was used. The scientists performing the study, using both current data and data that went back as far as the Civil War, estimated that in 1985 a pilot would average nearly 2 kg heavier and 1.5 cm taller than in 1967, when he had weighed 78.5 kg and was 177 cm tall. In addition to statistics, NASA requested drawing board manikins for designing the Shuttle’s work areas. The study had produced two 2dimensional manikins like cardboard dolls with movable joints; each manikin was articulated in nine places to represent typical ranges of body movement. A 95% manikin represented a person 189.0 cm tall; a 5% manikin, representing a 168.3-cm astronaut or pilot, was designed so that only 5% of the 1985 pilot-astronaut population would be smaller. An engineer using both manikins could design a crew station or cockpit that would accommodate 90% of all astronauts and pilots. (AFSC Release OIP 072.75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $4 409 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to Bendix Corp. for design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of integrated electronic assemblies (1EA) for Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters on the first six Shuttle developmental flights. Each booster would require two IEAs: The forward IEA would initiate release of the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket-motor nozzle, detach the parachute, and turn on recovery aids. The aft IEA would interface with the Orbiter, the forward IEA, and other avionic systems. Delivery of the IEAs would begin in 1976 and continue through 1 Apr. 1979. (MSFC Release 75 — 190)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Johnson Space Center’s Glynn S. Lunney, U.S. Technical Director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been named manager of the Space Shuttle Payload Integration and Development Program Office, JSC’s Roundup reported. The office had been created to plan and develop JSC payload for the Space Shuttle. The Apollo Spacecraft Program Office had been abolished, and personnel from that office and the Payloads Coordination Office had been reassigned to the new program office. Besides managing Shuttle payloads and components—including the Interim Upper-Stage low-cost modular spacecraft, long-duration exposure facility, and Large Space Telescope—the new office would manage JSC participation in international space activities, including any future U.S.-U.S.S.R. activities. (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 1)
Marshall Space Might Center announced selection of nine experiments on processing materials in space to be carried aboard a Black Brant 5C sounding rocket scheduled for December launch. The launch would be first in a 5-yr series of space-processing flights in MSFC’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to find improved methods of materials processing on earth, and ultimately to produce materials in space that could not be produced on earth. The nine experiments were: dendrite remelting and macrosegregation; liquid mixing; lead-antimony eutectic; foams from sputter-deposited metals; thoria-dispersed magnesium; dispersion-strengthened lead-silver alloys; particle-interface interactions; bubble behavior in melts; and contained poly crystalline solidification. The low-cost rocket launches, each of which provided approximately 5.5 min of low gravity (0.001 of earth’s) during the coast phase of the trajectory, would offer the only means of obtaining scientific data on space processing of materials in near-zero gravity until flights of the Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75— 225)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had said that NASA’s Space Shuttle program “might be on the verge of a financial breakdown,” the Washington Post reported. Citing a General Accounting Office report, Sen. Proxmire warned that the risk of cost overruns had increased and that Congress should look for “cheaper alternatives.” (AP, W Post, 6 March 75)
A long-duration free-flying manned space station in earth orbit appeared to be the most economical way of providing a continuing manned presence in space, according to “Manned Orbital Systems Concepts,” a study conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. A station that could significantly extend the time in space planned for the Space Shuttle would offer advantages for doing a given amount of work with fewer flights and reducing the number of turnarounds, checkouts, and similar operations. A permanent facility could offer maintenance and repair and even reconfiguration of payloads. The study envisioned development of four-man facilities that would serve as building blocks for growth into larger stations for 12 or 24 workers as needed; the four-man configuration would consist of a subsystems and habitability module carried into orbit by one Shuttle and joined with a logistics and payload module carried on a second mission. Several payload modules could be docked in tandem with the core vehicle, or in radial locations through use of a multiple-port docking adapter. The core vehicle would be left on station for a nominal lifetime of 5 yr, logistic and payload modules being replaced at 90-day intervals. Crew exchange and resupply would occur every 90 days. The study concluded that problems anticipated by the world in the 1990s should be solved in the 1980s, and that an extended-duration manned orbital facility could contribute significantly to those solutions. (MSFC Release 75— 26)
The first ground-test hardware for the Space Shuttle, a hydraulic actuator for the main engine, had arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center for functional checkout, MSFC announced. Each of the Orbiter’s three main engines would use two of the actuators to gimbal the engine for steering control. After checkout the actuator—one of 8 to be tested—would be sent to the National Space Technology Laboratories where the main engines would be tested. (MSFC Release 75— 68)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a $6 473 074 fixedprice indefinite-quantity contract to Modular Computer Systems, Inc., for minicomputers and associated equipment and services for the Space Shuttle. The contract included $4 226 646 in hardware and services already ordered and $2 246 428 in additional hardware. Modular Computer Systems would supply minicomputers, peripheral equipment, special interface devices, associated software, engineering and maintenance support, spares, and documentation. (KSC Release 114—75)
NASA’s new Low Cost Modular Spacecraft (LCMS), a recoverable compartmented spacecraft being considered for use aboard the Space Shuttle, was. demonstrated at a news conference at Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Division. The LCMS consisted of an instrument and spacecraft assembly joined by a transition ring. Scientific instruments or earth-resources sensors could be attached to the LCMS for specific missions. Designed by Goddard Space Flight Center engineers, the LCMS would fit into the 5- by 18-m payload bay of the Orbiter and also could serve as a platform for as many as 14 satellites. The system could be placed in orbit by the Shuttle and later serviced or recovered and returned to earth for needed repairs. Dr. Robert G. Wilson, Director of Advanced Payload Analysis at NASA Headquarters', said that a recoverable modular satellite system such as LCMS could save as much as $100 million annually over the cost of nonrecoverable satellites. (JSCRoundup, 14Feb 75, 3;GoddardNews, Feb 75, 8)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of United Technologies Corp. for negotiation of a fixed-price contract of $1,775 million for solid-propellant booster separation motors (BSM) for use on the first 6 development flights in the Space Shuttle program, beginning in 1979. The BSMs would separate the two reusable solid rocket boosters (SRB)—each SRB requiring eight BSMs, four forward and four aft—approximately 110 sec after launch. (MSFC Release 75—175)
Canada would develop the remote manipulator system (RMS) for NASA’s Space Shuttle to permit astronauts inside the Shuttle Orbiter to deploy or retrieve payloads in space, NASA announced. Canada would fund the $30 million project, providing the first flight unit to NASA without charge in 1979. Canada would also supply flight units for follow-on Orbiters. Costs for these units would not include charges for Canada’s research and development. (NASA Release 75 — 135)
Contracts involving $25 000 or more awarded by Marshall Space Flight Center during the month totaled nearly $200 million. Among them were awards to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Inc., for $67 500 to develop the capability of predicting radiant heating at the base region of the Space Shuttle, and for $49 971 to continue a two-phase study of flow effects on Space Shuttle plume simulation. Lockheed also had received $59 740 to continue analyses of Apollo Telescope Mount data obtained during the Skylab mission. A $29 945 contract had gone to Northrop Services, Inc., to continue studies on Space Tug recovery of a spinning satellite. The U.S.'Army Engineer Div., Ala., had received two contracts. A $2-million contract had been awarded for construction at MSFC of the structural test facility for the Solid Rocket Booster and a $2.93-million contract has been awarded for construction and modifications to the Dynamic Test Facility for vibration testing of the Space Shuttle in the vertical positions. The contracts also included a $152.6-million award to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the Space Shuttle external tank, including six flight units and test hardware. MSFC had awarded the Dept, of Commerce $60 000 for an atmospheric measuring program. Bendix Corp. had received $99 736 for a Skylab control-moment gyro anomaly investigation, and the University of New York had received $36 253 to continue data analysis of a Skylab zodiacal light experiment. (MSFC Release 75— 39) February 1975
The Space Shuttle orbiter might travel by ground rather than air from Rockwell International’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., to Edwards Air Force Base for its approach and landing tests, a Rockwell official said as the orbiter made its first appearance for the press. Original plan had been to send the orbiter piggyback on NASA’s Boeing 747 scheduled to launch the unpowered craft during its tests at Edwards. Travel on the ground would take 6 hr to go about 32 km, using an off-the-road vehicle inherited from the Apollo program, and would cost less. (NASA Release 75— 293; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 107)
The National Research Council’s Space Applications Board, directed by the National Academy of Sciences and a NASA contract, released a report entitled “Practical Applications of Space Systems,” with particular emphasis on approaches to socioeconomic benefits. The report stated that present institutional arrangements were “not adequate” to encourage future applications of space technology to promising areas such as natural resource exploration and management, telecommunications for education and health care, and long-range weather and climate forecasting. The report added: “There exists at present no institutional mechanism that permits the large body of potential users. . .to express their needs and to have a voice in matters leading to the definition of new systems.” Recommendations by the board included establishment of a national space applications council to direct policies affecting nonmilitary space applications; to set priorities for meeting user needs; to provide for exchanges between users and providers of space technology; and to encourage non-Federal investment in the application of space systems. The council could operate as an interagency group, with representation from state and local governments. To meet the launch needs of future applications satellites, the board recommended that plans for the Space Shuttle provide an early opportunity to orbit payloads in either polar or geosynchronous orbits. The Shuttle-launched payloads would have applications in hazardous weather warnings and long-range weather and climate predictions; land-use planning; agriculture, forest, and range management; exploration for food, water, energy, and mineral resources; and environmental monitoring. Other specific recommendations included lower cost, more accessible ground data-collection and readout stations; long-term observations of climatic factors—such as albedo, heat control of mixed layer in ocean, cloud distribution, and climatically significant changes in vegetation, land use, and snow and ice cover—to help provide a sound basis for long-range weather prediction; a resolution of 3 to 10 m for land-use applications; greater emphasis on Federal research and development programs for spaceborne sensors of water resources; continued development of earth physics techniques, including a system to measure relative displacement of tectonic plates within 3 cm; and vigorous continuation of the SEASAT-Aand Nimbus— C programs. The board had based its findings on the deliberations of 110 potential users of space-derived information and services who had attended a July 1974 study group in Colorado. The participants represented Federal agencies, state and local governments, industrial and business communities, and educational institutions. (“Practical Applications of Space Systems,” NAS publ, July 75)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 1 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA budget called for the authorization of $3,539 billion and net outlays of $3,498 billion for the 12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional NASA Budget Plan, FY 76 (in millions of dollars) FY 1974- FY 1975 FY 1976 Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 amounts of $958.9 million in authorizations and $905.6 in net outlays for the 3-mo transition period beginning 1 July 1976. Dr. Fletcher said the new budget was “lean but manageable.” For the first time since 1961 the budget provided no new program starts. In accordance with President Ford’s request "to hold FY J975 and FY 1976 expenditures to a minimum, NASA, in FY 1975, had deferred obligations of $72 million and outlays of $70 million, reduced civil service employment by 300, and made program adjustments to stay within the total FY 1975 and 1976 hudgets. Further adjustments might be necessary if the inflation rate continued to grow. Although NASA’s FY 1976 budget was up $300 million from the previous year, $200 million of this increase was specifically anticipated in last year’s budget to carry forward commitments built into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA had received an effective increase of only $100 million, or about 3%. This, along with the nation’s current 9% inflation rate, was a “good indicator of the leanness of NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” The budget would permit NASA to proceed with current major programs as planned: The Space Shuttle, scheduled for a first manned orbital flight in mid-1979, and Landsat—C, scheduled for a fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in aircraft remained a principal focus in NASA’s aeronautics research and technology. NASA was also continuing stratospheric studies, including the effects of pollutants on the environment, with significant contributions coming from NASA meteorological and atmospheric satellites, sounding rockets, and balloons and high-flying aircraft. Although there would be no new starts, NASA would continue its study and advanced technical development for science, applications, and aeronautics projects to be started in future years, including preliminary work for payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. The 1975 calendar year launch schedule was one of the most ambitious in U.S. history with 28 launches scheduled, including the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July and the two Viking missions to Mars scheduled for August. Although NASA’s legal responsibilities for energy research and development—designated under the Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 1974—had been transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration, NASA would work closely with ERDA in various aspects of solar research and development. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said at the press briefing that the largest budget increase was for manned spaceflight, where the increase for the Shuttle was partially offset by reduced spending for the rest of manned spaceflight. The small increase for space science did not tell the whole story: If funds for the Viking program were subtracted, the budget for the rest of science had increased $170 million from FY 1974 to FY 1976. Although applications, aeronautics, and space technology programs each showed small increases, funds for tracking and data acquisition decreased slightly despite increased maintenance costs for tracking stations, because NASA was beginning to close down tracking stations, preparing for the time when tracking and data relay satellites would be available. . NASA Budget Plan (in millions of dollars) FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1976 Manned space flight 999.9 1110.3 1414.6 Space science 664.5 542.8 582.6 Applications 159.0 174.5 175.0 Aeronautics and space technology 234.3 237.8 250.3 Tracking and data acquisition 244.0 248.0 243.0 Energy programs 4.7 4.4 5.9 Technology utilization 4.5 5.5 7.0 Total Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 Total budget plan 3156.0 3231.2 3539.0 William E. Lilly, NASA Comptroller, said that, of the $84.6 million budgeted for construction of facilities, $47.2 million was to continue the buildup of Space Shuttle facilities, mostly for launch and landing facilities at Kennedy Space Center. The remaining funds were for normal rehabilitation and modification of existing facilities, with smaller amounts for minor construction and for facilities planning and design. Civil service manpower was expected to continue at the same level for FY 1976 with 24 316 employees. However, the number of support service contractors—excluding mission or stage contractors—would decrease from 18 637 in FY 1975 to 17 811 in FY 1976. The estimated 125 000 persons working on NASA programs during FY 1975 was expected to increase by 6000 to 7000 by the end of FY 1976. Distribution of funds to the Centers would change: An increase of $224.3 million would go to Johnson Space Center for the Shuttle program. A decrease of $37.3 million for KSC reflected a decrease in funding for the construction program. Goddard Space Flight Center Estimated Distribution of Total NASA Budget (in millions of dollars) FY 1975 FY 1976 Decrease Johnson Space Center 922.6 1146.9 224.3 John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA 275.9 238.6 -37.3 Marshall Space Flight Center 428.7 541.2 112.5 National Space Technology Laboratories 10.0 10.9 0.9 Goddard Space Flight Center 493.7 461.1 -32.6 Wallops Flight Center 31.9 31.3 -0.6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory 180.9 188.1 7.2 Ames Research Center 168.2 193.0 32.0 Flight Research Center 34.6 40.3 5.7 Langley Research Center 285.5 249.4 -36.1 Lewis Research Center 218.1 253.3 35.2 NASA Headquarters 159.1 166.4 7.3 Undetermined 22.0 18.5 -3.5 Total 3231.2 3539.0 307.8 was down $32.6 million, largely because of a decrease in funding for Delta vehicles. (OMB, Budget of U.S. Govt., FY 76 and Appendix; NASA FY 76 budget briefing, 1 Feb 76, transcript; NASA Release, FY 76 budget briefing background material; Fletcher budget statement, 3 Feb 76, text)
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $1 279 000 contract to George A. Fuller Co., a division of Northrop Corp. of Chicago, for fabrication and erection of a structure for mating and demating the Space Shuttle Orbiter and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft at NASA’s Flight Research Center in Calif. KSC had been given responsibility for Space Shuttle launch operations and for Orbiter ground operations and support equipment both at KSC in Fla. and at FRC, which was to be Orbiter landing site for the first four missions. The contractor was to complete the structure—including hoist system, access platforms, and utility systems—within 328 days after notice to proceed. (KSC Release 290-75)
The rocket-powered M2—F3 lifting body—a wingless vehicle that derives aerodynamic lift from its body shape—arrived for display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C. In a flight program beginning in 1963 and ending in 1972, the three versions of tbe M—2 vehicle had demonstrated that a manned reentry vehicle could reenter from space, maneuver through the atmosphere, and safely make a deadstick landing. M2—F3 was the thjrd version of Ames Research Center’s M—2 lifting-body design. The first, M2—FI, was a lightweight plywood glider towed to altitude by a C-47 and released, whereupon the pilot guided the craft to a landing. A heavier version, M2—F2, was launched from underneath the wing of a B— 52 aircraft. After nearly a year of testing the unpowered vehicle, an XRL—11 rocket engine was installed in preparation for rocket-powered flight; on the second glide flight after engine installation, the vehicle crashed, badly damaging the vehicle and injuring the pilot. The lifting body was rebuilt, incorporating modifications, and designated M2—F3. The M2—F3 made more than 37 glide and powered flights with a jet reaction-control system that successfully demonstrated the feasibility of using a single system from orbit to landing. A lifting body design that had been considered for the reentry vehicle in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs was rejected in favor of a ballistic reentry design. The use by Space Shuttle of the maneuver-to-a-deadstick-landing concept was possible largely because of the confidence level built up by 9 yr of lifting-body flight tests. (NASA Release 75—199; A&A 62 through A&A 74)
NASA awarded a 1-yr contract to Boeing Co. to study a proposed Large Lift Vehicle (LLV) made up of Space Shuttle engines, fuel tanks, and avionics. Launched without the Space Shuttle Orbiter, the LLV could carry tons of freight into space, or could rocket to the moon with a second stage attached. It would be less expensive than the Saturn V because the avionics package could be retrieved in orbit and the twin boosters were recoverable. In a 1974 interview with the Huntsville Times, John H. Disher, NASA Director for Advanced Programs, had said that no definite mission for the LLV was planned, but that NASA was looking to the future. (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 12 Aug 74; NASA Hq Adv Progs Off, Fero, interview, 10 Aug 75) August 1975
NASA had decided to eliminate all expendable launch vehicles except Scout after the Space Shuttle became operational, NASA Associate Administrator John F. Yardley told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, but the Air Force wanted to play it safe. AF officials wanted extra vehicles on hand after Shuttle in case problems developed, he said. NASA had planned about 20 launches of expendable vehicles a year through 1980—4 Scouts, 10 Deltas, 3 or 4 Atlas-Centaurs, and 1 or 2 Titan-Centaurs—with 17 launches in FY 1977 and 27 in FY 1978. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 899)
NASA announced the award of a $ll-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Cutler-Hammer, Inc., AIL Div., for acquisition of the Microwave Scanning Beam Landing System ground stations for the Space Shuttle Orbiter. AIL would perform the research and development necessary to build the ground stations for the Shuttle landing sites. Ground-station hardware would be able to transmit localizer and glide slope signals to the Orbiter and respond to distance-measurement interrogations from the Orbiter. (JSC Release 75 —32)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of two contracts for 356 aluminum hand forgings for Space Shuttle solid-rocket boosters. A $465 935 contract went to Aluminum Co. of America and $62 900 went to Weber Metals & Supply Co. for forward-skirt thrust post fittings, inboard aft-skirt actuator support brackets, aft-skirt splice fittings, and aft-skirt holddown posts. (MSFC Release 75—151)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of two contracts for parallel studies on space-processing equipment for Space Shuttle and Spacelab missions. TRW Systems Group was awarded $299 981 and General Electric Co. was awarded $284 974 to provide preliminary designs for equipment that could be used to process various materials, such as metals and crystals, in space. (MSFC Release 75 — 125)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of an $18 749 million contract to Blount Brothers Construction Co. for modification of Launch Complex 39 Pad A, to accommodate all early Space Shuttle missions. The complex had been the site of all but one of the historic Saturn V launches; Pad B, from which the Skylab Orbital Workshop was launched, would be modified later. The contract included conversion of the mobile launcher for Shuttle operations. (KSC Release 164—75)
Assembly of the first main engine of the Space Shuttle had been completed by Rockwell International Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. 1 mo ahead of schedule, NASA announced. After assembly the engine was automatically checked out—for the first time in history—by the engine’s internal controller and integral digital computers for functional, electrical, and mechanical operations. Known as the Integrated Subsystems Test Bed, this engine was not built for flight but for static firing tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories. The Space Shuttle would use 3 of the liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engines. Designed to perform at high internal pressures for greater specific impulse, each engine would produce more than 2.1 million newtons thrust and would be used for up to 55 missions before overhaul, with between-mission maintenance comparable to techniques used by commercial airlines. (NASA Release 75—83; Rocketdyne Release RD—7)
West Germany was studying the possibility of purchasing a Spacelab pressurized module for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. The German Spacelab would be configured for research in space processing, a field of considerable interest to Germany. Its missions on Spacelab, launched by NASA aboard the Space Shuttle on a cost-reimbursable basis, would be separate from missions conducted by the European Space Research Organization. {Av Wk, 21 April 75, 27)
Rockwell International Corp., holder of the prime contract with NASA to build the Space Shuttle Orhiter, announced that more than $109 million in subcontracts for the Space Shuttle main engine had been awarded by the Rocketdyne Div. since work on the engine began 3 yr ago. Figures to date showed that firms in 40 states were participating in the Space Shuttle program. Rockwell reported that Space Shuttle development would funnel an estimated $5 billion into the U.S. economy by 1978 and create employment for approximately 50 000 workers. (Rockwell Int’l Release RO—9)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $1.9-million firm-fixed-price contract to the Martin Marietta Corp. for fabrication, acceptance testing, and delivery of 322 pyrotechnic-initiator controllers (PIC) for the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters. (MSFC Release 75—182)
Marshall Space Flight Center had selected Moog Inc. Controls Div. to negotiate a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract totaling $6 685 584 for the design, development, production, and acceptance testing of a thrust-vector control electrical-hydraulic servoactuator on the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The servoactuator would control the SRB’s exhaust nozzle. (Marshall Star, 12 Nov 75, 4)
NASA Life Sciences Director, Dr. David L. Winter, issued an invitation to scientists to help plan NASA’s future life sciences program in space. The invitation, sent to 30 000 biological scientists in the U.S., said that NASA was considering a series of manned laboratories staffed by scientists, engineers, and technicians to be launched aboard the Space Shuttle. One entire lab devoted to life-science experimentation would be launched every 6 mo. Other small highly automated life-science experiments could be performed during Spacelab and Space Shuttle missions dedicated to other disciplines; NASA estimated that as many as 200 life-science flight experiments could be conducted in space during the 1980s. The invitation stated that “in order to take maximum advantage of future research opportunities, NASA intends to involve a large cross section of the Life Sciences community in shaping scientific program objectives, in selecting spacecraft laboratory equipment, and in the planning and execution of Flight Experiments.” NASA estimated that approximately 200 scientists could participate as principal investigators of future flight experiments and that 50 of those could perform their research in space as crew members. As part of the first phase of the life-science program, NASA requested that interested scientists suggest general topics for future research and identify equipment needed to carry out life-science investigations. (Winter letter, text; NASA Release 75-140; UPI, ATT, 9 May 75, 7)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $5 137 000 contract to Mayfair Construction Co. to modify the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) for Space Shuttle operations. The contract provided for modifications to High Bay 3’s extensible work platforms, installation of new checkout cells in High Bay 4, and modifications to the north door of the VAB transfer aisle and related support facilities. (KSC Release 160— 75)
Astronaut Donald K. (Deke) Slayton had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Operations for Approach and Landing Test at the Johnson Space Center, announced Center Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. In the newly created position, Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the approach and landing test project for the Space Shuttle program. He most recently had been docking module pilot of the U.S. crew for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 75—314; JSC Release 75—100)
NASA announced the selection of Sperry Rand Corp. for the negotiation of a fixed-price $8-million contract for a Space Shuttle mission-simulator computer complex at Johnson Space Center. Sperry would design, develop, fabricate, test, and deliver a computing complex and all associated hardware for the Shuttle mission simulator. (JSC Release 75—37)
Johnson Space Center announced that the first of two Space Shuttle training aircraft had been test flown at Grumman American Aviation’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. The modified Gulfstream II would be used to train crews for Orbiter descent and landing procedures. The cockpit layout and the aerodynamic modifications of the trainers provided motion and visual cues and handling qualities similar to those of the actual Orbiter. The two trainers would be delivered to Johnson Space Center early in 1976. (JSC Roundup, 10 Oct 75, 1)
Rockwell International Corp., prime contractor for the Space Shuttle, announced selection of Consolidated Controls for a $1.5-million contract to provide high- and low-pressure helium valves for the Shuttle Orbiter reaction-control system (RCS). The valves would control helium output in the RCS propellant tanks, serving as a manifold shutoff valve in the vernier engine and as a low-pressure helium shutoff valve. (Rockwell Release SP—29)
NASA announced award of a $46.8-million cost-plus-award-fee contract to International Business Machines Corp. for developing and testing the Space Shuttle avionics software system. IBM would design, develop, test, and maintain the avionics software for the data-processing system on the Shuttle Orbiter that would include electric and electronic systems for guidance, navigation, and control capability; communication; computation; displays and controls; instrumentation; and electrical power distribution and control for the orbiter, external tank, and solid-rocket boosters. (JSC Release 75—63)
Potential propellants for the Space Shuttle had been tested at an underground facility at Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command reported. Testing was part of a selection process to find a compatible propellant for the auxiliary motors that would separate the Orbiter from the two solid-rocket boosters. Three candidate propellants were tested at a simulated altitude of 40 000 m. Reusable ballistic test-evaluation system motors, each loaded with 45 kg of propellant, were fired seven times, burning for 2 sec and generating 53 400 newtons of thrust. Exhaust plumes were directed at 15- by 15-cm tiles of thermal protective material at various distances and angles; after the tests, the tiles were checked for erosion of the surfaces and edges. Pressure and temperature were measured in the rocket plumes, and surface temperatures and heating rates were measured on 21 selected material samples. All data and samples were sent to Marshall Space Flight Center for analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 3)
Kennedy Space Center announced the selection of Modular Computer Systems, Inc., for final negotiations on a $6.7-million fixed-price contract for equipment associated with the Space Shuttle launchprocessing system. The company would provide minicomputers and their associated equipment, software, maintenance, spares, and engineering support. The launch-processing system now under development at KSC would provide automatic test, checkout, launch control, and operational management for NASA’s Space Shuttle program. (KSC Release 69—75)
Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. successfully test-fired the main chamber of the Space Shuttle main engine for the first time, at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories. Initial evaluation of ignition-test data indicated that all test objectives were achieved. During a second firing the engine’s high-pressure fuel pump reached a maximum speed of almost 7000 rpm, 19% of full power. The test was seventh in a planned series of 10 to 15 short-duration ignition tests that began 11 June and would culminate in the operation of the engine at 20% of maximum thrust level of 2 090 664 newtons (470 000 lbs). Subsequent tests would attempt higher mainstage thrust levels to evaluate engine-starting characteristics and performance. The Space Shuttle main engine, the most advanced liquid-fueled rocket engine ever built, was the first to use an electronic digital computer for automatic control. Three of these engines, designed for reuse up to 55 times, would power the Space Shuttle Orbiter. (Marshall Star, 2 July 75, 1; Rocketdyne Release RD—15; MSFC Release 75-115)
Sen. John Tunney (D—Calif.) defended the nation’s space program during a tour of Space Shuttle facilities at Rockwell International Corp. in Downey, Calif. According to Sen. Tunney, the most important justification for the space program was to provide new technology in weather mapping and control, to help increase the amount of land available for food production, and to locate additional stocks of natural resources in this country. Sen. Tunney stated, “I quite frankly think without a space program. . .mankind is going to have a rendezvous with destiny which would be catastrophic. . . .” But with this kind of program, a world food supply and adequate resources can “keep this country going indefinitely.” {Pasadena Star News, 6 Aug 75)
Johnson Space Center announced award of a $11.5-million contract to General Electric Co. Space Div. to provide acceptance-checked equipment for the Space Shuttle orbiter. The equipment would be used to conduct standard tests and to detect variances in spacecraft systems in assembly at the Rockwell International Corp. plant. GE would also provide checkout support during the approach and landing phases of the Shuttle missions. (JSC Release 75—92)
The preliminary design review of Space Shuttle Orbiter 102 for the first manned orbital flight was completed on schedule. (NASA Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 March 75, 39)
Development of a reusable single-stage Space Shuttle that could perform better than the current partially reusable design, and cost less, would be feasible before the end of this century “if pushed aggressively enough,” Robert E. Smylie, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology for NASA, told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Studies by the agency had shown that structural weight reductions of 25% and propulsion-system improvements of 5 to 6%, relative to current space flight technology, could be achieved in the late 1990s. In other areas of space technology, Smylie cited the concept of solar-electric propulsion that had been considered for planetary missions using the Space Transportation System, and described research in automated processing of microcircuits, robot vehicles for planetary exploration, vitreous materials resistant to laser radiation, and dry iubricant with application in space payloads. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 696, 726, 1130 ff)
The vertical tail assembly for the Space Shuttle arrived at Rockwell International Corp., in Palmdale, Calif., after being shipped by Shuttle subcontractor Fairchild Republic Co. The tail unit, more than 8 m high, had a root chord of nearly 7 m. (FRC X-Press, 6 June 77, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 76, 25)
At least five of NASA’s 25 000 employees had made use in past years of hunting facilities owned by Rockwell International, and the agency and Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had begun investigating the matter. The investigation had not been confined to entertainment at the Rockwell facility in Md., but included “receipt of other gratuities such as Redskin (football) tickets and use of hospitality suites,” the senator said. Rockwell had been prime contractor for the $6.4-billion Space Shuttle program that accounted for more than a third of NASA’s budget. Sen. Proxmire, vice chairman of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, had directed the committee staff to assist NASA in determining the full extent of “unethical or illegal lobbying by NASA contractors.” NASA had placed five inspectors on the case. (NYT, 19 Nov 75, 1)
Walter Cronkite, U.S. broadcaster who had covered the space program from its beginnings to date, reminisced about the space program during an interview with Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News. Cronkite recalled that news coverage in the early 1950s was done from the beach with very little official information. “All we had were tips from engineers and others we met in bars.” By Alan B. Shepard’s 5 May 1961 launch, things had improved only slightly; coverage took place from the back of a station wagon with a microphone, monitor, and very little incoming information. Later launches had seen drastic changes. “We’ve got so much information today that it’s the traffic cops’ job to take care of the flow, whereas before it was more imagination and fill-in-the-blanks.” Asked if he would be interested in riding aboard the Space Shuttle, Cronkite said, “I think newsmen will go on the Shuttle. . . . Just as soon as we prove out the equipment. ... I would guess that somehow or other we’re going to see that a pool man gets aboard, and I hope it’s Regarding the apparent apathy of the American public toward the space program, Cronkite stated that it would be difficult in this age to sustain the “high intensity of feeling about the space program, the race to the moon, [and] landing on the moon. ... We don’t have an attention span in the modern world, with so much going on, that permits us to remain at that high level of excitement.” (Spaceport News, 24 July 75, 6)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases, introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into public law P.L. 94— 303 on 1 June 1976 The committee appropriation allowed for no new starts but did permit an increase of $400 million in funding for the Space Shuttle. The committee supported manned NASA activities such as an international cooperative space-docking mission built on the successes of Apollo and Skylab programs, and the development of the Space Shuttle as an economical, versatile transportation system to give a wide variety of users access to space. The committee also endorsed a space science flight program furthering knowledge of the earth, atmosphere, moon, sun, planets, interplanetary space, and stars; a research and development program to identify and demonstrate useful applications of space techniques in areas such as weather and climate, pollution monitoring, earth-resources survey, earth and ocean physics, communications, and space processing; U.S. leadership in aeronautics and space programs; worldwide tracking and data acquisition support for NASA’s manned and unmanned programs; a program to assist in the development of national energy self-sufficiency; and a technology utilization program to speed dissemination of technological and engineering information gained during NASA programs to government, industry, and other users. The committee restored $48.4 million for the two-spacecraft Pioneer—Venus mission scheduled for launch in 1978; the House had cut the funds requested by NASA in the original budget. The Senate agreed with NASA that the project had high scientific priority, and that delaying it to a less opportune launch window when Venus was further from the earth would require redesign of the spacecraft and would cost $50 million more than originally planned. The committee also restored $1 million cut by the House from the $5 million requested for definition studies and advanced technological development of the Large Space Telescope. The study was necessary for NASA to define an optimum design at minimum cost. The committee added $7 million to the $7 million NASA request for research and development to help understand and monitor physical and chemical processes in the upper atmosphere, emphasizing the need for studies of the depletion of stratospheric ozone. Because some committee members had had reservations about the high cost and safety hazards of the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the committee said it would like to be notified well in advance of any future joint space mission to permit an accurate assessment of potential benefits and costs. The committee’s recommendation of $82.1 million for construction of facilities, $25 million less than the request, would allow continuation of previous work including Space Shuttle facilities, facility rehabilitation and modification and minor construction, and facility planning and design. Not only did the committee, agreeing with the House action, cut the $2.5 million requested for an addition to the Lunar-Sample Curatorial Facility at Johnson Space Center, it also agreed with the House in denying funds to modify the 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel at Ames Research Center—not included in the original request but authorized by Congress—until the committee had had an opportunity to review the necessary funding in a formal budget request. The recommendation of $775.5 million for research and program management, the same amount approved by the House, was $0.5 million less than NASA’s request. The reduction reflected a 10% cut in General Services Administration rental charges. The Senate committee recommended a total of $925 028 000 in funds for the transitional period 1 July— 30 Sept. 1976. NASA Transitional Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 730.6 700.6 (-30.0) 700.6 (-30.0) Construction of Facilities 14.5 10.8 (-3.8) 10.8 (-3.8) Research & Program Management* 213.8 213.8(0) 213,7 (-0.1) TOTALS* 958.9 925.2 (-33.8) 925.0 (-33.9)
NASA had awarded a definitive $140 577 924 contract to Thiokol Corp. Wasatch Div. for solid rocket motors for the Space Shuttle, MSFC announced. A previous letter contract issued 26 June 1974 had given Thiokol authority to proceed with the work which included design, development, test, and evaluation of the solid rocket motor. The contracts also called for Thiokol to provide support .equipment, tooling and support parts, systems-integration support and special studies, and data and documentation. (MSFC Release 75—91)
The Saturn V dynamic test stand at Marshall Space Flight Center was being modified under a $1 923 400 contract between the Army Corps of Engineers and the Universal Construction Co., to provide a Space Shuttle Mated Ground Vibration Test Facility, MSFC announced. The 123-m-high structure would be used to test the vehicle in launch and boost configuration, to determine the bending modes and dynamic response during launch and ascent conditions. (MSFC Release 75-230)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $4 778 000 contract extension to Bendix Corp.’s Launch Support Div. for support services including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39, mobile launchers, mobile service structure, industrial complexes, technical shops, propellant systems, life-support facilities, and a components-cleaning laboratory. The 4rmo extension brought the total value of the contract to $266 662 753. Complex 39, launch site for the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz Test Project missions, would be the launch and landing site for Space Shuttle. Modification of the facilities was under way. (KSC Release 260— 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $3.2-million contract by Space Shuttle prime contractor Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. to Avco Corp. Aerostructures Div. to manufacture the intertank section of the shuttle’s external tank. The intertank would provide support between the liquid-oxygen tank and the larger liquid-hydrogen tank. The disposable external tank, 47 m long and 8.4 m in diameter, would carry liquid propellant for the Space Shuttle’s three main engines. (MSFC Release 75 — 116)
Development of the Spacelab by the European Space Agency for NASA’s Space Shuttle continued. An annual Spacelab status review 4—5 June attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Roy Gibson, ESA Director General, established schedule milestones, determined readiness for the preliminary design review, and discussed arrangements for the first Spacelab flight. They also discussed plans for the instrumentpointing system and the first Spacelab payload, follow-on Spacelab procurement by NASA, and terms and conditions for use of the Space Shuttle—Spacelab system. On 6 June, the recommendations of 10 teams—which had met at Marshall Space Flight Center in May to discuss Spacelab systems, avionics, structures, environmental control and life support, software, test and integration, and payload operations and accommodations—were presented to the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight for concurrence. At the same time ESA was preparing similar recommendations at the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC). Beginning on 9 June, combined NASA—ESA teams met in Noordwijk to consider the 1772 review-item discrepancies prepared by both agencies and, after 2.5 days, had processed all of them. (Spacelab Newsletter 75—2, 3 July 75)
NASA announced the award of a $287-million contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen for the government’s East Coast requirements over a 12.5-yr period beginning 1 July 1975. The liquid hydrogen would be used primarily in Space Shuttle engine testing at the National Space Technology Laboratories and for Space Shuttle launches. (NASA Release 75—192) During June: Activities continued at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project launch in July. During the week of 2—6 June, KSC engineers and technicians checked the Apollo spacecraft for propellant leaks, filled the liquid-oxygen storage tank at the pad, loaded oxygen and nitrogen onto the docking module, and installed conax valves on the Saturn IB first stage. Spacecraft ordnance was installed 9—13 June and the command module was checked for leaks and prepared for hypergolic loading. Also during the week the liquid-hydrogen tank was filled. Prime crew members—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton—and backup crew members—Jack R. Lousma, Alan L. Bean, and Ronald E. Evans—arrived at KSC on 10 June for command and docking-module crew compartment fit and functional checks. The crew also familiarized themselves with stowage arrangements. (Spaceport News, 12 June 75, 5; 26 June 75, 3)
NASA Black Brant VC sounding rockets would be used to carry materials-processing experiments as a low-cost way of expanding observations made during the 1973—1974 Skylab missions, NASA announced. Three flights a year aboard the sounding rockets were planned from 1975 through 1980 to provide a better understanding of material behavior during melting, solidification, and heat treatment without the effects of gravity. Although the sounding rockets would provide only 6 min of low gravity—one ten-thousandth of the gravity on earth—rocket missions were the only way to get low-gravity materials-processing data between the July 1975 manned Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Space Shuttle flights in the 1980s. (NASA Release 75—12)
Charles M. Duke, Jr., an astronaut since 1966 and lunar mobile pilot on the Apollo 16 lunar landing mission (16—27 April 1972), announced he would leave NASA, effective 1 Jan. 1976. He would also resign from the Air Force after nearly 19 yr of service. DuringApo//o 16, Duke logged 11 days 1 hr 43 min in space, including a 71-hr 14-min stay on the lunar surface. He and John W. Young made 3 surface explorations of the Descartes region for a total of 20 hr 15 min of lunar excursion. Since April 1973 Duke had served as technical assistant to the manager for Space Shuttle systems integration. (JSC Release 75—74)
The first of a series of 5 conferences on design requirements for Space Shuttle and Spacelab payloads had been held at Marshall Space Flight Center. About 50 scientists and engineers from government, industry, and universities had met to define functioned requirements for payload equipment to further NASA’s Space Processing Applications (SPA) program, including analysis of selected design approaches and recommendations for getting the most use out of SPA payloads for the materials science and technology community. The meeting would hear presentations on the two SPA competitive engineering designs by General Electric and TRW Systems, Inc. The next 2 days would be used by working groups to discuss their specialties—biological preparations; chemical processes and fluid phenomena; glasses and ceramics; and solidification of metals, alloys, composites, and electronic materials. The 5 scheduled meetings should define payloads that are compatible with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and that would meet the research needs of the industrial and scientific communities. (MSFC Release 75—218)
The first set of wings for NASA’s Space Shuttle Orbiter began an 18-day land and water journey from Grumman Aerospace Corp.’s facility in New York to Palmdale, Calif., for final assembly with the Orbiter. The two wing panels, each 9 m long from tip to fuselage and 18 m wide at the fuselage edge, would travel aboard transporters specially designed to be pulled by a truck—at 16 km per hr—or loaded onto an ocean-going container ship. From New York the wings would make a 13-day trip through the Panama Canal to Long Beach, Calif., and then travel overland to Palmdale. The double-delta aluminum wings had been designed, manufactured, and tested by Grumman under a $40 million subcontract awarded by the prime Space Shuttle contractor, Rockwell International Corp., in March 1973. (JSC Release 75—38)
The Washington Post reported that, after launch of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, more than 1800 persons would lose their jobs. With the liftoff came the end of the Apollo and Saturn programs which had begun 25 May 1961 with President Kennedy’s request for a national commitment to a lunar-landing program. Layoffs would cut the Kennedy Space Center workforce to less than 8500, down from a peak of28 000. Of those who would lose their jobs, 1100 worked for NASA contractors— Rocketdyne Division pf Rockwell, Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—who built and mated the stages of the Saturn launch vehicle to the Apollo spacecraft. Another 700 worked for contractors such as International Business Machines Inc., TRW Inc., Grumman Corp., Aerojet General Corp., and Rockwell International Corp. Only 100 launch-operations contract employees would remain to help plan the launches of the Space Shuttle. The Shuttle launch force would begin to increase in size in 1977, but would never reach the size of the Saturn team because of increased automation. (O’Toole, W Post, 15 July 75, A9)
Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. successfully conducted the first ignition test of the Space Shuttle’s Integrated Subsystem Test Bed engine at the National Space Technology Laboratories. The test, conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center, lasted for 0.8 sec. It was first of a series of 8 ignition tests leading up to the firing of the Space Shuttle main engine. Initial evaluation of data indicated that all the test parameters were satisfactory and that the test objective was achieved. All ignition tests would be of short duration, none reaching full engine thrust. (Roundup, 20 June 75, 4; Marshall Star, IT June 75, 4)
The Space Shuttle was, in many ways, the “ultimate recycling program,” Robert Anderson, president and chief executive officer of Rockwell International Corp. said on Transportation Day at the Canadian National Exhibition in Toronto. Anderson said that the Shuttle program, with its international scope and emphasis on reusability, was the first major step toward economical and effective use of space. More advanced Shuttle-launched satellites Would benefit the world by aiding crop control; locating new sources of minerals and fossil fuels; monitoring weather, pollution, and localized disasters such as oil slicks and forest fires; mapping oceans and urban areas; and improving communications. “For the job of transportation is not just to move people and goods from point to point—it is to also move history forward by enabling the pioneers to explore the new frontiers and by enabling society to capitalize on their discoveries.” (Text; Rockwell Inti Release R—42)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $5 768 612 costplus-incentive-fee contract to Sperry Rand Corp. for design, development, test, and delivery of 37 multiplexer-demultiplexers (MDM) for the Space Shuttle rocket boosters. The MDM, an electronic device that permitted sending or receiving more than one message, signal, or unit of information on a single communication channel, was housed in the solid rocket boosters’ integrated electronics assembly. It would process signals for such functions as ignition, thrust vector control, release of nose cap and frustum, jettison of solid rocket motor nozzles, detachment of parachutes, and tum-on of recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—154)
The Saturn IB, used to launch three U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts into space [see 15—24 July], had experienced no unscheduled holds whatever during countdown, making it the most perfect launch of the Saturn series, Ellery B. May, manager of the Saturn Program Office at the Marshall Space Flight Center, said. Saturn 210, manufactured in 1967, was 10th of the IB series and had the oldest engine used. All Saturn launches had been successful and had met their objectives; although some had anomalies, such as leaks or faulty wiring, no major configuration changes were ever necessary. The ASTP mission marked the end of the Saturn series, but its impact on technology would continue. “Space Shuttle main engines (SSME) are an outgrowth of technology from Saturn engines,” May explained. The major difference between the two was that the Shuttle must have much higher pressure systems than ever before required and must be reusable. (MSFC Release 75 — 174)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the selection of Bendix Corp. Guidance Systems Div. for negotiations leading to a contract for integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of assemblies and assorted test equipment for the first 6 Shuttle flights. The initial contract would call for 33 units, including flight articles, spares, and development and test versions, with delivery to begin in 1976. Each solid rocket booster would have two assembly units, one forward and one aft. Ignition commands would route from the Orbiter through the aft assembly to the forward assembly. During launch, the aft assembly would route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system. The forward assembly would release the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid rocket nozzle, detach the parachutes from the solid rocket booster, and turn on recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—106)
Marshall Space Flight Center had resumed acoustic testing of a 6.4%-scale model of the Space Shuttle to provide information needed in designing the Shuttle and its launch facilities, MSFC announced. The tests would also produce data on effects of hot exhaust gases on the aft portion of the Shuttle immediately after ignition. Data from earlier testing of the model, which included the liquid-fueled engines and solid rocket motors, had alerted designers that special provisions would be needed to deflect hot gases out of the solid rocket boosters away from the facility fuel lines near the launch pad. A pad design based on this analysis had been tested and proven. During the tests, which had begun originally in August 1974, the model was held in a test stand while its engines were fired from 6 to 10 sec. (MSFC Release 75—205) During September: NASA had invited nearly 5000 scientists worldwide to propose experiments for a possible 6-yr mission to Uranus, beginning with a November 1979 launch. The mission, which could include a swing by Neptune, was being studied for inclusion in NASA’s FY 1977 budget request. A mission to Uranus and Neptune would mean that every planet in the solar system except Pluto would have been probed by a U.S. spacecraft by 1988. The spacecraft itself would be adapted directly from the Mariner probe now under development at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a planned 1977 mission to Saturn; like Mariner-Satum, the Uranus mission would use the gravity of Jupiter to hurl the spacecraft on toward the more remote planet. If the spacecraft remained healthy after it investigated Uranus, it would use the gravity of that planet to fly on to Neptune, more than 1.6 billion km deeper into space. (GSFC Goddard News, Sept 75, 2; UPI, NYT, 4 Sept 75, 20) October 1975
DOD announced the award of a $3 500 000 firm-fixed-price contract to TRW, Inc., for software support of the Space Shuttle. (DOD Release 83-75)
The aft fuselage for Space Shuttle Orbiter 101 arrived at Rockwell International Corp.’s Palmdale, Calif., assembly facility after a 160-km truck journey from Rockwell’s Downey plant. The aft fuselage joined the midfuselage, vertical tail, and wing panels delivered earlier by Rockwell subcontractors. The forward fuselage was due in Palmdale in October, with rollout of the first orbiter scheduled for the third quarter of 1976. Approach and landing tests would begin during the second quarter of 1977. (JSC Roundup, 12 Sept 75, 4)
NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Aerospace for a $22.8 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for checkout, control, and monitoring of subsystem hardware for the Space Shuttle launch processing system (LPS). Martin would design, fabricate, test, and install hardware for the subsystem, composed of hardware assemblies communicating directly with computers and with flight and ground equipment of the Space Shuttle. The LPS was designed to use automated and modular techniques to meet Space Shuttle launch, maintenance, and refurbishment requirements. (NASA Release 75—219)
Transfer of the Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program from the Office of Space Science to the Office of Manned Space flight, and transfer of the NASA Directorate for Life Sciences from the Office of Manned Space Flight to the Office of Space Science became effective. Also, the name of the Office of Manned Space Flight had been changed to Office of Space Flight, and the name of the Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program had been changed to Expendable Launch Vehicle Programs. In announcing the changes, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had said that the exchange of these functions would “provide a more logical alignment of responsibilities as we move into Space Shuttle operations. The new Office of Space Flight will be concerned primarily with launching. . . and conducting Shuttle operations, while Space Science will have responsibility for the science to be performed on these flights.” (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 1)
An Ames Research Center wind tunnel used primarily for testing the Space Shuttle had been shut down after a steel flange failed, setting off a high-powered explosion of compressed gas. The blast scattered hundreds of hot aluminum oxide pebbles over a wide area, causing several fires but no serious injuries. Space Shuttle testing had been postponed until the facility, which generated pressures up to 126 kg/cm2 (1800 psi) in testing models at 14 times the speed of sound, could be declared operational again. An investigation board was formed to determine the cause of the accident and recommend actions to prevent recurrence. (ARC Astrogram, 14 Aug 75, 1; ARC Experimental Fluid Dynamics Br, interview, 27 June 77; UPI, W Post, 1 Aug 75, A17)
A star tracker, STELLAR (Star Tracker for Economical Long Life Attitude Reference), Was being developed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a variety of future manned and unmanned space missions. STELLAR used a solid-state silicon detector, called a charge-coupled device (CCD), for image sensing and a microcomputer to process and format the data. Previous star trackers had used high-voltage vacuum-tube image dissectors for image sensing; the tubes were difficult to produce, had a limited lifetime, developed errors, and could provide attitude-reference data from only a single star in any given observation frame. STELLAR, which substituted a single low-voltage 6-mm-sq CCD chip for the complex and expensive tube, offered the advantages of solid-state reliability and of simple programming to adapt to varying mission requirements. In addition to substantial savings in cost of flight hardware, the CCD imaging devices were expected to revolutionize TV camera design, permitting miniature low-cost home monitors within the next several years. STELLAR, which had been developed under the management of NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, would provide trackers for planetary Mariner spacecraft after the Mariner—Jupiter—Saturn mission in 1977 and for such Space Shuttle payloads as the proposed Shuttle infrared telescope facility. For the telescope facility, STELLAR would track as many as 10 stars simultaneously, providing position coordinates and star magnitudes for each. (NASA Release 75—251)
A giant washing machine capable of doing 318 kg of laundry would help to develop economical and efficient methods of cleaning and refurbishing the Space Shuttle solid-rocket booster parachutes, and to identify the problems encountered during the process, Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News reported. The washer—2 m wide by 2 m high and 10 m long, and holding 23 668 liters of water—would wash a 23-m 318-kg 80-gore parachute. Once washed, the parachute, 136 kg heavier, would be taken by monorail to a drying area. A team of five technicians was required to complete the 4-hr process. (KSC Spaceport News, 18 Sept 75, 6)
Johnson Space Center announced signing of a $44 800 000 contract amendment with Lockheed Electronics Co., Inc., for electronic, scientific, and computing-center support services at JSC. The services would support JSC programs including Space Shuttle, earth resources, aircraft, health applications, and the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment. The amendment brought the estimated value of the Lockheed contract to $173 100 000. (JSC Release 75—93)
Western Union Telegraph Co. and RCA Global Communications, Inc., had been selected for negotiations leading to phase-one contracts to provide detailed systems-design proposals for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), NASA announced. TDRSS, to be developed and operated by industry to meet NASA service requirements, would consist of three or more specialized satellites in synchronous orbit to continuously relay tracking information and data and voice commands to and from NASA satellites. Western Union and RCA would both provide a technical, cost, and business proposal for leased services to be provided in the phase-two operational period. The proposals would be evaluated and a single contract for phase two would be awarded. The selected contractor would provide tracking, command, and data-acquisition services for essentially all spacecraft orbiting below 5000 km, including the Space Shuttle and Spacelab, as well as automated spacecraft to be orbited by the Space Shuttle, for a 1- to 10-yr period beginning in 1979. TDRSS spacecraft and ground stations would be the property and responsibility of the selected contractor. (NASA Release 75—176)
Marshall Space Flight Center forwarded the experimental payload for the first launch of NASA’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to Goddard Space Flight Center, where the payload would be integrated with its launcher, a Black Brant sounding rocket. The integrated unit would undergo checkout before being sent to N. Mex. for firing by White Sands Missile Range early in Dec. The payload consisted of nine scientific experiments on processing materials in near-weightlessness. After the first launch, three flights per year carrying similar payloads had been planned through 1980. All payloads were to be recovered by parachute for ground analysis. The low-cost SPAR missions would provide data on space processing until Space Shuttle flights began in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75—233)
Two solid rockets on the Space Shuttle acoustic model accidentally escaped from the test stand during a captive static firing. The model’s liquid-propellant rocket engines had operated normally for a few seconds when the two solid rockets ignited on schedule. Both solid rockets then separated from the test stand. One was propelled north for 1.2 km, landing in a pine thicket; a brush fire caused by the rocket was quickly extinguished and no one was injured. A nine-member board was appointed to investigate the cause of the accident, determine the amount of property damage, investigate the adequacy of safeguards to prevent further incidents, recommend corrective measures, and assure containment of facilities and surrounding areas in case of recurrence. Although the test stand was damaged, the Orbiter and external tank of the model were not. The model would be returned to operation with the replacement of some wiring and instrumentation. (Marshall Star, 2 April 75, 2)
NASA and Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. had signed a $1.8-billion supplemental agreement for the follow-on development of the Space Shuttle Orbiter, NASA announced. The agreement formally incorporated into an existing contract awarded for Orbiter design, development, and test and evaluation, the construction of Orbiters 101 and 102, approach and landing tests, and six orbital flight tests. The supplemental agreement for the additional work brought the value of the Rockwell contract to more than $2.7 billion. (NASA Release 75—266; JSC Release 75—90)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a 10-mo $149 325 contract to Econ, Inc., to study the technical and economic feasibility of two different solar power plants, both in space and on the ground, and compare them with conventional terrestrial plants expected to exist ift the future. The first system was an orbiting system which would generate electrical power from the sun and transmit it to industries and cities on earth. A second kind of solar-power generating system, located on a remote area of the earth, could transfer power via an earth-orbiting satellite to users thousands of kilometers away. Econ, Inc., would use results from earlier concept studies to define requirements for payload packaging, development and checkout, and resupply for launch on the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—37)
President Ford signed Executive Order 11834 establishing the Energy Research and Development Administration—under Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.—and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission—under Chairman William A. Anders—effective 19 Jan. Establishment of the two new agencies was provided for in the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, signed into law on 11 Oct. 1974 by President Ford, which abolished the Atomic Energy Commission and reassigned its responsibilities. ERDA would take over AEC’s research and development programs including the development of fossil, nuclear, solar, and geothermal energy to meet present and future needs. ERDA would also take the lead in energy R&D programs transferred from the Dept, of the Interior, National Science Foundation, and Environmental Protection Agency. NRC was assigned AEC’s licensing and regulatory responsibilities. (PD, 20 Jan 75, 54; ERDA Release 75—1; ERDA Fact Sheet) 16 January—8 February: U.S. and U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project working groups held their last major meeting in the U.S. before the scheduled July launches. The five working groups included 80 Soviet aerospace specialists led by Academician Boris N. Petrov and ASTP Technical Director for the U.S.S.R. Konstantin D. Bushuyev. Working Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan. and went directly to Rockwell International Corp. in California for joint tests of the docking system alignment pin and socket. Following the tests, the group returned to JSC to review the results of those tests and others made earlier in Moscow. NASTRAN to analyze Space Shuttle structures. Recipients of the awards included 12 NASA and 12 contractor employees. (NASA Release 75-13) 16 January—8 February: U.S. and U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project working groups held their last major meeting in the U.S. before the scheduled July launches. The five working groups included 80 Soviet aerospace specialists led by Academician Boris N. Petrov and ASTP Technical Director for the U.S.S.R. Konstantin D. Bushuyev. Working Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan. and went directly to Rockwell International Corp. in California for joint tests of the docking system alignment pin and socket. Following the tests, the group returned to JSC to review the results of those tests and others made earlier in Moscow. On 20 Jan. a portion of Working Group 1—for experiments, trajectories, and contingencies plans—arrived at JSC to prepare for joint simulations scheduled for March. Group 4, for communications systems, also arrived to review the results of independent U.S. and Soviet tests of the flight communications system. The latter group—accompanied by Dr. Glynn S. Lunney, U.S. ASTP Technical Director, and Prof. Bushuyev—then traveled to Kennedy Space Center 3 Feb. to make electromagnetic radio and TV compatibility tests. The remaining Soviet specialists arrived in the U.S. on 27 Jan. Working Group 2, for control systems and docking targets, prepared contingency-control modes for the mission, and Working Group 5 prepared the final report on the compatibility of ASTP life-support systems. Group 5 also certified the equipment to be transferred between the two spacecraft. Although a portion of Group 1 would remain in the U.S. through crew training scheduled for 11 Feb., most of the Soviet contingent returned to the Soviet Union 8 Feb. The next major meeting for the working groups was scheduled for mid-May in Moscow. (JSC Release 75—02; Spaceport News, 6 Feb 75, 3)
NASA expected to add 3800 contractor personnel in FY 1976, mostly for the Space Shuttle, NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly told a joint session of the House Subcommittees on Space Science and Applications and on Aviation and Transportation R&D. However, overall employment on the space program had been forecast down 68%, or 278 000 workers, from its peak of 409 000 in 1965. NASA would lose 17 more Federal positions in FY 1976 after losing 521 Federal employees in FY 1975. NASA is paying more for fewer employees, Lilly pointed out, because agency manpower expenses go up about $6 million a year, offset by only $1 million in replacing retired workers with new workers in lower grades. Total Federal employment at NASA had hit a high of 33 924 in 1966; NASA Federal employees now numbered 24 316. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 995, 1024, 1031)
A prototype of a flexible tunnel to connect the Space Shuttle airlock with the forward end of the Spacelab was being tested at Marshall Space Flight Center. The tunnel would provide a pressurized passageway for crew members and scientists to move to and from the orbiting laboratory without spacesuits. The flexible circular tunnel, built by Goodyear Rubber Corp., would accordion-fold to 0.6 m and extend to a length of more than 4.3 m. Made rigid by steel rings, the tunnel was constructed of layers of aluminum foil, Capran film, and nylon cloth covered by a spongy meteoroid shield. MSFC engineers were testing the tunnel, which would be exposed to the space environment when the Orbiter bay doors were opened, for structural strength, airtight integrity, and materials compatibility. (MSFC Release 75—63)
The House of Representatives’ Committee on Appropriations reported out H.R. 8070, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Independent Agencies Appropriations Bill for FY 1976. The committee proposed the continuation of the Space Shuttle and Viking projects; various planetary, weather, and scientific satellites; and further development of a strong aeronautics program. No new starts were proposed. The committee also directed deferral of the Pioneer—Venus mission for 1 year to permit a budget-priority decision in 1977 between the Large Space Telescope and Pioneer—Venus. The committee recommended reducing the $57 600 000 requested for Pioneer—Venus to $9 200 000 to maintain a management capability during the 1-yr deferral. NASA FY 1976 Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 2678.4 2687.2 (+8.8) 2629.0 (-49.4) Construction of Facilities 84.6 99.1 (+14.5) 82.1 (-2.5) Research & Program Management* 776.0 776.0 (0) 775.5 (-0.5) Totals 3539.0 3562.3 (+23.3) 3486.6 (-52.4)
Manufacture of unique items in space is nearing reality with the availability of the Space Shuttle, scientists from TRW Systems Group told the 6th U.S.—European conference on partnership for space applications. Five practical processes in the space environment would be crystal growth, purification and separation, mixing, solidification, and processes in fluids. The gravity-free environment would permit the manufacture of items such as contamination-free glass for laser requirements, pure crystals for semiconductors, and highly pure vaccines. Also, if materials like copper-lead alloys that do not mix on earth could be combined in zero gravity, retd breakthroughs in aircraft and automotive parts manufacture might be possible. (SBD, 14 Oct 75, 221)
Approximately 31 000 contractor personnel in 47 states were current .at work on the development of the Space Shuttle, NASA announced. That number was expected to increase to 34 000 by June and to reach a maximum of 50 000 persons within 2 yr. (NASA Release 75-63)
NASA’s Office of Space Science announced assignment to Marshall Space Flight Center of overall responsibility for a definition study of the Atmospheric, Magnetospheric and Plasmas-in-Space (AMPS) Spacelab payload, to fly on the Space Shuttle. AMPS would be a manned laboratory equipped to study the dynamic process of the atmosphere and magnetosphere, using active and passive probing techniques. (NASA Release 75—28)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. announced the award of an estimated $1 million subcontract to the United Technologies Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. to build the flash evaporator subsystem, a part of the Space Shuttle Orbiter’s environmental control and life-support system. The evaporator would use excess heat generated by Orbiter subsystems to turn water from the spacecraft’s three power-producing fuel cells into steam vented into space, handling as much as 60 kg of water per hr. (United Aircraft became UTC in May.) Rockwell held the prime contract with NASA to build the Orbiter and . integrate the complete Space Shuttle system. The evaporator subsystem contract was the third of three contracts totaling more than $27 million awarded to Hamilton. Under previously awarded subcontracts, Hamilton was also developing the Orbiter’s atmospheric revitalization subsystem, Freon coolant loop, water boiler hydraulic thermal-control unit, and ground-support equipment hydraulic cart. (Rockwell Int’l Space Div Release SP—17)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, associate director for science at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire after 30 yrs of Federal service on 28 Dec., NASA announced. Born and educated in Germany, Dr. Stuhlinger became a physicist and had been involved in rocketry and space work since 1943 when he joined the rocket development team at Peenemunde, Germany. He had come to the U.S. after World War II and worked for the U.S. Army before transferring to NASA when MSFC was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo telescope mount had been carried out under his direction, as well as early planning on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial phases of the Space Telescope project. His work had included electric propulsion studies and scientific payloads for the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—256)
If NASA had unlimited funding, “I would mpve fairly quickly on a manned station because that will become an important outpost foy anything that we do in space,” Dr. Geprge M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an interview with the San Diego Union. Dr. Low added that he would move quicker in launching a space telescope and bringing back soil samples from Mars, “both enormously important from a scientific point of view.” Dr. Low expressed concern that “we really aren’t being inventive enough. We haven’t discovered a new propulsion system.” All NASA’s rockets so far, including the Space Shuttle, had Used conventional means of propulsion, and with it man was limited. Dr. Low said that the moon landing “was enormously difficult because we are tied to chemical propulsion systems.” NASA was experimenting with solar electric propulsion but to date no one had invented a fission or antigravity system. (San Diego Union, 8 June 75) On 14 June at 9:30 am local time (12:30 am EDT) Venera 10 was successfully launched toward Venus from Baykonur Cosmodroipe. Tass reported that “in design and purpose it is analogous to the ‘Venera-9’ station launched on June 8” and that all spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Venera 10 was also expected to reach Venus in October. In an interview 17 June with the Christian Science Monitor, Boris N. Petrov, chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of International Cooperation in the Study and Exploration of Outer Space, revealed that the Venera mission called for a landing rather than just a flyby. (GSFC SSR, 30 June 75;FBIS—Sov, 8—17 June 75; Pond, CSM, 17 June 75,1; W Post, 8—17 June 75; NYT, 8—17 June 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center was seeking industry proposals for procurement of parallel definition studies of the atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space (AMPS) payload, a reusable research facility to be integrated with Spacelab. The proposed 12-mo studies were to define an overall AMPS program with special emphasis on ground- and flight-support systems and subsystems, systems engineering and integration, and ground/orbital operations with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. AMPS, a single laboratory system flown with the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments and observations in atmospheric science, magnetospheric physics, and plasma physics. (MSFC Release 75—172) 4—6 August: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, at its 1975 aircraft systems and technology meeting in Los Angeles, Calif., presented the following aerospace awards. Award Recipient (affiliation) Purpose Aircraft Design Walter E. Fellers (Northrop Corp.) For 30 yr of outstanding achievement in design and development of fighter aircraft to meet rapidly changing requirements Octave Chanute Alan L. Bean Jack R. Lousma Dr. Owen K. Garriott (NASA Skylab 3 astronauts) For outstanding contributions to manned space flight and scientific research. Using the most sophisticated instruments ever flown in space, crew performed scores of scientific experiments and observations vastly expanding man’s knowledge and enhancing quality of life on earth 38th Annual Wright Brothers Lecture Henri Ziegler (Airbus, France) Topic: International Cooperation in Aerospace Projects: cooperation between European industries and between Europe and United States (AIAA Release, 22 July 75)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for negotiation of a $14.8-million fixed-price incentive contract to develop, build, and deliver Space Shuttle solid rocket booster (SRB) structures, and to design and build the tooling necessary to produce them. The SRB structures would support the Space Shuttle on the launch pad, transfer thrust loading to the Orbiter and external tank, and provide structural support for the SRB recovery system, electrical components, and thrust-vector control system. (NASA Release 75-238)
NASA would store $900 million worth of surplus Apollo-Satum hardware instead of scrapping it as planned earlier, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague, Chairman of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology. The flight hardware would be stored in a manner to minimize costs and to permit restoration, if required, to flight condition. Dr. Fletcher also wrote that, as Space Shuttle launch-readiness schedule and program costs required, NASA would convert Launch Complex 39 and its supporting facilities to handle the Space Shuttle. As requested by the Committee during a 25 March meeting with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, NASA would supply the Committee with a summary of options for missions that could be flown using the remaining Apollo-Satum flight hardware. Dr. Fletcher also stated that, because of the “considerable cost” to the government of storing the equipment, NASA would like to discuss the matter with the committee once again during the FY 1977 authorization hearings. (Text, letter Fletcher to Teague, 9 April 1975; UPI, NYT, 17 April 75, 7)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported out H.R. 4700 authorizing FY 1976 appropriations to NASA. Changes recommended by the committee would raise the NASA authorization by $5.7 million to $3,545 billion. Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the Senate Committee Program Difference from Submission (millions) Recommended Authorization (millions) Purpose Research and Development: Space shuttle 0 1206.0 Accepted as presented Space flight operations -4.0 203.1 Allocation of reduction left to discretion of NASA Advanced missions -1.5 0 Recommended deletion of this item; activities to be integrated with similar and related functions in other programs Physics and astronomy +7.0 162.8 To increase knowledge of upper atmosphere, identifying problems and developing new technology for dealing with them Lunar and planetary exploration 0 259.9 Accepted as presented Launch vehicle procurement 0 166.9 Accepted as presented Space applications +8.9 183.9 To increase emphasis on weather research, LACIE program, advanced communications research, and Space Shuttle payload definition Aeronautical research and technology 0 175.4 Accepted as presented Space & nuclear research & technology 0 74.9 Accepted as presented Energy technology appHcations 0 5.9 Accepted as presented Tracking & data acquisition -2.2 240.8 To seek economies in the program Technology utilization 0 7.0 Accepted as presented R&D Totals: +8.2 2686.6 Research and Program Management: Basic submission 0 776.0 Accepted as presented R&PM Totals: 0 776.0 Construction of Facilities: Modification of 11-by-ll-ft transonic wind tunnel at ARC 0 2.7 Accepted as presented Addition to Lunar Sample Facility at JSC -2.5 0 Deleted from funds Addition for composite model and metal finishing shops at LaRC 0 1.9 Accepted as presented Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the Senate Committee (continued) Program Difference from Submission (millions) Recommended Authorization (millions) Purpose Construction of Facilities: (cont.) Space Shuttle facilities 0 47.2 Accepted as presented Rehabilitation of facilities at various locations 0 16.0 Accepted as presented Minor construction of new facilities or additions to old facilities 0 5.0 Accepted as presented Facility plannirig and design 0 9.3 Accepted as presented C of F Totals: -2.5 82.1 Grand Totals* +5.7 3544.7
Estimated cost of the Spacelab being built for the first Space Shuttle flight had risen from $400 million to $500 million during the last year, and the program had fallen 3 to 6 mo behind schedule, NASA’s Space-lab program director Douglas Lord told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. The European Space Agency, which was developing Spacelab, was confident of delivering it in time to fly on the Shuttle. Lord and NASA Associate Administrator John F. Yard-ley said the increased development cost would not affect NASA’s cost in purchasing the modules, because NASA’s agreement with ESA precluded the Europeans from recouping development costs. NASA had been committed to buying one set of Spacelab hardware at a cost “reasonable to NASA,” although pricing proposals would not be received for 6 to 8 mo. The two officials said European cooperation on the program had been “exceptional.” (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 889)
One of the most highly detailed and instrumented models of the Space Shuttle ever constructed had been wind-tunnel-tested at the Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command announced. Located throughout the 92-cm model were 835 temperature sensors to measure heat levels of major components at jettison of the two expended solid-propellant boosters. Two other Shuttle tests also had been completed for NASA at AEDC: A smaller model and computer-controlled systems were used to study aerodynamic forces during the separation of the expended solid boosters. During the test the Orbiter and external fuel-tank models were attached to the tunnel supports and a solid booster model was attached to the computer-controlled support. Measurements were recorded with a single booster model at various points below, beside, and behind the Orbiter-tank combination and with the booster and Orbiter-tank at various pitch and yaw angles. In the third test, heating data were obtained on an Orbiter model positioned at a high angle of attack at mach 8. Special paints that changed from a solid to a liquid at specified temperatures were used to record heating histories on the surface of the model, and oilcoating techniques were used to examine airflow. (AFSC Release OIP
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a $1 612 948 extension to a $600 000 contract to Reynolds, Smith, and Hills Co. for Space Shuttle architectural and engineering services. The contract, which would run until June 1977, provided for modification to Pad A and Mobile Launcher 3 at Launch Complex 39, both being reconfigured for the Space Shuttle. (KSC Release 109—75)
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for quotations for a proposed study contract to design, build, test, and deliver a full-scale solar-array wing for solar electric propulsion and Space Shuttle payload applications. The selected contractor would establish design requirements and develop techniques for low-cost fabrication and testing incorporating all previously developed technology. (MSFC Release 75—109)
A significant influence on NASA’s ability to maintain viable programs in the face of possibly unstable funding will be the extent to which commercial and foreign government users participate in the development and financial support of future payloads,” Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Av Wk interviewed the Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, Philip E. Culbertson, who said that it would be better, in the long term, to move into a position where more organizations outside NASA were sponsoring and paying for missions and payloads. The agency was encouraged by the interest of industries in flying and funding Space Shuttle missions involving a wide range of basic scientific and technical operations. Foreign reimbursable payloads, already an important part of NASA launch operations, were seen as an even iarger factor in Shuttle payloads development. Japan, already holding discussions with NASA to lay the groundwork for a viable national space program, was considered a serious Shuttle customer; Japan would like to develop both scientific and earth applications programs in the communications, navigation, and weather satellite fields.. Canada’s interest in positioning domestic communications satellites over its territory would continue into the Shuttle era. Even individual Soviet scientists had made inquiries into the possibilities of flying payloads on the U.S. Shuttle. Culbertson pointed out that, unlike earlier NASA manned space programs that included scientific funding in overall program budgets, NASA in-house Shuttle payload development was the sole responsibility of the specific NASA disciplines themselves. NASA’s FY 1976 budget request contained from $50 to $100 million for various efforts that could evolve into Shuttle payloads, and the budget for FY 1977 would markedly increase payload funding. However, with the budget crunch, funding for Shuttle payloads would compete directly with other programs and the payload proposals “will have to stand on their own merit.” Culbertson also said that major decisions would have to be made on how long to keep which expendable launch vehicles in the program. In another interview, NASA Spacelab Program Director Douglas R. Lord said that upcoming major decisions concerning Spacelab included a follow-on procurement plan for Spacelab hardware and priorities on how often ESRO (European Space Research Organization) and other crews and experimental hardware would fly on Shuttle— Spacelab missions. Lord said that operations of overall Spacelab functions would probably be maintained separately from payload operations: Johnson Space Center was the logical place to handle overall operations, and Marshall Space Flight Center was the leading candidate for the Spacelab payload operations center. Goddard Space Flight Center had expressed interest in handling operational needs of the high-energy experiments on Spacelab pallets. (Covault, Av Wk, 17 March 75, 59- 60) 18March: “The expertise and facilities of LeRC [Lewis Research Center], as well as other NASA centers, are being considered by ERDA [Energy Research and Development Administration] as part of its overall definition of a total institutional structure required to carry out the nation’s energy R&D program,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., ERDA Administrator said in a letter to Representative Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio). The letter was a reply to correspondence from members of the Ohio congressional delegation and Cleveland businessmen and industrialists to President Ford calling for increased use of LeRC talent to meet the nation’s energy crisis. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Seamans noted that the newly established ERDA was the lead Federal agency for managing national energy R&D. ERDA intended to use the expertise and facilities of other Federal agencies where it was feasible and in the national interest with respect to cost, timeliness, and program management. LeRC, NASA’s lead center for aerospace propulsion and power, was already involved in ERDA-sponsored projects in solar heating and cooling, wind energy, and topping cycles to increase the efficiency of coal-fueled steam plants. But LeRC would continue its main task to work on propulsion technology, conducting energy research in support of ERDA “when it was consistent with the requirements of its principal mission within NASA.” (Text, letter to Mosher from Fletcher and Seamans, 18 March 75)
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
Engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center were completing tests seeking to refine the means of towing to shore for refurbishment and reuse recovered solid rocket boosters from Space Shuttle launches. These tests explored the question of whether the parachute recovery lines and riser lines on the three recovery parachutes to be attached to each booster would, when under tension during descent, stretch enough to develop sufficient latent energy to deploy the 52-mm-dia by 15-m long tow rope from a tray located in the booster’s forward skirt. The tests employed a 10-m Saturn S—II-stage adapter ring, to which the parachute lines were attached. A crane hoisted the adapter ring until the stress on the rings was 12 000 kg, about one-half the stress expected on the parachutes lowering the booster. An explosive bolt was detonated, abruptly freeing the parachute lines; they contracted and the lines and fitting to which they were attached were yanked upward more than 60 m, quite enough energy to deploy the tow line. The recovery system parachutes would be fitted with flotation devices so they could be recovered. On the first six Shuttle developmental flights, the set of parachutes would be cut free from one booster in each set of two and both would be tested to determine which configuration made it easier to retrieve and tow the booster. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)
Kennedy Space Center announced the selection of General Electric Co.’s Space Div. and Martin Marietta Corp. for competitive negotiation of a contract to check out, control, and monitor subsystem hardware for the Space Shuttle launch processing system. The contractor would design, develop, build, test, and install the hardware. The launch processing system would use modern industrial automation techniques, applied to a modular concept, to meet maintenance and refurbishment requirements for tum-around and launch of the Space Shuttle. The other candidates for the contract had been Grumman Aerospace Corp. and Aeronutronic Ford Corp. (KSC Release 94—75)
Boeing Co., which had a 44-mo $3-million subcontract from Rockwell to detect electrical problems with the Space Shuttle, reported that 35 design or hardware changes had been necessary in main-engine electrical circuits of the Shuttle so far. Boeing was conducting a sneak circuit analysis of the first Shuttle orbiter, to be used for approach and landing tests; later studies were scheduled for the second orbiter, the solid rocket booster, and the external fuel tank, as well as critical ground-support equipment. (SBD, 18 Nov 75, 92)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a single-source request to Sunstrand Corp. to submit a proposal for the design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of the auxiliary power unit for the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster’s thrust-vector control subsystem. The APU would include a gas generator, turbine, gearbox, fuel pump, electrical controls, control valves, instrumentation, mounting system, and the mechanical and electrical connections required to interface with other SRB subsystems. Two APUs would be used during prelaunch and ascent phases of flight to provide hydraulic power to the thrust-vector control system of each booster. (MSFC Release 75 —62)
In a letter to Rep. Don Fuqua, chairman of the House of Representatives’ Committee on Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher summarized options for missions that could use the remaining Apollo-Saturn flight hardware. Options included an earth-orbital mission as an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project backup; a Skylab revisit; an Apollo geosynchronous mission; a lunar orbital mission; an earth-orbital mission to visit a Soviet space station; and a manned-satellite inspector. The hardware could also be used to launch a U.S. unmanned space station carrying a large U.S.S.R. payload, a large orbiting reflector, a space solar-power demonstration, a planetary probe, or multiple payloads. Another possibility might be to carry an Apollo spacecraft into space aboard the Space Shuttle to provide a crew-rescue capability or to serve as a habitable module, to demonstrate a Shuttle-serviced free-flying module, or to inspect and service orbiting satellites. Dr. Fletcher’s letter added that he did not foresee that funds would be available to support additional Apollo-Saturn missions in the period preceding the Space Shuttle operation. The subcommittee at a 25 March meeting had asked NASA to summarize the options when the agency had sought permission to dispose of surplus Apollo-Saturn equipment [see 9 April]. (Text, letter from Fletcher to Fuqua and attachment “Conceptual Flight Possibilities for Satum-Apollo Hardware,” 15 Sept 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
A 50 000-kg towing tractor, first piece of operational ground-support equipment manufactured by International Harvester Co. for Kennedy Space Center’s Space Shuttle operations, was accepted for delivery to KSC. The T—500S Paymover tractor would tow NASA’s Boeing 747 carrier aircraft or the orbiter, or the mated 747-orbiter combination after use at the Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif., during orbiter tests. (KSC Release 257—75)
Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development at Johnson Space Center, received the gold medal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers at its annual winter meeting honors assembly in Houston. Faget had been responsible for design and testing of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft and the Skylab space station, as well as of the Space Shuttle scheduled for flight in the late 1970s. Previous JSC recipients of the ASME gold medal had been JSC Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., in 1973 and former JSC Director Robert R. Gilruth in 1970. (JSC Release 75—98)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Donald P. Hearth, Deputy Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, gave in their testimony before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology a preview of the new NASA report “Outlook for Space.” The report had been submitted to NASA by a 21-member study group established by Dr. Fletcher in June 1974 to develop an unconstrained listing of desirable and practical civilian space activities; to group these around goals, objectives, and themes; to define R&D tasks required by potential commercial and operational uses of space; to identify social and economic challenges that could benefit from space-reported data; and to relate space goals and objectives to national ones. All space objectives defined by the study group were evaluated in terms of their contribution to national interests, which included expansion of human knowledge, physical benefits to the U.S. and humanity, contribution to the vitality of the nation, exploration of the unknown, national prestige and self-esteem, and international cooperation. The report suggested categorizing space missions as either earth-oriented or extraterrestrial. Earth-oriented programs for the rest of the century should help increase food production by improved weather and water-availability forecasting, improved crop forecasting, improved detection and monitoring of diseases and infestations in vegetation. The consequent economic benefits and stabilization of the commodity market could gain hundreds of millions of dollars per year. Other earth-oriented space programs should emphasize improved forecasting of seasonal and climatic trends, to aid in the managing of food and energy resources and associated transportation requirements. Benefits from improved climate forecasting could reach hundreds of millions of dollars annually. The space program should also address itself to the challenge of the unknown by adding to man’s knowledge of cosmic and human evolution and destiny. Spacecraft could take instruments above the “dark and dirty glass” of earth’s opaque atmosphere, and should continue to carry instruments to other planets, setting up laboratories there as well as bringing samples back to earth for analysis. Extraterrestrial missions should include textural, chemical, and isotopic planetary studies and comparisons of atmospheric trends for all planets and their satellites. Plans should also continue for human activities in space, using both the space shuttle and free-flying laboratories to repair and maintain orbiting spacecraft systems and perform research in space. Although the study panel had found it difficult to assert that manned orbiting or planetary bases should be undertaken in the next 25 yrs, it found that man was an integral and necessary part of the more creative space-exploration programs. If the U.S. was to avail itself of the potential benefits of space, the next logical step for NASA’s manned program could be development of a permanent space facility in which crews could work for extended periods. (H.R. transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 782, a biological satellite carrying 4 U.S. experiments as well as materials from Russia, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, Poland, and Romania, to be recovered in Soviet territory in about 3 wks. Launched from Plesetsk into an orbit with 405 km apogee, 227 km perigee, 62.8° inclination, and 90.5 min period, the satellite provided an opportunity for U.S. scientists to fly biology and weightlessness experiments that would otherwise have had to await flights of the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Last U.S. biology research spacecraft, Biosatellite 3, had been launched in 1969. Cosmos 782 was the first satellite equipped to simulate gravity in space, to compare effects on biological processes with those of weightlessness. A specially constructed centrifuge, consisting of a small disk that would rotate at a constant speed, would create a centrifugal force equal to gravity on earth for packages placed at the right spot on the disk. Comparing the specimens exposed to lack of gravity during orbital flight with similar specimens feeling the pull of gravity would prove any effects had resulted from weightlessness. Results of the experiments should be available in about 90 days, according to the Tass news agency. Ames Research Center managed the U.S. participation in the Cosmos 782 flight. It had had no advance notice of the launch date, place of launch, or mode of orbital operation, although life limitations of the biology materials had dictated a launch near this date. NASA had been invited to participate in a second Soviet biosat mission in 1977, and had planned to fly Russian experiments on its Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (NYT, 27 Nov 75, 62M; NASA Release 75—292; SBD, 28 Nov 75, 145; Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 148)
The Air Force System Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was developing a technique to study, under flight conditions, the physical behavior of the spray-on insulating material proposed for the Space Shuttle, AFSC announced. Using procedures similar to those used in analyzing aerial photographs, a series of reference lines was projected onto the original surface and photographed before wind-tunnel testing. The same pattern was then projected onto the surface during the testing. The shift in the apparent position of the projected lines as the surface eroded from the position shown on the original photograph allowed analysis of the behavior of the materials. (AFSC Release OIP 157.75) 24 —25 June: At its first meeting, the council of the European Space Agency (ESA) elected Wolfgang Finke (West Germany) as chairman for 1 yr. General Luis de Azcarraga (Spain) and Jan Stiernstedt (Sweden) were elected vice chairmen. (ESA Release, 27 June 75)
Frank Briscoe Co., Inc., and Santa Fe Engineers, Inc., were the apparent successful bidders on two major Space Shuttle contracts which would be awarded by Kennedy Space Center, KSC announced. Frank Briscoe Co. had bid $8 733 300 on a contract for the construction of the Orbiter processing facility, Orbiter towway, and associated site work and utilities at KSC. It was in the processing facility that the Orbiters would be safed, serviced, and maintained after returning from flights into space and then prepared for their next mission. Phase 1 of the construction—scheduled for March 1977 completion—included a 5000-sq-m building with a low bay area 88 m long, 30 m wide, and 8 m high and two high bay areas 61 m long, 46 m wide, and 29 m high. Santa Fe Engineers had bid $3 567 567 on a contract to construct the Shuttle approach and landing test facilities at Flight Research Center. The contract would include site preparation, construction of a maintenance hangar and shops, Shuttle Orbiter mating structure area, hypergolic fuel and oxidizer area, fire protection pump station, concrete towway and service aprons, parking area and road paving, and necessary utilities. The project was scheduled for completion in September 1976. (KSC Release 73—75) '
Kennedy Space Center announced a reorganization to prepare for the Space Shuttle era of space operations. John J. Neilon, Director of Unmanned Launch Operations since 1970, was named Deputy Director of Technical Support; George F. Page, Chief of Operations, Div. of Manned Spacecraft Operations, would move into Neilon’s former post. The Launch Operations Directorate would be reorganized into four major second-level groups: engineering, payloads, space transportation systems processing, and expendable vehicle operations. (KSC Release 253—75)
NASA announced selection of three contractors to negotiate for provision of various subsystems for the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft. The SMM, scheduled for launch in the third quarter of 1979, would carry instruments to investigate solar flares; the spacecraft would be built on the modular concept, so that its instrumentation could be readily changed or replaced. Fairchild Industries, Germantown, Md., would negotiate to provide the communications and data-handling subsystem at a proposed value of $2.5 million, for one protoflight model with options for up to six additional. The C&DH subsystem would provide ground and onboard control of all spacecraft and sensor functions, and of retrieval of housekeeping and experiment data. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., East St. Louis, Mo., would negotiate to provide the power module subsystem for the SMM at a proposed value of $2.3 million, with options for up to six additional. The power module, an unregulated system operating from a deployable solar array, would provide 1280 w at the beginning of its operating life. General Electric Space Div., Valley Forge, Pa., would negotiate to provide the attitude-control subsystem at a proposed value of $3.5 million, with options for up to six additional subsystems. The ACS would include reaction-control devices as well as a high-performance gyro inertial-reference unit, a pair of fixed electronic-scanning star trackers, a three-axis magnetometer set, and sun sensors. The SMM spacecraft, a 381-cm-long cylinder weighing about 1740 kg, would be powered with solar panels and fit atop a modular spacecraft base; it would be capable of launch on a Delta and retrieval by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Releases 76-203, 76-204, 76-205)
NASA selected 3 firms for negotiations leading to award of a single contract for assembly, checkout, launch operations, and refurbishment of the Space Shuttle solid-fueled booster, MSFC announced. The firms were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, and United Space Boosters Inc. of Sunnyvale, Calif., a wholly owned subsidiary of United Technology Corp. The contract would extend through March 1980 to include the first 6 development flights of the Shuttle, with option for renewal through Feb. 1982. The contractor would be responsible for assembling and checking out the booster (forward and aft skirts, attach structures, nosecone, and various subsystems) with the solid-fueled motor. Two solid-fueled boosters would be used to launch the Shuttle, in conjunction with the orbiter main engines; after launch, the boosters would be jettisoned, lowered into the ocean by parachute, retrieved, and returned to KSC for refurbishment and reuse. Work would be performed at MSFC and KSC except for the solid-fueled motor, which would be returned to Thiokol facilities in Utah for reloading with propellant. (MSFC Release 75-159)
NASA announced selection of United Space Boosters, Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., as assembly contractor for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket. USBI, a wholly owned subsidiary of United Technologies Corp., received a cost-plus-award fee contract for $122 million, to cover six design, development, and test and evaluation flights up to March 1980, with options for 21 operational flights extending into 1982. The contract would cover all booster assembly activities at MSFC and KSC; MSFC would supervise assembly, checkout, and refurbishment of the boosters, and KSC would supervise final assembly, checkout, launch operations, and postlaunch disassembly of the boosters. First of six orbital test flights had been scheduled for the second quarter of 1979, with operational flights to begin in 1980. At launch, the three main engines and two boosters of the Space Shuttle would operate together; upon burnout at about 43 km altitude, the boosters would separate and descend by parachute to the ocean for retrieval and refurbishment. The boosters were designed for use 20 times. (NASA Release 76-212; MSFC Release 76-215; WSJ, 21 Dec 76, 11)
NASA announced that a task team headed by Marshall Space Flight Center, and including representatives from Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, would assist the Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) in evaluating industry proposals for validating the development of the Space Shuttle interim upper stage (lUS). The IUS, an expendable solid-fuel rocket stage capable of launching one or more spacecraft, would be carried into low earth orbit in the bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter; after deployment, it would be fired to carry the spacecraft into orbits of from 800 to 35 000 km, or to earth-escape trajectories for interplanetary missions. The basic IUS developed to meet DOD objectives would be altered as needed to meet NASA-unique requirements (planetary missions, or economical delivery of several smaller satellites). MSFC would be responsible for establishing the NASA-unique requirements; its task team would be responsible for planning and coordinating NASA’s IUS activities; KSC would be responsible for IUS launch operations, and JSC for lUS-orbiter integration and flight operations. The Air Force was expected to award a contract for IUS development by Sept. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-89)
Pilot training for the Space Shuttle would begin in October at White Sands Missile Range, the Washington Post reported, with instructors completing their training by mid-October. Two of the instructors—David Griggs and Ted Mendenhall—were scheduled to make practice approaches at the range 29 September; chief instructor A1 Manson and copilot Ed Rainey made a similar test in August. Aircraft used in the Shuttle training are modified Grumman Gulfstream II jets fitted with Shuttle orbiter controls and instrumentation. (WPost, 26 Sept 76, A20)
NASA announced “an unusual agreement” with McDonnell Douglas Corp., under which the firm would build a solid-fuel upper-stage rocket as a commercial venture, to be available for use in future Space Shuttle missions. The firm would build and market the product using its own funding and initiative, at no direct cost to NASA or the U.S. government, except when the government might be a purchaser; NASA agreed that it would not knowingly fund or formally solicit development of competitive or alternate upper-stage systems. McDonnell Douglas would market the stage hardware and services either directly to users, or through NASA; NASA would not be committed to buy any hardware or services from McDonnell Douglas. The Delta rocket, workhorse of NASA’s expendable launch-vehicle program, which had carried most of the com-sats and metesats now in geosynchronous orbit, .would be phased out along with other expendable vehicles after the Space Shuttle became operational. After the Shuttle had carried payloads into low earth orbit, the upper stage would put the payloads (weighing up to 1110 kg) into a transfer orbit, where a kick motor would insert them into geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 76-198)
Johnson Space Center awarded a $96 000 contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. of Denver for a study of equipment needed to construct a solar-power satellite (SPS) in geosynchronous orbit, in or about 1990. The 9-mo contract called for conceptual design and system definition of equipment to support construction of large space systems in orbit, assuming use of the Space Shuttle, and for defining development and maintenance costs of such equipment. (JSC Release 76-62) —JSC selected Alpha Bldg. Corp. of Houston for negotiations leading to award of a $1 369 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract for construction support services at the Center, including minor construction and other site work—alteration of laboratory systems, facilities, utilities, roads, sewers, walks, etc.—required by space programs and normally for projects estimated at $10 000 or less. The contract would begin 1 December 1976 and end 30 November 1977, with the option for the government to extend the contract for two additional 1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-63) November 1976
Dr. Mary Helen Johnston, metallurgist at MSFC, was principal guest speaker at the Federal Women’s Day program at Wallops Flight Center. Dr. Johnston, who said she wanted to be one of the first American women chosen for space flight, participated in 1974 as part of an all-women crew of experimenters in a 5-day tryout of the general-purpose laboratory at MSFC, a cylindrical mockup of the Spacelab being built in Europe for Space Shuttle flights. Using the neutral-buoyancy simulator, a working area for handling experiment packages in a zero-gravity environment, the crew developed techniques for use on Spacelab. As principal investigator for three scientific experiments and co-investigator on another, Dr. Johnston had planned the work in hopes of going on orbital missions in the 1980s. Also on the program was Audrey Rowe Colom, director of women’s activities for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and current president of the Natl. Women’s Political Caucus. Besides the speakers, the program included jskits by WFC employees and a costumed narration of “Two Centuries of American Women on Parade.” (WFC Release 76-15)
Women would definitely be admitted to the U.S. space program, the Chicago Tribune reported, and NASA would make a formal announcement in July. Only one woman—Russia’s Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited for 3 days on Vostok 6 in June 1963—had been in space so far. The U.S. space women would fly on the Space Shuttle scheduled to be operational by 1980; the exact number had not been determined, but they would form part of a group of 15 mission specialists who would be chosen within the coming year. Screening, evaluation, and physical examination of applicants would be completed by Dec. 1977, and selectees would join NASA as candidates for space flight by July 1978. (B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
Kennedy Space Center announced award to Pan American Technical Services, Inc., Cocoa Beach, Fla., of the first contract to modify KSC facilities for Spacelab processing as part of the Space Shuttle program. The $129 627 contract included architect and engineer services to design the modifications of the Operations and Checkout Bldg., including changes in utilities (gaseous nitrogen, helium, high-pressure air, water and airconditioning) and adaptation of Apollo equipment acceptance and checkout rooms to make them compatible with ground-support equipment provided by the European Space Agency for automated Spacelab testing. Spacelab—to be carried into space by the Space Shuttle orbiter—was being designed, developed, and built by 9 member nations of ESA at a cost of $300 to $400 million. At the end of each mission, the Spacelab would be removed from the landed orbiter and prepared for the next mission. The engineering model to be used for facility and orbiter checkout was scheduled to arrive at KSC in July 1978; the first flight model was due in June 1979. (KSC Release 128-76)
MSFC announced selection of the Bendix Corp., Teterboro, N.J., for negotiations leading to award of a $7 007 210 cost-plus-award-fee contract for installing, activating, disassembling, and removal of special equipment at MSFC for Space Shuttle structural and dynamic ground tests. The contract would run from 15 Nov. 1976 through Dec. 1979. MSFC responsibilities in developing the Space Shuttle covered three areas: the main engine powering the orbiter, which uses three of these engines; the external tank holding propellants for the main engines during launch and ascent; and the solid-fuel rocket boosters to be jettisoned after burnout and recovered by parachute for future use. MSFC would make structural tests of the external tank and boosters, development tests to prove design concepts of the main engine and external tank, and dynamic tests simulating flight conditions to be encountered by the Shuttle during launch. (MSFC Release 76-196)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced shipment of the first production segment of a motor case for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor from the manufacturer (Ladish Co. of Cudahy, Wis.) to the Cal-Doran Metallurgical Services plant at Los Angeles, where it would undergo heat treatment and cleaning before being forwarded to Rohr Industries at Chula Vista, Calif. Rohr—subcontractor to prime contractor Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Utah—would process the cylindrical segment, with a finished weight of about 5060 kg, for delivery to Thiokol in Sept. 1976. Thiokol would load the solid propellants into 4 motor-case segments over 3 m in dia. and 45.5 m long, each holding about 500 000 kg of propellant. The 4 segments joined would stretch to more than 35 m and constitute about three fourths of the solid-fuel rocket booster. Each launch of the Shuttle would use 2 boosters, burning from ignition on the pad to burnout at an altitude of about 42 km; at that point, the SRBs would be separated and descend by parachute into the ocean for recovery, refueling, and reuse. (MSFC Release 76-76)
Travelers aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter in the 1980s would use a unique space suit and rescue system, developed at Johnson Space Center. The Shuttle suit, a departure from the customized astronaut suits, would consist of a two-piece upper and lower torso cover in small, medium, and large sizes to accommodate all astronaut candidates or crews, including females. Only the pilot and mission specialist would be outfitted with the space suit; the commander and payload specialists would be provided with a personal rescue system nicknamed the “cosmic soccerball,” consisting of a container nearly a meter in diameter constructed of three layers—urethane, Kevlar, and an outside thermal protective layer, with a small viewing post of tough Lexan—containing its own simplified life-support and communications systems. During a rescue operation in space, a space-suited astronaut could transfer the rescue balls in one of three ways: using the handle to carry the enclosure like a suitcase from one vehicle to another; hooking a device like a clothesline between two spaceships and passing the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship to the other; or using the remote-manipulator arm in the orbiter’s cargo bay to pluck the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship and put it aboard the rescue ship. Materials to be used in the rescue ball and the Shuttle suit would provide longer shelf life, according to technicians who ran pressure and abrasion tests on them; use of the fabric to make joints in the space suits (instead of the Apollo and Skylab suit use of neoprene rubber molded into convolutes containing cables) would provide better mobility and reduce cost and weight of each suit. The new suit also featured a module construction that closed with a body seal at the waist, considered more reliable than the pressure-seal zippers used in the previous suits. The new suits also were designed with an integral portable life-support system as part of the rigid upper torso, instead of the bulky 34-kg package that previously had to be unpacked and connected to the suit. (NASA Release 76-56; JSC Roundup, 26 Mar 76, 1)
The House passed, 330 to 35, and sent to the Senate an authorization bill of $3.t billion for the nation’s space programs for FY 1977, slightly less than the administration request, but $ 133 million more than for FY 1976. Research and development authorizations totaled $2.77 billion, nearly $10 million more than requested. The Space Shuttle would use $ 1.29 billion in R&D money, plus $40 million for 8 construction projects. (W Post, 23 March 76, 6)
NASA announced selection of IBM Corp., Gaithersburg, Md., for award of a $24-million 44-mo cost-plus-award-fee contract to supply a Space Shuttle data-processing complex for the mission control center at Johnson Space Center. The complex would consist of 3 computers and peripheral equipment for support of the Shuttle program; work to be performed would include design, fabrication, delivery, installation, and checkout of the computer complex and associated software. Control Data Corp. of Minneapolis also submitted a proposal. (NASA Release 76-104; JSC Release 76-37)
The Hugh L. Dryden Flight Research Center, formerly the Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., was formally dedicated in a ceremony by NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first administrator of NASA from 1958-1961; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; and Mrs. Dryden, guest of honor, who unveiled a bust of her late husband that would be placed in the Center’s lobby. After the ceremony, visitors were invited to a display of aircraft in the main hangar, including the 747 aircraft that would be used for the Space Shuttle orbiter approach and landing tests next year. Center efforts to transfer space technology to industry were represented by a solar-energy display and low-drag truck exhibits. Dr. Dryden in 1947 had been named to the newly created post of director of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics; when Dr. Glennan, then head of the Case Institute of Technology, was selected as NASA’s first administrator, he insisted on Dr. Dryden as his deputy. When James E. Webb was chosen NASA’s second administrator, he also made the condition that Dr. Dryden remain as his deputy; he had served in that position until his death in 1965. (NASA X-Press, 26 Mar 76; program)
The Michoud Assembly Facility operated for NASA by MSFC at New Orleans was nearing production capability for the Space Shuttle external tank, MSFC announced. Delivery of all required items to Michoud would require an estimated 225 trucks, about three fourths of them carrying loads classified as oversize. By the time all 225 trucks arrived, total “train” length would have reached more than 3 km. Getting the equipment from the suppliers located at faraway points such as Dallas, San Diego, Baltimore, and Nashville had presented problems because of the size of the loads; special escorts were required for oversized loads, and travel time at New Orleans for oversize loads was restricted to the period between 10 pm and 4 am. Tooling and fixtures being installed at Michoud would give Martin Marietta, prime external tank contractor, the capability needed to meet flight schedules; each Shuttle flight would require a new external tank, and NASA had planned more than 400 flights between 1979 and 1989. Launches should number 60 per year by 1984. (MSFC Release 76-60)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $2 250 000 contract to the Beech Aircraft Corp., Boulder, Co., for development of a Space Shuttle orbiter fuel-cell servicing system. An orbiter would carry 3 fuel cells using cryogenically stored hydrogen and oxygen to provide electrical power; each cell would connect to a separate power bus, but only 2 cells would be used during minimum power load. Peak or average power load would use all 3 cells. The contract called for Beech to design, fabricate, test, and deliver a complete cryogenic remotely controlled unit that would provide liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen for the fuel cells, delivery to be completed by 1 Dec. 1977. (KSC Release 333-76)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
A small-scale model of the Space Shuttle and its launch pad would be used in a test program begun at MSFC to reduce noise during a Shuttle launch. Sound energy could damage sensitive instruments or other payloads carried in the Shuttle orbiter, and reducing launch noise by modifying the launch facility would be more economical than redesigning the launch vehicle itself or its associated payloads to tolerate anticipated levels of noise. The model would test various designs that sprayed water into, above, and below the rocket exhaust; firing the engines into a water spray would convert acoustic (sound) waves into thermal energy, which would dissipate as steam. Use of the water technique had significantly reduced—but not eliminated—the damaging noise. (MSFC Release 76-33)
Payload responsibilities for the first 6 flights of the Space Shuttle had been allocated by NASA, according to Aviation Wk and. Space Technology magazine. The first 6 orbital missions scheduled for 1979-1980 would be verifications of the overall Shuttle system; the first flight would carry no payload except a 45 000-kg data-analysis system, but the other 5 flight-test missions would carry scientifically meaningful payloads. NASA had assigned the second and fifth flight tests to its Office of Applications; the fourth and sixth, to the Office of Space Science; and the third, to the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. The Office of Applications would be involved with space-processing hardware, and the Office of Space Science would oversee the use of existing research instruments; the OAST had been considering a space “workbench” on which various instruments could be deployed for 3- to 9-mo periods. The orbital flight-test missions would begin with a duration of only a few orbits, which should increase to about 7 days by the sixth flight mission; the first 4 flights would land at Dryden Flight Research Center, and the latter 2 at Kennedy Space Center. {AvWk, 17 May 76, 21)
The USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center operated in Tenn. by the Air Force Systems Command announced that it was using infrared equipment, designed in Europe to locate tumors in the human body, for studying heat patterns on the surface of the Space Shuttle manned orbiter vehicle under simulated flight conditions. Infrared cameras were known to detect a tumor because its heat-radiation characteristics differed from those of normal tissue. In the USAF tests, a model heated in a wind tunnel’s supersonic airflow produced infrared radiation received by a camera and transferred to a detector that could record infrared radiation from 7000 points in the field-of-view. Earlier Shuttle tests had shown the need for a protective system when the vehicle plunged into the dense atmosphere and for data on expected temperature levels, important to the selection of structural materials and to the design of internal parts. Ceramic-like tiles had been used in a scanning test to see the effect of a slight misalignment on the overall heat distribution on the orbiter’s underside; the resulting data had demonstrated advantages over more traditional methods. Standard procedures required the application of surface coatings—either a paint that changed from solid to liquid at a specified temperature, or compounds whose ultraviolet radiation changed with temperature—but such materials could create a surface roughness that would alter the results. Also the melting-paint technique required washing and repainting the model after each test. The infrared camera could transmit its findings to a computer for analysis within minutes, and could provide a permanent color record if required. Use of mechanical heat-measuring devices was limited by the number of sensors that could be installed, and the time required to do so. (Although the infrared system would minimize the need for mechanical instrumentation, tests calling for simultaneous temperature data from all portions of the model surface would still require installation of sensors.) About 90% of the system used at AEDC was off-the-shelf hardware; computer programs and methods of interconnecting components were devised by ARO, Inc., the center’s operating contractor. (OIP 114.76)
The $6.2-billion Space Shuttle, “America’s only remaining space spectacular,” might come apart at the seams because of unsafe nuts and screws, Jack Anderson and Les Whitten reported in the Washington Post. Discussion at NASA as early as Apr. 1973 had centered on the menace of substandard screws; in July 1973, Johnson Gage—-a Bloomfield, Conn, firm-—had sent NASA a warning based on tests of individual screw and nut threads stating that the standards “provide for a loophole that allows [NASA to] accept outright junk.” Computer tests had revealed that millions worth of faulty threads reached Rockwell International Corp., principal Shuttle contractor, because of low standards and it was feared the inferior screws had gotten into Shuttle equipment. Although company engineers were worried about the standards and the resultant products, the company bought fasteners from outside suppliers and could not control quality from 6000 vendors in 47 states, company minutes said. Industry had fought to keep the low standards rather than pay the estimated $120 million cost of retooling; the American National Standards Institute, led by industry, had blocked every move for tighter standards, Anderson and Whitten charged. (WPost, 17 Apr 76, B—11)
Three space scientists at Johnson Space Center would begin a week-long round-the-clock test of experiments and procedures in a mockup of the Spacelab designed for the Space Shuttle. The team, headed by astronaut-physician Dr. Story Musgrave, would eat, sleep, and perform space-related duties in a mockup of the Shuttle orbiter crew compartment, and would carry out more than 20 experiments in space medicine and one in space physics inside the 6.8-m-by-4.06-m Spacelab mockup. The team inside would be in constant communication with flight operations engineers and scientists at control points outside the mockup, which had been equipped with both instruments and experiments just as the Spacelab would be. The team would demonstrate 14 operational tests whose results would serve in planning inflight crew activities, procedures, and scheduling, and in studying items such as personal hygiene, general housekeeping and special-purpose cleaning and maintenance, and functional utility of the orbiter aft deck from which many of the Spacelab experiments would be monitored. The simulation was also designed to evaluate ground-support procedures and data-handling techniques. (JSC Release 76-04)
NASA announced selection of Hamilton Standard Division, United Aircraft Corp., for negotiations leading to award of contract for development and production of space suits to be used by men and women during Space Shuttle flights. The basic cost-plus-award fee contract would cost about $15 million through Sept. 1980. The suit system, consisting of a basic suit and built-in support system including breathing-atmosphere and cooling components, would be adjustable instead of custom-made for each astronaut (as in earlier programs) and would come in small, medium, and large sizes to fit candidates varying in height from 1.5 to 2 m. Hamilton Standard would provide hardware and spares needed for 7 suits and support equipment, as well as training, manpower, and equipment needed to support the program at NASA field centers. Johnson Space Center would have technical direction of the contract. (JSC Release 76-46)
Johnson Space Center announced on 21 Sept, modification of a costplusaward-fee contract with IBM, Gaithersburg, Md., to cover software for ground-based computing and data-processing systems at JSC. IBM would develop computer programs for Space Shuttle vehicle management and flight operations, and related scientific and medical operations. Value of the modified contract would be $19 463 000. (JSC Release 76-59) —NASA contracted 22 Sept, with Aeronutronic Ford Corp. for support services for the Mission Control Center and other ground-based data systems at JSC, including data hardware and software systems engineering and maintenance, as well as logistics, reliability, and quality assurance. The cost-plus-award-fee contract would cost about $46 550 000 from July 1976 through 30 Sept. 1978. (JSC Release 76-60) —JSC announced 24 Sept, selection of Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. for negotiations leading to award of a contract for development and production of a portable oxygen system for Space Shuttle crew and passengers. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, costing about $1.9 million, would run from 13 Nov. 1976 to 13 July 1979. The system, designed to meet four special Shuttle needs (emergency oxygen in case of cabin-atmosphere contamination, prebreathing before spacewalks, life support during rescue, and emergency oxygen after landing in case of landing-area contamination), would be capable of operating independently or connected to the Shuttle oxygen'system. The contract would call for delivery of ten units and 50 recharge kits for NASA use in certification, training, and flight, plus ground-support equipment and manpower; it would contain options for 62 additional units and 310 recharge kits. (JSC Release 76-61)
A “tethered” satellite—suspended by a cable from the Space Shuttle orbiter’s cargo bay—could serve to deploy and control materials used in constructing a space station, or to transfer articles from one manned vehicle to another, said NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center. The orbiter could also “troll” a tethered satellite through a low-altitude earth orbit to explore the atmospheric region between 80 and 120 km above earth’s surface; previous exploration vehicles— sounding rockets and low-altitude satellites—could not remain in that region long enough for extensive studies before being forced back to earth by atmospheric drag and gravity. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory would aid NASA in system-dynamics studies for the tethered satellite system. MSFC would manage program development, integrate experiments, and support orbital operations. If the tethered system proved feasible, MSFC would begin spacecraft system design, and the first mission could be scheduled as early as 1980. (NASA Release 76-138)
Johnson Space Center announced “the most successful balloon flight of its type ever conducted” when a football-field-sized balloon carried a scientific instruments package at a 40-km altitude across the central Texas night sky for 12 hr to gather information on far distant giant and super-giant stars. The 589-kg package known as BUSS—for balloon-borne ultraviolet stellar spectrometer—gathered data on 16 separate stars, including Arcturus, a giant star in constellation Bootes; super-giant Antares (alpha Scorpii); Vega (alpha Lyrae); and Spica (alpha Virginis), super-hot star and one of the brightest observed during the flight. Of special interest was super-giant Deneb in constellation Cygnus, 1400 light years distant, whose light recorded by BUSS was emitted before the Anglo-Saxons settled in England; Deneb was so large that, if the sun were located in its center, the earth would orbit the sun entirely within the star’s outer limits. The BUSS payload was the culmination of a 3-yr international collaboration between JSC and the Space Research Laboratory of Utrecht in the Netherlands. Dr. Yoji Kondo of JSC was U.S. coprincipal investigator, with Dr. Thomas H. Morgan and Dr. Jerry L. Modisette of Houston Raptist University; the Dutch team was led by Dr. Cees de Jager. Purpose of the balloon flights in a series of star studies that began in 1971 was to evaluate the experiment systems for use on the Space Shuttle; the BUSS package was designed to obtain data on spectral variations of a variety of stars and aid scientists in determining their structure and evolution. Previous flights had obtained some information but only a fiftieth of the spectral range covered by the BUSS payload. The package was landed by a parachute about 26 m in diameter, similar to those used on the Apollo command module; the payload, chute, and balloon were recovered between Abilene and Ft. Worth by NASA engineers who returned the material to Houston. The data would be analyzed by the U.S. team and by the Dutch scientists, who had returned to Holland, in preparation for another balloon flight scheduled for the fall of 1976. (JSC Release 76-39)
NASA announced selection of the initial crew of the Boeing 747 shuttlecarrier aircraft that would carry and launch the Space Shuttle orbiter in approach and landing tests. Pilots would be Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Thomas C. McMurtry, both of Dryden Flight Research Center; flight-test engineers would be Victor W. Horton, also from Dryden, and Louis E. Guidry, Jr., of Johnson Space Center. All the men chosen were civilians. The ALT flights, scheduled for early 1977, would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7.5 km, where it would separate from the 747 and the orbiter crew would pilot it to a glide landing. Unmanned and manned captive flights would precede initial free flights. (DFRC Release 3-76)
NASA announced award of an $8.8-million extension for 1 yr of a contract with Northrop Services, Inc., of Houston for operation and maintenance of lab and test facilities at Johnson Space Center. Northrop had provided these services to JSC for the past 3 yr; the extension would bring the value of the contract to $37 416 742. Northrop had used 425 employes to maintain and operate the life sciences and engineering labs and the lunar curatorial lab. NASA also announced award of a $6.8-million extension for 2 yr of a contract with the Charles Stark Draper Labs., Cambridge, Mass., for technical support of Space Shuttle orbiter avionics software development. Draper had provided this support to JSC since 1974. The effort, employing 55 people, would include software design, verification, simulation, requirements formulation, and analysis as required for programming the guidance, navigation, and control computer for the Shuttle orbiter. (JSC Releases 76-12, 76-14)
Johnson Space Center announced that NASA had awarded the Singer Co. Simulations Products Division, Binghamton, N.Y., a $6.5-million 2-yr contract for maintenance, modification, and operational support of JSC’s simulation complex at Houston to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle program. Initially, the simulation complex would consist of the Shuttle procedures simulator and the crew procedures evaluation simulator; later, an orbiter aeroflight simulator would be added, followed by the Shuttle mission simulator. In addition to systems and hardware engineering, configuration control, installation and tests of modifications, and development, drafting, and illustration of software, the contract would require maintenance, servicing, and operational support of the equipment as well as documentation and logistics support. Extensions of 24 and 6 mo would be optional. McDonnell Douglas Corp. also negotiated for this contract (see 10 May). (JSC Release 76-48)
More new discoveries would be made in space than on the ground during the first 10 to 15 yr of Shuttle operations, a colloquium on bioprocessing in space was told by James H. Bredt, NASA program manager for space processing. The meeting of more than 200 industrial and academic bioscience researchers at Johnson Space Center heard reports on Space Shuttle and Spacelab capabilities and status. Noting that Spacelab would be able to carry 300 to 400 experiments, more on each flight than all other previous manned space missions combined, Bredt urged the audience to submit experiment programs that would make use of the new national resource. Participants recommended formation of a small group of bioscientists to advise NASA in discussions of space processing suggestions, and scheduling of followup meetings to define areas of interest so that programs could be developed before instrumentation development began. NASA spokesmen said more than 1400 experiment proposals for Shuttle flights were on hand, and Shuttle flight opportunities covering the first 2 Spacelab missions would be announced later this year. (Av Wk & Sp Tech, 29 Mar 76, 53)
Addressing the Utah Air Force Association’s Bicentennial program in Salt Lake City, NASA’s Deputy Administrator George M. Low gave a status report on ongoing projects such as Landsat, Viking, and the Space Shuttle, then speculated at length on accomplishments in space that might be celebrated on the occasion of the U.S. Tricentennial. Referring to “the beginning of the industrialization of space,” using the first-generation reusable space-transportation system called Shuttle to set up the first factories in space, he said “the real breakthrough” would come with energy collected from the sun and beamed down with microwaves to provide all the electrical needs of a major city. None of this technology, he added, was beyond today’s knowledge. He then forecast a cleanup of earth’s environment, communications applications of all kinds, and exploration of outer space made possible by discoveries using the Space Telescope, ending with descriptions of space colonies that would “become the real frontier.” He concluded by stating that “all of my projections are overly conservative” and could all become reality long before the end of America’s third century. (Text)
The U.S. Air Force announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Corp., a unit of the Boeing Company, to design and produce an interim upper-stage (IUS) solid-fuel rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, to lift Shuttle craft from low earth orbit to higher mission altitudes. Boeing, chosen over Martin Marietta, Lockheed, and General Dynamics Corp., still had to negotiate a contract, estimated to be ultimately worth about $300 million. (ATT, 10 Aug 76, 45; WSJ, 10 Aug 76, .3)
NASA would buy the Department of Defense’s 2 Space Shuttle orbiters if the administration would give NASA an extra $835 million or so for that purpose, Aerospace Daily reported after a meeting between George M. Low, departing NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, DOD’s chief of research and engineering. The 2 agencies reportedly agreed that the nation needed 5 orbiters—2 more than NASA had planned to buy—and that NASA should buy them. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld were reported ready to meet to “firm up a proposal” to the Office of Management and Budget and to President Ford; 0MB might contest the need for 5 orbiters, Aerospace Daily said. (Aero Daily, 21 June 76, 22)
MSFC announced it had shipped to GFSC the experiment payload for SPAR III, third in a series of about 15 space-processing applications rockets being flown over a 15-yr period to obtain space-processing data in near-zero gravity until Space Shuttle flights become available in the 1980s. The scientific payload built by MSFC would be integrated with GFSC components—igniter, separator, control and recovery systems—and shipped to the U.S. Army White Sands Missile Range, N.M., for a scheduled mid-December launch. SPAR payloads recovered by parachute would be forwarded to investigators for analysis. The SPAR flight would provide about 5 min of near-zero gravity in which to perform materials processing. (MSFC Release 76-204)
MSFC announced completion of 2 of 8 major facilities for production of Space Shuttle solid-propellant rocket motors at Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Brigham City, Utah. Thiokol was selected as prime contractor by MSFC for development of the solid-fuel rocket motor, main element of the reusable solid-fuel rocket booster being developed by MSFC. The 2 completed units were a nozzle-bearing test facility, used to test a flexible bearing allowing the rocket-motor nozzle to turn up to 8° in any direction for thrust-vector control in steering, and an x-ray facility for inspecting propellant after casting into the motor-case segments. A case-preparation building, where motor cases would be prepared for propellant loading by sandblasting, cleaning, refining, and painting, was reported 95% complete. Three facilities for loading the propellants— casting pit 1, a casting house, and casting-pit covers—were about half completed. A case-refurbishment facility to handle the motor cases after recovery would be under construction shortly. (MSFC Release 76-151) 15 August: In an attempt to predict the weather on the planet Jupiter, Dr. Gareth P. Williams, researcher at NOAA’s Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at Princeton Univ., applied a computer model of earth’s atmosphere to Jupiter and found that it not only reproduced patterns known to exist there but also provided new explanations of visible features such as the Great Red Spot and horizontal stripes, as well as revealing a 4-yr cycle of heat transfer. Using a set of equations describing physical processes that produce atmospheric behavior on earth, Dr. Williams fed in conditions known to exist on Jupiter—the planet’s enormous size, amount of sunlight it receives, and rate of rotation (which dominated the behavior of the Jovian atmosphere)—and found that the basic behavior of atmosphere was “quite similar.” The purpose of atmosphere, he said, was to transfer heat from the equator to the poles; the terrestrial heat cycle took about a month, but the NOAA model revealed a corresponding cycle on Jupiter that took 4 yr. Whereas the earth received its heat from the sun, Jupiter received only 4% as much solar heat as earth, but the infrared measurements showed that the planet was warmer than it should be if its only heat source were the sun. Scientists believe that the planet generates heat of its own in an amount about equal to what it receives from the sun; this extra heat complicated the job of modeling Jupiter’s atmosphere because there was no way of telling how it might be distributed, but it also provided a confirmation for the model. Atmospheric motions on Jupiter tended to perpetuate themselves instead of dying out, as they do on earth because of interaction with the earth’s surface. Jupiter has no “surface” as we know it, Dr. Williams noted; “it just gets denser toward the interior and motions gradually dissipate downward....” Circulation patterns producing eddies in the planet’s atmosphere seem to be stable; the Great Red Spot had been apparent since the 17th century, when it was first sighted. The researchers hoped that Pioneer 11, now about halfway between Jupiter and Saturn, might provide a positive test of the Princeton model; “we think Saturn is like Jupiter, but we don’t know,” said Dr. Williams. “Maybe it has a red spot.” (NOAA Release 76-170)
NASA announced that it would modify equipment and facilities used in the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz programs for use in future space programs, and that it would dispose of remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware that had no future application. Disposal would eliminate storage costs, free storage space, and make facilities available for ongoing programs, the agency said. The action marked the transition of U.S. manned space activity from use of expendable vehicles to use of the reusable Space Shuttle, scheduled to undertake its first mission within 3 yr. Although NASA, at the request of Congress, had kept its remaining Saturn-Apollo flight hardware since April 1975 in minimum-cost storage, to be able to restore it to flight condition if needed, the backup Skylab workshop and Apollo-Soyuz backup docking module had been transferred to the National Air and Space Museum; twenty-two H-l rocket engines from Saturn stages had been transferred for use in Thor-Delta vehicles. Much of the remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware would probably be turned over to the Smithsonian Institution, and other equipment would be screened for use in the Shuttle or other programs. (NASA Release 76-206)
NASA announced signature of an agreement between the Universities Space Research Association (USRA) and the Langley Research Center to provide university participation in the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) space research program managed by LaRC, which would use the Space Shuttle to launch and retrieve an earth-orbiting multipurpose-experiment carrier starting late in 1979. USRA was established in 1969 through the National Academy of Sciences as a consortium of 50 universities in the U.S., through which the academic community could work with NASA on scientific and technological developments in the space program; its headquarters was at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. The agreement with LaRC called for USRA to solicit, select, and implement university experiments for each LDEF mission, with funds provided by the sponsoring organizations. NASA would also seek participants in the LDEF program through a formal announcement of opportunity inviting private companies, research and engineering institutes, and other government agencies to provide space experiments for LDEF missions. (NASA Release 76-99)
Isaac T. Gillam IV, NASA Hq Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles, was designated Director of Space Shuttle Operations at Dryden Flight Research Center, effective 23 May. In his new position, Gillam would be responsible for development of test support facilities, institutional support of test operations, and flight and industrial safety for test operations in support of Shuttle carrier-aircraft testing and orbital approach and landing tests conducted at DFRC. Before coming to NASA Hq in 1963, Gillam served in the U.S. Air Force as pilot, missile launch crew commander, and ROTC instructor; he had done graduate work at Term. State Univ. while serving as assistant professor of military science. From 1963 to 1966, he was resources management specialist at NASA Hq and was then appointed Assistant Delta Program Manager in the Launch Vehicles Directorate. Named Delta Program Manager in Sept. 1968, he became Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles (including Delta and Scout) in June 1973. He received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work in the launch-vehicle program. (NASA Release 76-96)
A NASA study reported that relocation of crew training and mission-control activities from Johnson Space Center in Tex. to Cape Canaveral in Fla. would offer “no management, technical or budgetary advantages” and “would seriously affect a smoothly functioning, highly efficient organization” at JSC, delaying the Space Shuttle program by up to 2 yr. The study, requested in June 1975 by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of a subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that relocation would cost up to $842 million by 1983, and that the funds would not be recoverable. (ATT, 19 Sept 76, 24)
Tass announced the launch of the Salyut 5 orbital scientific station “under the program of studying the outer space.” Parameters were 260-km apogee, 219-km perigee, 51.6° inclination, and 89-min period. Control posts inside the Soviet Union as well as vessels of the USSR Science Academy “sailing in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean” were tracking the flight, receiving telemetry, and controlling the station, the announcement said. Although the official announcement did not mention manned flights as part of the Salyut 5 program, the Washington Post reported that a Western specialist in Moscow had predicted the new station would be manned “sooner or later.” The Washington Star noted that 2 visiting cosmonauts—Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, who lived aboard Salyut 4 for 63 days last summer—speaking at an international meeting in Philadelphia 2 wk ago said the new station would be able to accommodate 6 cosmonauts for as long as 3 mo, and would have 2 entry ports, so that 2 spacecraft could dock with it at the same time. The 2-mo flight of Klimuk and Sevastyanov set a Soviet record for time spent in space; however, the 84-day flight of 3 Americans (Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue) aboard Skylab 4 had set the overall endurance record in early 1974. A USSR manned mission would be the first launching of cosmonauts since the joint Apollo-Soyuz flight with the U.S. in July 1975; the last USSR orbital station, Salyut 4, was launched 26 December 1974 and was still performing experiments, according to official announcements. The Star said that the Soviets were directing their resources toward perfecting permanent stations in contrast to the U.S. approach of developing a reusable space shuttle. (FBIS, Tass in English, 22 June 76; W Post, 23 June 76, A-ll; WStar, 23 June 76, A-15)
Despite lower profits in its work on the Space Shuttle and increased losses in business aircraft, Rockwell Inti, reported higher sales and earnings for both the last quarter and the full fiscal year ending 30 Sept. 1976. Earnings were $121.1 million, up 29% in fiscal 1976, and sales increased 8% to a record $5.2 billion. The figures did not include discontinued operations in Rockwell’s industrial components area, sold in Dec. 1975. Four of the company’s five operating areas reflected better management and lower interest costs: automotive operations, electronics operations, consumer operations, and utility and industrial operations. The aerospace operations figures reflected fewer award-fee opportunities, Rockwell said. (Rockwell Release R-40)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a number of activities, centered on the Space Shuttle, including testing, procurement, and completion of facilities. —During July, MSFC awarded 14 contracts each of which totaled more than $50 000. (MSFC Release 76-155) —MSFC completed preparation of a 2.8% scale model of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) that would be tested in Ames Research Center wind tunnels (the 2 supersonic facilities and the 4.2m transonic facility). MSFC had used a 0.5% scale model in its smaller trisonic (over mach 3) wirid tunnel to develop preliminary environmental data; the smaller tunnel ft as cheaper to operate, and a smaller model was cheaper to alter. Data from the ARC tests would be use in SRB component vibration and acoustic design and in establishing qualification-test criteria, and finally for generation of data on the acoustic environment for reentry of an actual full-scale SRB. (MSFC Release 76-120) —Completing the first phase of acoustic testing that used scale models of the Space Shuttle with models of the Kennedy Space Center launch pad, MSFC announced that it had begun another test program using a scale model of the Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launch pad and a Shuttle model having working main engines and solid-fuel rocket boosters to the same scale. The Vandenberg launch pad differed from that at KSC, but MSFC said that much of the information obtained since Aug. 1974 in 150 test firings to evaluate different acoustic methods for the KSC launch pad would be useful in suppressing noise at the Vandenberg site. The tests were made to determine the best way to control noise and ignition overpressure when Shuttle engines and boosters were ignited at launch; uncontrolled pressures and acoustics could damage the Shuttle or its payload. Tests were scheduled for completion in Dec. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-117) —MSFC announced award of a $247 363 contract to Rockwell’s Space Div. for a 12-mo study of Shuttle booster and external tank options that could reduce cost per flight and increase payload weight capability. (MSFC Release 76-118) —MSFC announced that the first flight-configuration nozzle for the Shuttle main engine under development by Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Div. had been completed and successfully proof-tested. Completion of the nozzle represented a significant design and manufacturing achievement; the nozzle consisted of 1080 precisely formed tapering tubes brazed to a shell and stiffened by bands. It was about 3m tall and 2.7m in diameter, weighing about 454 kg. Attached to the main combustion chamber of the main engine, the nozzle would allow exhaust gases to expand to obtain maximum thrust, contributing to highly efficient burn. (MSFC Release 76-128) —MSFC announced completion of tests conducted with KSC to determine the effects of salty and brackish water on materials used in elements of the Space Shuttle. Recovery of 2 Shuttle boosters after each launch would require towing the boosters in the salty Atlantic Ocean and into the brackish waters of a Fla. river. The studies used an integrated test bed constructed from the same materials and covered with the same sealants and paints planned for use on flight rockets, carrying samples of electrical and electronic equipment and hydraulic systems being considered for Shuttle use. The test bed, shipped to KSC, was put into the ocean for 7 days and in the Banana River for 3 days, at a depth that closely simulated actual booster-recovery conditions. Returned to MSFC, the test bed had been subjected to study by engineers and technicians to discover the effects of the ocean and river environments, and to look for corrosion or marine biological growth. After this study, the refurbished test bed would be used again for tests in the ocean by KSC personnel. (MSFC Release 76-131) —MSFC announced it had requested bids from industry on development of range-safety receivers for the Space Shuttle. Each Shuttle’s 2 booster solid rockets would carry 2 receivers and the external tank 1, a total of 5 for each launch. The receivers would be part of a safety system that would let the range safety officer destroy the vehicle in case of a malfunction at launch. NASA planned to reuse the receivers up to 20 times, recovering and returning the equipment to the manufacturer for testing before it was shipped to the assembly contractor for reuse. (MSFC Release 76-132) —MSFC announced that assembly of the first Space Shuttle external tank had begun at the Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. Assembly should be completed and the tank delivered to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Miss., in mid-1977 for use in the test program for the main propulsion engine. The tests would use the tank, three Shuttle main engines, and other components in actual firings to verify the design and operation of the main propulsion system. The program would consist of 15 test firings, 11 at or near the full 8-min duration. (MSFC Release 76-137) —MSFC announced preparations for the arrival of the first Space Shuttle orbiter in mid-July for a series of tests at MSFC’s dynamic test facility. The orbiter would arrive at the Redstone airfield in 1978 atop a modified Boeing 747 and be off-loaded by KSC personnel. On the ground, the orbiter would become the responsibility of MSFC personnel, who would move it to the test facility and mate it with the rest of the Space Shuttle elements for vibration tests. This would be the first time all elements of the Shuttle were united. Tests were scheduled to run from spring to winter of 1978. (MSFC Release 76-141) —MSFC announced completion of tests on minitank 5, a small aluminum tank coated with a spray insulation that would be used to protect the Space Shuttle’s external tank and its highly volatile liquid hydrogen contents from engine exhaust or aerodynamic heat. This was the fifth of 13 such tanks to be tested at MSFC. The tests were to determine the effectiveness of Martin Marietta’s foam insulation against stress encountered during Shuttle launch and space flight. Besides acoustic and vacuum tests, the minitanks would undergo pressure, boiloff, and holding tests with liquid hydrogen; the hold test would determine the effect of a 7-hr idle period on a full tank’s insulation system. The test period of 7 hr was estimated to be the longest time a fueled Shuttle would have to wait on a launch pad before liftoff. %ISFC Release 76-142) —MSFC announced completion^, the only totally new structure built exclusively for testing the Space Shuttle external tank: the pneumatic test facility at Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans, which would accommodate the tank measuring 47 m long (more than half the length of a football field) and 8.4 m in diameter. Empty, the tank would weigh about 34 000 kg. The pneumatic facility would be used for proof tests and leak tests of the external tank’s liquid hydrogen tank; the proof test would pressurize the tank with gaseous nitrogen and apply a series of external loads with 9 hydraulic cylinders. The leak test would verify that no out-of-specification leaks existed. Martin Marietta Aerospace was prime contractor at Michoud for external tank production. (MSFC Release 76-143)
Physicians at Johnson Space Center were gathering data on female physiological performance and tolerance limits as a basis for establishing criteria in recruiting NASA’s first women astronauts. Women employees of the center were asked to volunteer for testing on a treadmill and in a lower body negative-pressure device, to see whether women responded differently from men of comparable age to treadmill exercise and to stresses on the circulatory system induced by decreased pressures on the lower body. On the treadmill test, researchers would monitor the subject’s heart rate and blood pressure as they varied the speed and tilt of the moving treadmill. The pressure device, encasing the subject from the waist down, would have the pressure reduced while researchers monitored the reaction of the cardiovascular system to the change in pressure. NASA had issued a call for at least 30 Space Shuttle astronauts (15 pilot candidates, 15 mission specialist candidates) in July 197 6, with a closing date of 30 June 1977. Selection would be completed by December 1977. (JSC Release 76-65)
A new device developed by the USAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at Edwards AFB, Calif., would permit an annual “physical examination” of the motors of intercontinental ballistic missiles while the missiles were still in the silo. The practice of removing the motors for inspection had resulted in high costs for handling and transportation as well as high risk of damage to the motors. The AF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) at Los Angeles asked AFRPL to find a compact, safe, and economical means of inspection, and acoustical holography was selected. The system when fully developed would be able to scan the outside of an intact missile top to bottom, probing the propellant inside its motors. The device worked much like sonar, transmitting high-frequency sound waves and registering reflected vibrations; the reflected waves, processed electronically, would reproduce any flaws in the propellant on a cathode-ray tube for instant viewing or photographing, and the information would be stored in a computer for later evaluation. Future uses of acoustical holography might be made in medical science, improving on current x-ray techniques. (AF Release OIP 174.75) the advantages of space environment—earth overview, zero gravity, vacuum, heat and waste disposal, and uninterrupted solar energy—for future uses, concluding with a prediction of a growing tourist industry in space. The symposium concluded 26 May at the annual banquet of the Ala. AIAA with an address on “Space Industrialization as a Concept” by Dr. Krafft Ehricke, science advisor for North American Space Division, Rockwell International Corp. Sessions of the symposium dealt with space habitation, space transportation, space processing of materials, and space power. The symposium was organized to disseminate recent information on expanded space operations after the advent of the Space Shuttle to all segments of the scientific and technical community; participants included NASA centers, other government agencies, industry and universities. (NASA Release 76-81; MSFC Release 76-64, 76-79; Disher text)
Johnson Space Center announced delivery of the first of 2 training aircraft to Ellington AFB, Tex., for JSC’s use in training Space Shuttle crews. The aircraft (STA) was a modified Grumman twin-engine Gulf-stream II jet designed to simulate flight characteristics of the Space Shuttle orbiter, using thrust-reverser engines and direct lift control to vary the jet plane’s dynamics to resemble those of the orbiter. After JSC personnel conducted a receiving inspection on the plane, it would be returned to Grumman at Bethpage, N.Y., for installation of an electric aileron-trim system; this modification should take about a week. The second STA, scheduled for delivery in late July, would remain at Bethpage to ensure that the plane could duplicate the various landing flight modes of the orbiter during the flight tests. Remaining tests would verify STA’s ability to match orbiter trajectory during the period from 10-11 km altitude through touchdown and would check out recent engineering changes. (NASA Release 76-108; JSC Release 76-38)
NASA announced successful static test firing of one of two Space Shuttle main engines for 650 sec at main-stage operating level (50% rated thrust level) at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., under the direction of MSFC. The firing, on 30 Sept., was the longest test firing of an SSME to date. Previous firings had aimed at testing engine-throttling control, engine start and shutdown sequence, and engine power balance. The current series of tests, conducted by personnel of Rockwell Intl.’s Rocketdyne Div., would obtain component- and system-operation data at increasing levels of power. The NSTL test program combined development and acceptance testing; each Shuttle engine would be fired at NSTL before being certified for flight. (NASA Release 76-162)
NASA’s reusable Space Shuttle program would produce significant benefits for civil aviation, the agency reported in announcing the first operational tests of an advanced flight-control system for civil aircraft to be conducted by the Shuttle, together with advances in structural materials technology for aerospace manufacturers. Standard heavyweight mechanical backup flight-control systems had been required when reliability of electronic control systems was in question; however, aerodynamic requirements for the use of mechanical systems had hampered development of flight-efficient aircraft designs. Use of the advanced electronic controls would reduce weight, resulting in less fuel consumption, and a computer tie-in with ground navigation and mission controls would provide constant reliable communication and reduce traffic delays. Use of composites—strong lightweight combinations of metals and plastics—would reduce structural weight by more than 30% compared to aluminum. Developed by NASA and the Air Force in collaboration with industry, the composites would demonstrate in Shuttle testing the weight reduction and cost effectiveness needed for future designs. (NASA Release 76-58)
The DOD did not really want the Space Shuttle, charged Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and NASA had “conned Congress into buying a pig in the poke” in its efforts to obtain funds for Shuttle development. DOD had shown that it did not want the Shuttle by its actions, said Proxmire, citing DOD’s statement that it would “under no circumstance^” pay for the fourth and fifth Shuttle orbiters, and the DOD decision to go forward with a new satellite communications system (DSCS-IIl) “which will not capitalize on the unique advantages of the Shuttle . . . [but] is to be compatible with both the Shuttle and the present Titan III-C.” Proxmire charged that the DSCS decision was based not on a 9-mo wait for the Shuttle, but on the fact that “DOD has little confidence in a cost-effective operational Shuttle.” Proxmire also cited a General Accounting Office report issued in April that DOD would pay less to launch its satellites on expendable vehicles than on the Shuttle through 1990-1991, assuming that DOD did not plan to recover and reuse any of its satellites. (SBD, 24 Sept 76, 105)
Calling the Space Shuttle “clearly . . . the. next logical step” in tapping the scientific and commercial possibilities of space, the Baltimore Sun said in an editorial that criticisms of the Shuttle program from an economic point of view should be balanced with the rewards that would come only from experience. The first Shuttle was never intended to be selfsupporting, the editorial said, and the rewards would include increased knowledge to serve as the basis for more sophisticated programs and the increased likelihood of constructing a permanently staffed permanently orbiting space station. Complaints from prospective users—ComSat and DOD—that Shuttle fees would be too high “before NASA even has announced these fees” were an obvious ploy to keep the fees as low as possible, the editorial said. (B Sun, 13 April 76)
A simple, inexpensive, and effective method of suppressing noise in windtunnel testing of space vehicles would be patented by two MSFC engineers, MSFC announced. While developing an acoustic environment for reentry of the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster, Paul W. Howard and Luke A. Schutzenhofer of MSFC’s Systems Dynamics Lab. found their acoustic data distorted by background noise reflected at transonic speeds from the walls of the wind tunnel, causing shock waves. The primary aerodynamic cause of the background noise was found to be the edgetone effect of high-velocity windflow over holes in the perforated walls of the tunnel; covering the perforated walls with wire screening minimized direct contact between the airstream and the edges of the holes, and the noise was greatly reduced. The temporary fix proved so successful that the screens were permanently installed, and the patent should be issued to the public by early summer. (MSFC Release 76-44)
A launch-abort system for the Space Shuttle, for use in case of malfunction during the first 2.5 min of flight, was “quietly” removed by NASA 3 yr ago although such a system had been designed into the Shuttle late in 1971, according to the Washington Post. (In 2.5 min the Shuttle would reach a 40-km altitude from which it could “fly” to earth.) Staff writer Thomas O’Toole said that in 1973 NASA “reversed itself and dropped the launch-abort system ... a decision understood to have met with dissent inside the space agency.” The abort system designed for the Shuttle consisted of 2 huge solid-fuel rocket motors, one on each side of the Shuttle tail, that could be fired to separate the spacecraft and its occupants from the booster engines and main-engine fuel tanks in case of trouble; however, the abort motors weighed 43,500 kg—half as heavy as the entire 68 000-kg Shuttle carrying an average 18 000-kg pay-load—and even after they fired, the Shuttle would fall for 2 or 3 sec before being lifted away from the boosters. Elwood W. Land, director of system operations for the Shuttle program, defended the decision to remove the abort system, saying that it was not needed because of redundancy built into the spacecraft and its engine. Land noted that, in 58 manned space flights, neither the U.S. nor the USSR had resorted to a launch-abort system to rescue spacecraft crews, notwithstanding 2 close calls: Gemini 6 astronauts had almost fired their ejection seats when their engine shut down on the pad in 1965, and the Soyuz 18 cosmonauts never reached earth orbit but flew their spacecraft to a landing in southeast Siberia. The 1-man Mercury capsule had a rocket-boosted escape system to carry the spacecraft cabin away from its rocket engines and fuel tanks; the 2-man Gemini had ejection seats to fire astronauts from the cabin like jet pilots from disabled aircraft; and the 3-man Apollo carried a large solid-fuel rocket motor that could pull the 18 000-kg spacecraft away from its tower of engines sec after trouble hit the engines or fuel tanks. Only remaining provision for the Shuttle was a pair of ejection seats for pilot and copilot of the first 4 orbital test flights; the seats would be removed when 5 more crew members were added for subsequent tests and for operational flights. “There is no way to install 7 ejection seats in the shuttle,” the article noted. (WPost, 7 May 76, A-3)
Johnson Space Center announced delivery and acceptance of the Sperry Rand computer system, Univac 110/46, that would drive the Shuttle mission simulators. Dr. Bruce B. Johnson, technical manager of the contract, said that JSC had tested the computer complex round the clock for 30 days before its acceptance, and that the complex had demonstrated reliability “far in excess of contractual requirements.” Completed 3 wk ahead of schedule, the Univac 1100/46 contained 10 processors, making it one of the most powerful digital computers built to date, with 900 000 36-bit words in the main memory and 2 billion characters in mass storage capacity. The computer would simulate a wide range of mission situations—prelaunch, ascent, aborts, orbit rendezvous and docking, entry, and landing—in the process of training flight crews and ground personnel in all phases of the Shuttle program. Total cost of the computer complex was $7 934 876. (JSC Release 76-47)
A U.S.-European Space Shuttle project starting in 1980 would recruit 30 more astronauts—including women and participants from the USSR—for the planned 200 flights in the project, U.S spokesmen said at a Paris news conference held at the end of a 3-day meeting between NASA and European Space Agency officials. John F. Yardley, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told newsmen that NASA was already training more than 30 astronauts for this program. Each flight, carrying 3 U.S. astronauts and up to 4 Europeans on space-science missions lasting between a week and a month, would cost between $18 million and $21 million; European scientists had expressed concern that the flights would cost so much that less money would be left for scientific experiments than they had hoped. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, when asked if the Soviets might be involved in the project, said, “We have made it clear in informal discussions that this would be available to them.” Those using the Shuttle would be expected to foot the bill, officials emphasized. {NYT, 15 May 76, 2; W Post, 15 May 76, A-15; W Star, 16 May 76, A-3)
NASA asked scientists to submit proposals for scientific experiments to be carried on the first Spacelab mission in late 1980, according to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science. Primary objective of Spacelab 1 would be to verify performance of systems and subsystems and to measure the environment surrounding NASA’s Space Shuttle; secondary objectives would be to obtain scientific, applications, and technology data and to demonstrate Spacelab’s abihty to perform space research. The first flight would emphasize stratospheric and upper atmosphere research, but proposals from other scientific disciplines were also solicited. Objectives of the Spacelab 1 mission had been planned jointly by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA); the NASA announcement of opportunity would be sent to U.S. scientists and those in all other nations not members of ESA, and ESA would make a separate solicitation to its 11 member states. Responses would be coordinated between the two agencies. (NASA Release 76-49)
KSC announced award to Norflor Construction Co., Orlando, Fla., of a $284 000 construction contract for an airlock to provide a clean-room environment in the spin-test facility of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, to be used in preparing Delta-launched spacecraft and later for Space Shuttle payload processing. Construction would be completed within 160 days after contractor’s notification to proceed. The airlock installation would include a 5-ton crane, air conditioning, personnel airlock, and lines for electricity, vacuum, compressed air, and gaseous nitrogen. Present clean-room facilities were occupied by elements of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn spacecraft scheduled for launch in Aug. and Sept. 1977. Delta payloads scheduled for launch in the spring and summer of 1977 included Geos (ESA), April; Goes, May; OTS (ESA), June; Japan’s GMS metesat, July; Sirio, an Italian comsat, August; and Meteosat (ESA), Sept. (KSC Release 490-76)
A recently completed manipulator-development facility at Johnson Space Center’s Bldg. 9a laboratory would assist NASA engineers and technicians in studying Shuttle payload deployment and retrieval in space, JSC announced. The manipulating system, with a reach of 15.2 meters, was the largest known remotely controlled manipulator system. Sizes of payloads to be carried in the Space Shuttle would range from very small to a maximum length of 18.2 m and diameter of 4.5 m; objective of the facility would be to improve techniques of moving bulky payloads in and out of the orbiter’s bay in a weightless environment. The manipulator arm would be operated from inside the orbiter cabin by an astronaut using a pair of hand controllers and viewing the process through a window, aided by a closed-circuit TV system. The laboratory building also housed working models of orbiter components including a full-scale forward cabin section with cargo bay, manipulator station, and a large air-bearing table approximately 25 by 30m on which simulated payloads could be steered on a cushion of air by the remote arm. The air-be a ring table would also test the ability of astronauts to move over the smooth interior of the orbiter, using suction-cup shoes instead of cleats locking into grids. An engineer wearing suction-cup shoes and strapped into a cage-like apparatus on the air-bearing table could be familiarized with “walking like a fly” in the day-to-day work environment of the Shuttle. (JSC Release 76-66)
Forecasts of NASA activity in 1977 included plans to launch 19 missions, with a possible four backup spacecraft in case of trouble with current missions. The 19 included eight comsats (NAT0-3B; Palapa-B; OTS, an operational test satellite developed by ESA; Intelsat IVA-C; Sirio, an Italian experimental spacecraft; Intelsat IVA-D; FLTSATCOM, part of a Navy-Air Force operational near-global system for command and control of all DOD forces; and Japan’s CS, a comsat to be placed in synchronous orbit); six scientific satellites (HEAO-A, a high-energy astronomical observatory; CEOS, an ESA mission to study geomagnetic phenomena from synchronous orbit; MJS-A and -B, two Mariner spacecraft scheduled to fly by Jupiter and Saturn,’and possibly Uranus; ISEE, a two-spacecraft international sun-earth explorer mission developed by NASA and ESA; and IUE-A, the international ultraviolet explorer spacecraft also developed jointly by NASA and ESA); three metesats (COES 2, to be launched for NOAA into synchronous orbit; CMS, a Japanese geosynchronous meteorological satellite; and Meteosat, ESA’s synchronous-orbit weather spacecraft, scheduled for 0° longitude); one navigational satellite, the Navy’s Transit 19, with R&D modifications not common to other Transits; and one applications satellite, Landsat-C, third in its series of earth resources technology spacecraft. The backup launches to be scheduled only if replacements were needed were comsats RCA-C and a spare OTS; navsat Transit 20; and metesat ITOS E-2, on standby in case of trouble with Noaa 4 or Noaa 5, already in orbit. Of the 19 scheduled launches, all but two would be from Cape Canaveral, using 12 Delta rockets, 3 Atlas-Centaurs, and 2 Titan III-E-Centaurs. The other two launches, both from Vandenberg AFB, would use one Delta and one Scout rocket. MSFC forecast for 1977 that facilities for assembling and testing the Space Shuttle orbiter would be completed, as well as test firings of the Shuttle’s solid-fuel motors and main engines. (Av Wk, 13 Dec 76, 26; KSC Release 492-76; MSFC Release 76-218)
The U.S. Air Force Systems Command announced that its space and missile systems organization (SAMSO) had completed tests at MSFC to define effects of sound waves and shock waves on the Space Shuttle during launch, using a 6.4% scale model of the launch pad proposed for Vandenberg AFB. The model launch pad, measuring roughly 13m long by 6.5 m wide by 2 m high and weighing more than 27 000 kg, underwent engine-induced overpressure and noise environments simulated by Tomahawk solid-fuel rocket motors and high-pressure gaseous hydrogen-oxygen engines. Shock waves from rocket-engine ignition interacted with exhausts on the launch pad to direct overpressure back to the launch vehicle; the flow rate also created an acoustic field causing turbulence in the surrounding atmosphere. The altered environments were modified during testing by altering the configuration to produce the most acceptable design of launch vehicle and payload. (AFSC Release OIP 170.76)
The European Space Agency announced plans for a NASA presentation on current status of the Space Transportation System to be held in Paris 12 to 14 May, for about 250 representatives of governments, national institutes and agencies, and industry of the ESA member states. Opened by Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, the program would be introduced by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Alfairs. Other NASA speakers would be John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight; Chester M. Lee, director of space transportation system operations; and Harold E. Gartrell, deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration'office. The Space Transportation System would include the U.S. Space Shuttle and the ESA Spacelab, as well as a new upper propulsion stage and a U.S.-developed tracking and data system. ESA representatives scheduled to present the Spacelab portion of the 3-day program would include Bernard Deloffre, director of the Spacelab program for ESA; Heinz Stoewer, Spacelab project manager; Jan J. Burger, Spacelab payload adviser; and Jacques Collet of ESA’s planning directorate. (ESA release 10 May 76)
A $4.5-million structural test data-acquisition system to be used for tests on Space Shuttle components was nearing completion of installation and checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center, MFSC announced. Developed by Avco Electronics, the system included a central facility with a computer system, 6 line printers, 5 graphics display units, a printer-plotter, 2 card readers, and 4 video hard-copy units; 4 data-selector units; and 24 static-input units. The central facility, to be located in MSFC’s Test Laboratory, was designed for a lifespan of 10 yr and would combine extreme accuracy with high reliability and ruggedness. Testing the external tanks, solid-fuel rocket booster, and other parts of the Shuttle for structural integrity would require monitoring up to 6000 channels of data simultaneously, fed into the computers from test hardware elsewhere at the Center. The Avco contract also provided for training MSFC personnel to operate the system when completed late in 1976. (MSFC Release 76-73)
Scientists all over the world had been invited to propose experiments for the second Spacelab mission, NASA announced, asking that they submit by 1 Oct. their letters of intent to propose, with actual proposals due by 3 Dec. Final selection of experiments would be made in Aug. 1977; proposals would be evaluated in the areas of space science (including life sciences), applications, and space technology. Primary intent of the second Spacelab mission would be to evaluate the laboratory’s system and subsystem performance, but space and resources would be available for experiments. Second objective of the The 26-m “Venus disk" at NASA's Goldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calif., in use with rectenna (in. background) for solar-energy conversion experiments. (NASA 76-H-685) mission would be to demonstrate the broad capabilities of Spacelab for scientific research, especially in astrophysics (astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar physics). Proposals should designate a principal investigator as the point of contact with NASA, to manage the efforts of any other persons involved in the experiments. As the second mission payload would not include a pressurized module as the design for Spacelab 1 did, instruments would be mounted on pallets exposed to space with a remote manipulator system available if needed. Experiments would be controlled remotely by persons at the payload-specialist station in the Space Shuttle orbiter’s aft flight deck. Power, data distribution, and thermal control would be available from flight subsystems in a pressurized igloo on the forward pallet. Spacelab, a reusable space laboratory, was under construction in Europe by the European Space Agency for NASA. Marshall Space Flight Center was the lead center for Spacelab development, as well as for the Shuttle main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster. (NASA Release 76-152)
Johnson Space Center announced receipt of delivery on the second of two Space Shuttle training aircraft. The first had been delivered 8 June 1976. The modified Grumman Gulfstream II twin-engine jet, flown to Ellington AFB from the plant in N.Y., would simulate Shuttle Orbiter handling qualities, performance, and flight-control procedures during subsonic flight phase, from 10.6-km altitude to simulated Orbiter touchdown. Crew training for approach and landing tests of the Shuttle Orbiter would begin late in Oct. (JSC Release 76-58)
Aerospace contracts valued at about $1 billion were hanging fire as DOD and NASA struggled over which agency would ask Congress for funds (beyond those already appropriated for development and testing) to pay for 2 additional Space Shuttles, said the New York Times. NASA’s commitment of 1971 was to develop the Shuttle system at a cost of about $6.9 billion, to include 2 Shuttles, the start on a third, and a series of preoperational flights into orbit beginning in 1979. The NASA plan envisioned a total of nearly 600 Shuttle flights in the 12 yr beginning with 1980, with a fleet of 5 Shuttles averaging an annual 60 flights starting in the mid-80s. DOD had earmarked $1.5 billion for Shuttle expenses by 1981, including $700 million for refurbishment of Vandenberg AFB in Calif, for polar-orbit Shuttle launches and $190 million for facilities at Cape Canaveral, Fla., plus $178 million for development of an interim upper stage ( a solid-fuel rocket to be ordered by the Space and Missile Systems Organization of the USAF from Boeing Aerospace, for boosting Shuttle-payload spacecraft into extremely high orbit). DOD had been maintaining for 2 yr that it would not have money for the 2 final Shuttles; Dr. Malcolm Currie, DOD Director of Research and Engineering, told Congress during budget testimony 3 March that paying for the orbiters would exceed what DOD considered “cost effective” amounts for participation in the shuttle program. DOD’s refusal to pay had caused “consternation among planetary scientists,” the NYT said, because NASA might be forced to cut much of its scientific space program in the 1980s to pay for 2 more Shuttles within a fixed budget. However, the matter should be resolved within a few wk, the article added. (NYT, 24 Aug 76, 37)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of 2 contracts totaling $486 388 for fabrication and installation of 2 test towers to be used in structural load tests of the Space Shuttle external tank. One contract, awarded to the Lucey Boiler Co. of Chattanooga for $344 660, was for pickup from MSFC of government-furnished construction materials and fabrication and delivery by July 1976 of all sections and components of the towers. The other contract, awarded to Teledyne Brown Engineering of Huntsville for $141 728, was for installation of the towers by 30 Sept. (MSFC Release 76-69)
MSFC announced launchings of two giant helium-filled polyethylene balloons carrying cosmic-ray detectors, last week’s flight for a French-Danish team investigating isotopic composition of primary cosmic rays, the upcoming flight to evaluate instrumentation for a planned HEAO launch and for other Space Shuttle experiments. The HEAO flight scheduled for 1979 would survey and map gamma-ray and cosmic-ray flux. The balloon launch site near Sioux Falls, S.D., was chosen because earth magnetic-field lines there would deflect fewer cosmic rays, and the low population density and open terrain facilitated payload recovery. The balloons would reach an altitude of about 41 km, above 99.6% of earth’s atmosphere (which fragments cosmic rays), and remain aloft for 40 to 60 hr sending data to the ground. Upon electronic command from the ground, the instrument payloads would separate from the balloons and return to earth by parachute; the balloons would be destroyed by ground command over unpopulated areas. Telemetry tapes and recovered instruments would go to the investigators for analysis. (MSFC Release 76-172)
Astronaut-pilots in training for the Space Shuttle program had used a simulated shuttle—a Grumman Gulfstream 2 twin-engine jet— in approach-and-landing maneuvers over the southern New Mexico desert at White Sands Missile Range, the New York Times reported. Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, JSC director, who recently watched the training at White Sands, said that the latter installation might eventually become a space port for launch and recovery of the shuttle. The pilots were to test an actual space shuttle—the Enterprise, unveiled this fall by Rockwell Inti.—some time next year; the first vertical launch of the shuttle had been scheduled for 1977 from KSC at Cape Canaveral, Fla. (ATT, 19 Dec 76, 41)
The space share of federal R&D funding for FY 1977 would increase only slightly, according to a Natl. Science Foundation report, An Analysis of Federal R&D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969-1977. The 1977 estimate of $2940 million was considerably less than the 1969 level of $3732 million; the space share—13%—was much lower than the 24% for the earlier year. Manned space flight, always the leading subfunction, remained predominant with the Space Shuttle accounting for more than 40% of all space activities. Space science, with 20% of the total, reflected a decline from 1976 and showed effects of lower funding for NASA lunar and planetary exploration as Viking and outer planet missions moved into the launch stages. Space technology and NASA support activities would increase during FY 1977. (NSF, Space Science Resources Studies, 19 Aug 76, 1)
RockwelLIntl. Corp. inspectors testing their inventory of transistors after a government warning to watch for counterfeit semiconductors had found 11 of 11 transistors of one type to be fakes, the New York Times reported. Rockwell had concluded that bogus parts had been “unwittingly built into [NASA’s] major current project, the Space Shuttle, for which Rockwell is the prime contractor.” The NYT said that “a rash of discoveries of bogus devices” had plagued the electronics industry for the last year and a half. The Defense Electronics Supply Center (DESC), a DOD agency that procured almost all electronic devices for defense, found 20 of 60 components taken randomly from stock to be “suspect” and had returned them to the makers for tests to determine authenticity. “Counterfeit” components—devices altered physically to misrepresent their true type or quality, by relabeling, renumbering, or adding false reliability information or dating— would not necessarily be nonfunctional; however, as the purpose of the alteration would be to indicate falsely that a part had passed certain quality tests, and would therefore be much more valuable, the part might fail under strenuous application. Failure of a single component could have consequences far outweighing its 25-cent cost. The transistors tested at Rockwell had been marked to indicate suitability for use in the most rigorous applications; upon disassembly, the parts showed no indication of having undergone any of the extra testing signified by the external markings, which had increased the cost fivefold. Although one trade organization (Electronics Industries Assn.) set up a task group to combat the problem of counterfeiting, “all sectors of the electronics industry are working against . . . major procedures to alleviate counterfeiting,” said the NYT report. At issue was the use of distributors, intermediary between producers and end users, who had a “heavy financial interest in maintaining the current system,” the report said. Most semiconductor producers sold rejects to junk or surplus dealers for their metal content; the items not disfigured were a very inexpensive source for remarking, and could be introduced into the market as high-quality low-cost items. Virtually all counterfeit components could be traced to the big defense contractors, said the NYT. Industry sources contended that 'the DOD had loose procurement practices, with a purchasing-policy rule that component contracts must go to the lowest bidder. As a DESC spokesman pointed out, “We are simply not allowed to pay a premium price on any contract,” even if the low bid is suspiciously below the going rate—“a strong indication that something may be wrong,” the NYT noted. Accepted methods of the industry made it impossible to guarantee the authenticity of any part that did not come directly from the manufacturer, the report added. Although vendors had predicted that a 1974 DESC edict calling for a strict and immediate upgrading of tests on military-grade components would disrupt the supply, few problems had arisen after the regulations had taken effect. (NYT, 24 Oct 76, 3F; Newsweek, 25 Oct 76)
Gene Sivertson of Langley Research Center’s Space Systems Div. had developed a new idea for search and rescue' operations using passive reflectors with imaging or side-looking radar to locate persons in emergency situations. The passive reflectors could be rigid, inflatable, or erectable structures that would show up on a radar system as bright spots easily distinguishable from clutter signals of the terrain. The reflectors could be carried as standard equipment by aircraft, ships and small boats, earth vehicles, and individuals; different packages could be tailored to the user’s needs. The inflatable concept would use a balloon containing a reflector structure of aluminized mylar, with a small helium or hydrogen gas generator in the canister holding the mylar-saran balloon. Deployed in an emergency situation, the reflector would mark a distress site and provide a radar target. The concept had been field-tested in Mich, and Fla. with excellent test films as a result. Sivertson hoped to have the imaging radar on satellites with continuous global monitoring, and to test the system on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. (Langley Researcher, 9 July 76, 3)
The Marshall Space Flight Center announced 3 Sept, the start of hot-firing tests of the steering system for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB). First series of tests, which would continue into Oct., would confirm design of the thrust-vector control steering system developed by MSFC engineers as part of the center’s responsibility for SRB design and development. The system under test would provide power to move the nozzle of the SRB in any direction, steering the Shuttle in the first 120 sec of flight during SRB burn. Data from the first series of tests would be evaluated to refine the system design; after any needed modifications, a second series of tests would certify the system. Thrust-vector control units would be provided in 1978 to Thiokol Corp., MSFC contractor for the SRB solid-fuel rocket motor, for testing under actual firing conditions. (MSFC Release 76-163) —MSFC announced it had delivered the first production case segment for the SRB motor to Thiokol’s Wasatch Div. in Utah on 27 Sept., beating the schedule by 3 days. All case segments for the first motor were to arrive at Thiokol by the end of 1976. The delivered segment, almost 4 m in diameter and 4.2 m long, weighed more than 5990 kg. Eleven segments would be used in each motor; joined, the segments and nozzle would measure more than 38 m long, over three fourths of the total SRB length. (MSFC Release 76-173) —MSFC announced 30 Sept, that personnel of the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti. Corp., had fired a developmental test engine for the Space Shuttle for 650 sec, longest test to date. The same engine had been fired for 300 sec 2 days earlier. The tests, at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Bay St. Louis, Miss., would produce component- and system-operation data from extended-duration firings at increasing power levels. (MSFC Release 76-174)
First mainstage test of the Space Shuttle main engine occurred at the National Space Technology Laboratories in Hancock County, Miss., Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The engine—called the Integrated Subsystem Test Bed—was fired for 3.38 sec, reaching and stabilizing at its minimum power level: 50% of its rated power level of 1 668 075 newtons at sea level, or 2 090 654 newtons at altitude. Tests were conducted by the prime contractor for the engine, Rocketdyne Div. of Rockwell International Corp., under MSFC direction. (MSFC Release 76-29; Rockwell Release RD-2)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, who had retired in 1972 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Long-Range Planning at NASA Hq, said in a Washington Star interview that he had been brought to Washington in 1970. to “lend clout to NASA’s ability to get its appropriations.” His assignment had been to present to Congress the program of a manned expedition to Mars; “so many national problems” had arisen that Congress would not commit itself to another multibillion-dollar space program, and the reusable space shuttle was the only element of the concept that survived. Dr. von Braun recalled that NASA’s resources were cut to about a third during his last 2 yr at NASA, and the new organization with which he was associated—the National Space Institute—was created to “reach large numbers of people” and broaden public support of basic science, “where it is much more difficult to predict the payoff.” “Remember,” he added, “nuclear energy, which ultimately was used in the hydrogen bomb, was discovered because some astrophysicists were interested in what keeps the sun hot.” (W Star, 20 Jan 76, A—1)
First test firing of the second Space Shuttle main engine—Engine 0002, first to have a flight-type engine-mounted controller—achieved the programmed 1.5-sec duration, firing through a diffuser used for altitude simulation when production engines were throttled in testing. Engine 0002, a flight configuration that would not be flown, was a developmental engine instrumented for test purposes. It was fired on the National Space Technology Lab’s Stand A-2, used in Saturn V tests during the 1960s and modified and reactivated for the Space Shuttle program. NASA planned to fire each engine on the A-2 throttling test position before using it on a Shuttle flight. Stand A-l, the sea-level test position, had been used for about a year to test the first SSME, a test version known as the integrated subsystem test bed; A-l was also developed for the Saturn program and modified for Shuttle tests. (MSFC Release 76-57; Rockwell Release RD-7)
Study of earth’s climate to permit predictions of global climatic changes by the end of the century should be the top space priority, said a study group formed by NASA last year to assess U.S. progress in space and where it should go next. The 3-vol report of the study group did not mention manned exploration of Mars, which had been the prime recommendation of a forerunner study 7 yr ago. Citing the dependence of the world’s population on a complex system producing food and fiber where climate is favorable, the report said the entire system was predicated on a constant climate. Understanding of climatic processes would help solve earth’s most pressing problems: food shortages, and worldwide weather changes caused by pollution. The report estimated that a 1-degree cooling of earth’s annual temperature would mean loss of $1 billion in grain production, $2.2 billion in timber and fiber output, and $1.4 billion in fish catches; the drop would also increase the demand for electrical energy by $700 million, with a $2.4 billion rise in health costs other than treating skin cancers caused by alterations in earth’s atmosphere. The group recommended development of 6 satellites to identify and assess worldwide crop conditions; other satellites to study chemical changes in the atmosphere and to watch for solar changes affecting earth’s weather; and a network of 4 to 6 large geostationary satellites to observe ice and ocean conditions and keep tabs on the earth’s radiation balance. Manned flight should develop along the lines of Space Shuttle and space station— to be used partially for climate study—and instrumented craft should be sent to explore every solar-system planet except Pluto, the report said. Cost of the weather-satellite program was set at $1.7 billion, with operating costs over 20 yr estimated at $4.6 billion; the planetary exploration program would cost a total of $5.1 billion to the year 2000. (WPost, 22 Feb 76, A-3)
No immediate serious problem appeared to exist in modification of the stratosphere, according to a report released by an interagency task force on inadvertent modification of the stratosphere (IMOS) prepared by the Interdepartment Committee for Atmospheric Sciences (ICAS). Assessing presently postulated manmade modifiers of the stratosphere other than fluorocarbons, the report considered 6 kinds of possible hazards: nitrogen fertilizers, brominated compounds, other chlorinated compounds, particles, the Space Shuttle, and carbon monoxide. The report concluded that concern over modification of the stratosphere was so far speculative, and that it was based on compounds not yet released to the upper atmosphere in quantities believed sufficient to produce a hazardous effect. Although a large number of substances had been considered, only those appearing most potentially harmful were singled out. Also, cumulative effects from several substances might become significant later, the report said, even if the effect of any single substance were relatively slight. The report urged increased research into stratosphere modifiers and prevention of inadvertent modification now and in the future. (IMOS report, 30 Mar 76)
Fred W. Haise, Jr., astronaut on the Apollo 13 lunar mission of April 1970 that nearly ended in disaster, would command the first free-flight test of the Space Shuttle, Johnson Space Center officials announced. A research pilot for NASA since 1959, Haise worked at Lewis Research Center and the Flight Research Center before his selection as a civilian astronaut in 1966. He was technical assistant to the manager of the Shuttle orbiter project from April 1973 to January 1976. With Haise on the test Shuttle flight would be Air Force Lt. Col. Charles G. Fullerton, appointed astronaut in 1969, who had never flown in space. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly piggyback in 1977 on a modified Boeing 747 jet transport, then in free-flight testing and landing after release at about 8-km altitude. Haise and Col. Fullerton would guide the Shuttle to an unpowered landing at the Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif, to demonstrate handling and reusability. (B Sun, 25 Feb 76, A-7; W Post, 25 Feb 76, B 5; NASA Release 76-35; JSC Release 76-17)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Martin Marietta’s Denver division of a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract for $9 282 667 to deliver parachute decelerator subsystems for recovery of 12 solid-fuel rocket boosters from 6 Space Shuttle flights. The contract, effective through Dec. 1980, covers design, development, manufacture, and refurbishment of the subsystems. Work was authorized to start 6 July at Martin’s plant in Colorado and at Pioneer Parachute Co. of Manchester, Conn., subcontractor. (MSFC Release 76-135)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and the Singer Company’s Simulations Products Division for parallel negotiations, leading to award of a contract to one of the companies for maintenance, modification, and operational support of Johnson Space Center’s simulator complex to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle. The 2-yr contract beginning 1 July would provide for optional additional periods of 24 mo and 6 mo respectively. The training complex, consisting initially of a Shuttle procedures simulator and a crew procedures evaluation simulator, would have added to it an orbiter aeroflight simulator and a Shuttle mission simulator. General Electric and Computer Sciences Corp. also submitted proposals. (NASA Release 76-87; JSC Release 76-30)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced scheduling of further tests in October for prototype cloud-physics experiment hardware to be flown on the Space Shuttle to help researchers understand microphysical processes occurring in the atmosphere. The experiments would develop techniques for accurate prediction and control of weather (increase of snowfall or rain, dissipation of fog, suppression of lightning) to improve man’s environment. The Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) being developed by MSFC would use the low or zero gravity during Shuttle/Spacelab flights to perform experiments without contamination by supporting devices—wires, spider webs, blasts of air or electrical fields—used for test objects in earth laboratories. The prototype equipment was being tested in weightless periods provided by parabolic flights in the Johnson Space Center’s zero-gravity test aircraft. 0. H. Vaughn of the Aerospace Environment Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC, had been monitoring performance of the equipment during flights that began in September. (MSFC Release 76-186)
NASA issued a call for Space Shuttle astronaut candidates— 15 pilots and 15 mission specialists—to be selected by Dec. 1977. Applications would be accepted through June 1977, and candidates would report to Johnson Space Center in July 1978 for 2 yr of training. Appointment as an astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. Minority and women candidates were encouraged to apply. NASA spokesman Bob Gordon said the agency expected no problems if a woman were selected; the Space Shuttle was “designed to accommodate women astronauts... the waste management system is the only problem really and that has been designed for both males and females.” Since the astronaut program began in 1959, 73 pilots and scientists had been selected; 31 persons were available as Space Shuttle crew, 28 astronauts assigned to JSC and 3 holding government positions in Washington, D.C. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would maintain vehicle systems; mission-specialist astronauts would coordinate orbiter operations in flight planning, use of consumables, and management of the payload. (NASA Release 76-122; JSC Release 76-44; DOD Release 310-76; NYT, 8 July 76, 12)
NASA announced plans for rollout of the first Space Shuttle orbiter on 17 Sept, at NASA’s Rockwell Inti. Space Div. at Palmdale, Calif. The ceremony was scheduled for 9:30 am PDT, and media representatives were alerted. (JSC Release 76-51)
MSFC announced that it had modified its Saturn facilities to accommodate Space Shuttle work, having completed remodeling of a giant test stand used in the 1960s for static test firing of the Saturn V first stages. The stand would be used in structural tests of the liquid-hydrogen tank portion of the Shuttle external tank; the hydrogen tank measured 29.3 m long and 8.5 m in diameter. Stand modifications included work platforms, changes in the stand structure including pressurization, and an instrumentation and control system. Holddown arms were removed and a flame deflector that channeled rocket exhaust away from the area was taken from under the stand. Liquid-oxygen storage facilities used for Saturn had been converted for liquid-hydrogen storage needed for Shuttle testing, instead of building new storage. The contract with Algernon Blair of Montgomery, Ala., by the Huntsville Div., Corps of Engineers, was for approximately $4 million. (MSFC Release 76-195)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for a day-long meeting 16 Sept, at MSFC to review the status of the spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) that would deliver spacecraft from the Space Shuttle in low orbit to their operational synchronous orbits. The SSUS, carrying a satellite of the type now being launched by expendable Atlas-Centaur or Thor-Delta vehicles, would be launched from earth in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle. In orbit, the SSUS with its payload would be extended from the cargo bay on a cradle with a spin table that would stabilize the SSUS as it ejected from the cradle, before its own engine ignited to send it and its payload into the proper orbit. After reaching the required altitude, the payload’s propulsion system would position it in the desired orbital attitude. Industry representatives invited to the status review would hear presentations by NASA and Aerospace Corp. on concepts and current mission models for the SSUS. MSFC planned to issue requests for proposals for Phase B (preliminary design definition) about 1 Oct., with contracts being issued in Feb. Plans were to have the SSUS ready for flight in Dec. 1979. (MSFC Release 76-166; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 46)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
Modifications of the test stand to be used at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories for static firing of the combined Space Shuttle propulsion system had been finished 2 wk early, MSFC announced. The stand had been built for tests of the Saturn V first stage and converted for use in the Shuttle program by Industrial Contractors, Inc., of Idaho Falls, Ida. In the tests, scheduled to be conducted late in 1977 by workers in Rockwell Inti. Corp.’s Space Division under MFSC direction, the main engines of the Shuttle would be connected to a structure resembling the orbiter; this simulator, using both flight and nonflight hardware, would be attached to an external tank, the Shuttle element containing liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen for the three main engines. Firing of this combination (known as the Main Propulsion Test Article) would be the first time the three main engines were fired as a system. Engineers would combine acoustic tests with the MPT A firings to obtain data for determining optimum vibration and sound levels; they would also use the data to check tanking procedures. Hardware for the tests would arrive at NSTL next summer. (MSFC Release 76-178)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, pilot of the docking module on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been appointed to a newly created position as Deputy Director of Flight Operations for approach and landing tests of the Space Shuttle at Johnson Space Center, the Spaceport News of KSC reported. Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the shuttle approach and landing test project, under the Director of Flight Operations for the Space Shuttle project. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 5)
MSFC reported its engineers had prepared electronic simulations as dress rehearsals of Shuttle orbital missions set for 1978, with computers in the roles of major hardware. The simulations, carried out at JSC, would check out Shuttle avionics (electrical and electronic systems controlling the Shuttle during flight and sending signals to pilots and ground controllers monitoring the mission). MSFC’s engineers would deliver to JSC in Jan. 1978 the Marshall mated-elements system (MMES) simulating items for which MSFC was responsible: main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank. JSC would provide an orbiter , - simulator and a computer to simulate Shuttle dynamics, a system called SAIL (Shuttle avionics integration laboratory) able to simulate a Shuttle flight beginning 20min before launch under normal or abnormal conditions. The MMES could simulate failure of almost any MSFC element to see how the systems would react with one main engine out or if high temperatures or pressures should occur in vital areas. (MSFC Release 77-208)
Nature magazine reported that the NASA budget had met unexpected opposition in Congress, endangering 2 major scientific missions: the large space telescope, long regarded by space scientists as NASA’s top-priority project, and the Jupiter orbiter probe planned as a twin launch in 1982 of craft to orbit the planet and send probes into its atmosphere. Lobbying by NASA and the scientific community might rescue the projects, but loss of either would be a serious blow to the agency’s program. Nature said this yr’s efforts would be crucial because space science money had been squeezed out of NASA’s budget for 4yr to pay for the Space Shuttle, and further delay would probably kill future chances for approval of these missions. (Nature, May 19/77, 196)
NASA and ESA announced that 6 U.S. and 4 European candidates were finalists in the competition for 2 payload specialist positions, 1 U.S. and 1 European, on the first flight of ESA’s Spacelab scheduled to go on the Space Shuttle in 1980. For the U.S., Byron Lichtenberg of Natick, Mass., Ph.D. candidate at MIT, and MSFC’s Ann Whitaker, M.S. at the Univ. of Ala., were the only non-Calif, finalists. The others were Craig L. Fischer, M.D., of Indian Wells; Michael L. Lampton, Ph.D., of Berkeley; and Robert T. Menzies and Richard J. Terrile, both Ph.D.s from CalTech (Terrile employed there and Menzies at JPL) and both from Pasadena. ESA’s 4 were electronics engineer Franco Malerba of Italy; physicist Ulf Merbold of West Germany; and 2 from the Netherlands, astronomer Claude Nicollier and physicist Wubbo Ockels. (NASA Release 77-255; MSFC Release 77-229; ESA Release Dec 22/77)
MSFC reported successful completion of structural tests on the Space Shuttle external tank’s intertank section, carrying the attach points for the Shuttle’s two solid-fuel rocket boosters and subject to heavy loading both on the launch pad and during flight while the boosters were thrusting. MSFC engineers would now proceed with vibration tests on the forward portion of the external tank, the liquid-oxygen container, attached to the intertank. Structural tests would follow later in 1978. (MSFC Release 77-212) •
JSC announced award of a $5 189 500 supplement to an existing contract with Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division, Downey, Calif., covering 8 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter to accommodate the European-built Spacelab in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. (JSC Release 77-26)
Kennedy Space Center reported it had loaned its hyperbaric chamber to the Univ. of Fla. College of Medicine at Gainesville, for use in research. KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or recompression) chamber in its operations and checkout building to treat astronauts affected by decompression sickness (the “bends”) during manned altitude-chamber tests of the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms, carbon monoxide poisoning, or gas gangrene might require administration of hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber) for periods up to 24hr. The end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975 had ended NASA’s immediate need for the altitude or the hyperbaric chambers, but KSC had kept them for possible use in Space Shuttle training. (KSC Release 101-77)
NASA announced that four customers had signed up for “getaway special” payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle on a space-available basis beginning in 1980. The small self-contained payloads must weigh no more than 90kg (2001b) each, measure no more than 0.15m3 (5ft3), and require no services such as electrical power or deployment into space. Owners of the research and development packages were R. Gilbert Moore of Utah, a private citizen who offered half his payload to Utah State Univ., which in turn would make the space available to high school students who submitted proposals to fly their own experiments; Dr. L.R. Megill, chairman of the space science experiment committee at Utah State, who funded a payload as a follow-on to Moore and also planned to invite student proposals; and Reiner Klett, representing independent West German researchers, who signed for two payloads, one biological and one for space processing. (NASA Release 77-4)
Project Halo (high-altitude large optics), a space-based system proposed by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency to detect and track foreign missiles and aircraft, would require 6 Space Shuttle payloads to orbit its structures and equipment, AvWk reported. ARPA’s Halo research had focused on systems analysis, infrared focal planes, optics, cryogenic cooling, power sources, data utilization, and phenomenology. CAvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division and Autonetics group had won an Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) design competition for a Teal Ruby sensor to detect and track aircraft targets from space, AvWk reported. The DOD sensor, using up to a quarter million mosaic infrared detectors with charge-coupled processors, would fly on the Space Shuttle in 1980. A Lockheed-Grumman team had also competed. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 13)
Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR, late in Dec. to begin training for flight positions on Soyuz/Salyut missions. Flight candidates from Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania were to arrive for training at the center during 1977. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9) February I: NASA announced it had received 1147 applications for its Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least 15 pilot and 15 mission specialist candidates. Deadline for applications would be June 30, 1977. Those selected would report July 1, 1978, to Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; appointment as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of the course. NASA had mailed 11 822 applications to persons outside the agency, and another 350 to employees at NASA centers. All the applications received so far had been from civilians; the astronaut selection board would receive applications from members of the military services just before the deadline. Most of the applications were for the mission specialist category: 922 for that group, 225 for pilot, and 118 for both. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would be responsible for vehicle systems. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in areas of consumables usage, experiment operations, and crew activities. Crews would number up to seven: commander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists (who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors of the payload being flown). Payload specialists would operate specific payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to recruit qualified minorities and women as Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 77-18)
MSFC announced that a special hammer developed in the 1960s for Saturn fabrication had solved a major problem of manufacturing external tanks for the Space Shuttle. Martin Marietta Aerospace, prime contractor for the tanks, in welding four large sections of a liquid-oxygen container at the Michoud assembly facility, had found that peaking of the weld joints left some areas as much as 5° out of tolerance. The special tool MSFC had created for removing distortions in component welds would not impact a surface in the usual sense but, when in contact with the metal, would send a hydrodynamic force uniformly into the thickness of the metal when an electrical charge dumped into the hammer’s coil created an expanding magnetic field. The field would exert an evenly distributed three-dimensional force that would remove the distortions without leaving hammer marks on the target. After Robert M. Avery of MSFC’s Materials and Processes Laboratory showed how to use the tool at the Michoud facility, the contractor was able to remove most of the distortions during the week of demonstration. Two working hammers would remain at the plant for future use. (MSFC Release 77-21)
NASA announced award of what Aviation Week called “the largest NASA contract ever issued for an unmanned space program” to Western Union Space Communications Co., TRW Systems, and Harris Electronics Systems Div. for development of the tracking and data-relay satellite system (TDRSS) aimed at replacing present ground stations by offering orbital-communications coverage for 85 to 100% of spacecraft orbit, compared to 15% coverage now available from ground-based facilities. The system would consist of two specialized relay spacecraft in synchronous earth orbit plus a ground terminal at White Sands, N.M., supporting 20 or more satellites orbiting at up to 5000km altitude. The lOyr contract at $79.6 million per yr would include work on spacecraft and ground stations, as well as all operating costs. TRW would be prime manufacturer under subcontract with WU to build six spacecraft plus components for a seventh, using technology developed for the FltSatCom spacecraft and hardware used in WU’s Westar domestic comsats; Harris Electronics would build the White Sands station and provide antenna components. Missions using the TDRSS would include scientific, applications, and manned satellites such as Space Shuttle, Spacelab, and Shuttle-launched spacecraft scheduled for the 1980s. (A v Wk, Jan 3/77, 14; NASA Release 76-213)
NASA announced it had established a fare structure for Space Shuttle payloads on flights scheduled to begin in 1980. Depending on the weight and volume of cargo, the price would run from less them $10 000 to more than $21 million. Other factors would be the optional services desired and whether the payload would go on a reserved basis or as a standby. Costing $10 000 or less would be the “getaway special” (GAS), a small research package weighing less than 2001b, self-contained, with a volume of less than 5ft3, flying on a space-available basis. The $21-million fare would be for a payload using the full capacity of the Shuttle on a reservation basis by non-U.S. government customers. Lesser charges would apply to customers sharing flights with other customers; those willing to fly on a standby basis; and those having made a substantial investment in Space Transportation System development (e.g., The European Space Agency, its member nations, and Canada). Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA had set the prices to encourage Shuttle use by making costs attractive but still recovering operating expenses. Commercial and foreign users would pay fees covering depreciation of facilities and equipment, and amortization of or-biters. The pricing plan would undergo review in 3yr to make any necessary adjustments, Lee said; it contained provisions for cost increases due to inflation. NASA prices would include space in the Shuttle, with standard services such as design review, safety review, flight plans, transmission of payload data, and services of a 3-man crew. Optional services, costing more, would include special training, upper stages and services, special mission kits, revisit or retrieval of satellites, or any special equipment. (NASA Release 77-173)
NASA announced it had identified about 40 payloads to be carried on 11	Space Shuttle flights in its first yr of operation, beginning in 1980. Three civilian firms had deposited “earnest money” with NASA for payloads on 8 flights; NASA had plans for 5 payloads, and DOD had plans for one. Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA also had forecast 12	non-NASA civilian payloads, 10 NASA payloads, and 4 DOD payloads for launch during 1980 and 1981. Allocating the payloads to specific flights would not be firm until about a yr before launch, he noted. A working model for Shuttle traffic in the first 12yr, totaling 560 Shuttle flights, would show NASA flying about half the missions on its own; 20% would be DOD missions; 6%, other U.S. government agencies; 12%, commercial firms; and 12%, foreign customers. (NASA Release 77-175)
KSC announced it had awarded to Planning Research Corporation, McLean, Va., a $25 720 364 contract extension for engineering support services to the Space Shuttle program and other activities where the design-engineering directorate at KSC had design responsibilities. The 12mo cost-plus-award-fee extension through May 1978 had brought the value of the contract originally awarded in May 1974 to $72 616 061. The company employed more than 1100 workers at KSC and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Fla., and at DFRC and KSC’s Western Launch Operations Division in Calif. (KSC Release 111-77)
MSFC reported that NASA had issued a request for proposals to integrate mission payloads, in preparation for the first three Spacelab missions and the sixth Space Shuttle orbiter flight test. Integration would include combining a number of experiments into a compatible payload; controlling the configuration during instrument development, testing, and flight operations; and disassembly of the payload after the mission. Proposals, due Aug. 15, would be reviewed by a source evaluation board. (MSFC Release 77-131)
MSFC reported on the first meeting of a science working group for a proposed earth-orbiting system called Advanced X-Ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), to study stellar structure and evolution, large-scale galactic phenomena, active galaxies and galactic clusters, and cosmology. Chaired by Prof. R. Giacconi of Harvard Univ. and representing universities and government laboratories working on x-ray astronomy in the U.S. and Europe, the group would define the scientific requirements. The 12.8m (42ft) craft weighing about 9000kg (20 0001b) would be designed for Space Shuttle launch and repair or retrieval in orbit. (MSFC Release 77-227)
JSC announced award of a $2 752 000 contract to Hamilton Standard Division of United Technologies Corp., Windsor Locks, Conn., for development and production of a Space Shuttle portable oxygen system for use independently or connected to the orbiter’s oxygen system. Consisting of a face mask, rebreather loop, heat exchanger, oxygen bottle, and recharge kit, the system would operate during emergencies and for prebreathing before spacewalks to denitrogenize the crew’s circulatory systems. (JSC Release 77-18)
NASA reported KSC was preparing its facilities for next yr’s Space Shuttle arrival and prelaunch work, more than 3yr after it last launched a Saturn rocket from Complex 39. In Oct. 1978, Shuttle orbiter 102 would fly in from Calif, on its Boeing 747 carrier, with the main engines, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters due in Nov. and Dec. for assembly and test before launch March 1979. KSC’s orbiter landing strip had been completed in Aug.; support facilities to be completed by April 1978 would include a device to unload the orbiter, plus a microwave landing system to guide it to an automatic landing. An orbiter-processing facility to store fuels and handle payloads was the only new construction except the landing strip, the rest being modifications of Apollo facilities. (NASA Release 77-253)
JPL announced that NASA had followed its recommendation and selected a 12-bladed spinning solar sail spacecraft as a candidate for the automated interplanetary shuttle to be used within earth’s solar system in the 1980s and beyond. Also known as a heliogyro, the set of extremely long blades or sails made of reflective aluminized plastic would be deployed in two tiers of six each by centrifugal force after its spacecraft had been launched from the Space Shuttle late in 1981. The spacecraft and its scientific payload, mounted at the center of the heliogyro, would be propelled by photon radiation from the sun to rotate once every 3min. The spinning-sail concept had been chosen by program engineers and designers for development as being more feasible than a square-sail concept that would have used an 850sq.m (half-mile square) sail configuration. NASA would choose in mid-Aug. between the heliogyro and a proposed ion-drive (solar-electric propulsion) spacecraft for a Halley’s Comet mission in 1986. JPL had been working with other NASA centers and a dozen industrial and research groups on parallel efforts to develop low-thrust long-life spacecraft for the 1980s. (JPL Release 826)
JSC announced it had signed a $40 million letter contract with Rockwell Inti. Corp. Space Division for modifications to the first Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise and for starting design of a third orbiter. Funded in part by the Economic Stimulus Bill, the contract had been directed at generating more employment opportunities. (JSC Release 77-37)
MSFC announced a $1 046 100 amendment of a contract with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Inti. Corp., Canoga Park, Calif., contractors for the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME). The amended contract, totaling more than $66 million, would include equipment to build SSME. (MSFC Release 77-37)
MSFC reported it had fired for 2min the largest solid-fuel rocket motor ever developed, at Thiokol Corp.’s installation 24mi from Brigham City, Utah, and 2mi from the nearest occupied building. The Thiokol motor, the propulsive part of the Space Shuttle booster, contained 302 454kg (more than 1.1 million lb) of propellant, half again as much as the next largest motor ever fired at the site. A composite fuel, mixed and poured into the 4 segments of the SRM, had been cured for 4 days before the segments were joined horizontally at the test site by special handling devices. The segments would go by rail to KSC for vertical assembly. Each Shuttle launch would use two of the boosters, designed for reuse up to 20 times. (MSFC Releases 77-125, 77-133; NASA Release 77-142)
MSFC reported NASA’s Michoud assembly facility had shipped the first of four major pieces of test hardware for the Space Shuttle external tank, an intertank structural-test article scheduled to arrive by barge at MSFC about Mar. 5. It would go from New Orleans to Huntsville by way of Mississippi, Ohio, and Tennessee Rivers, the route NASA had used to ship Saturn stages for testing during the Apollo program. The other test articles (liquid-hydrogen tank, liquid-oxygen tank, and another intertank) would arrive later in 1977. The external tank, one to be used for each Shuttle mission, would hold containers for liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen, connected by the intertank; the combined assembly would measure about 47m long. Test data would serve to verify the intertank’s structural integrity before static test firing of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories later in 1977. The test firings would use a full-size external tank, three Shuttle engines, and an Orbiter aft-structure simulator, attached to the test stand through the intertank. (MSFC Release 77-30)
The Washington Post said NASA was looking for “someplace else to land the space shuttle.” Its second free flight had been postponed when Hurricane Doreen turned the planned landing strip (a dry lakebed at Edwards AFB) into a “mud puddle.” A NASA source said officials had investigated other sites for the flight, tentatively rescheduled to Sept. l.(W Post, Sept 1/77, A-27)
DFRC announced that a malfunction during a June 2 test of the Space Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power system would delay the orbiter’s first manned captive flight from June 9 for 1 or 2 weeks, depending on successful completion of ground tests. (DFRC Release 22-77)
KSC announced award of a $95 025 000 contract to the Space Division, Rockwell Inti. Corp., Downey, Calif., for activation of the Space Shuttle facilities and systems, and for Orbiter support during checkout, launch, and postflight operations, in the first six Space Shuttle missions. Rockwell would also support postflight operations at the DFRC landing site for the first four missions. (KSC Release 92-77)
NASA announced it had issued proposals to buy 6 spinning solid fuel upper stages (SSUS) for boosting spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle into higher orbits. The decision was the first step following agreement earlier this yr with McDonnell Douglas and Boeing Aerospace, allowing them to design, build, and test the devices and market them independently of NASA. The agency as part of a procurement agreement would normally bear cost of development and production; the current bidding would be limited to the 2 companies that had agreed to develop the stages with private funds. The purchase would include hardware, analyses, logistics, and services needed to put a spacecraft into higher orbit after launch and orientation by the Space Shuttle. The contractor would build the vehicle, provide services, and operate the systems. First delivery in Dec. 1979 would be a flight demonstrator; 3 others would launch advanced Intelsat V comsats; the other 2 would serve for other missions. (NASA Release 77-101; MSFC Release 77-90)
MSFC announced award of a $110 096 contract to General Dynamics Convair Div., San Diego, Calif., to study and define ideas for an automatic structural-beam fabrication machine for use in the Space Shuttle [see Mar. 1]. The beams, made of a composite material, would support large scale space structures and act as electrical and thermal insulators. (MSFC Release 77-72)
NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERNO of Bremen, W. Germany, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload). Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif. Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)
MSFC reported plans to request another $18 610 000 in NASA’s FY 1978 budget for construction or modification of facilities to be used in building the Space Shuttle external fuel tank (ET) at the Michoud assembly facility (MAF) near New Orleans. With addition of a chemical waste-treatment plant and alterations of the manufacturing, vertical-assembly, final-assembly, and checkout buildings, MAF could produce 28 ETs each yr. (MSFC Release 77-35)
MSFC announced it had selected General Electric Co. of Valley Forge, Pa., to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for a prototype Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) to be flown on a number of Spacelab missions carried by the Space Shuttle [see June 22]. The prototype with software and spares was due for delivery to MSFC by Oct. 1, 1979, and to KSC for Shuttle launch by Jan. 1, 1980. (MSFC Release 77-124)
MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon was on its way to Seal Beach, Calif., to pick up a Space Shuttle orbiter simulator and deliver it to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Mo., to stand in for the orbiter during firings next year of the main propulsion test article, consisting of the simulator with an external tank and thrust structure covering 3 main engines. MSFC had used the Poseidon in the 1960s to move stages of Saturn rockets. (MSFC Release 77-84)
MSFC announced plans for a teleoperator retrieval system (a retrievable reusable low-thrust stage for maneuvering payloads in low earth orbit) to fly on the Space Shuttle in the early 1980s, its first use probably a Skylab-orbit adjustment to permit revisiting or control its reentry over an open ocean area. Riding into orbit on the Shuttle, the TRS would be deployed and remotely operated by an astronaut aided by a television image from a camera mounted on the TRS. It could also maneuver to higher orbit and return, using its own guidance and computer systems, to be remotely controlled again for retrieval into the Shuttle when it came within range of the TV signal. MSFC would manage development of the TRS, and Martin Marietta would be responsible for vehicle integration. (MSFC Release 77-201)
MSFC announced award of a 15-mo contract worth $99 663 to Desert Research Institute — part of the Univ. of Nevada system—for development and fabrication of a prototype particle generator for possible use in the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL), a payload scheduled for an early Shuttle or Spacelab flight. The generator would form nuclei with diameters of a hundredth to a thousandth of a micron (one thousandth of a mm) upon which water would condense to form clouds. Researchers would use the zero-gravity environment on Shuttle flights to perform cloud-physics experiments leading to an understanding of microphysical processes in the atmosphere, and to eventual prediction, alteration, and control of weather. (MSFC Release 77-19)
DFRC announced that the first manned test flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter, previously scheduled for May 26, had been postponed to a date no earlier than June 9, depending on successful completion of orbiter ground tests. The manned test would begin the second phase of Shuttle approach and landing trials to verify aerodynamic and flight-control characteristics of the orbiter. Cause of the postponement was delay in orbiter systems checkout and verification testing after completion in March of the first flights of the orbiter linked to its 747 carrier. (DFRC Release 18-77)
NASA announced it had scheduled the second free flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about Sept. 13 at DFRC with astronauts Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. The free-flight test series called for 3 more flights before the orbiter would go to MSFC for vibration tests early in 1978. (NASA Release 77-186)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $918 523 contract to T.H. Taylor Construction Co., Montgomery, Ala., for construction of permanent and semipermanent steel working platforms on the modified dynamic test stand. The stand would hold an entire Space Shuttle assembly during mated vertical ground-vibration tests scheduled for 1978. (MSFC Release 77-54)
JSC announced that NASA and the Soviet Academy of Science would send representatives to a meeting Nov. 14-17 in Moscow to discuss a joint program for the 1980s using the flexible delivery and large capacity of the Space Shuttle and the Salyut’s longer stay time in orbit. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, would head the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Boris Petrov, chairman of the academy’s Intercosmos council, would head the Soviet delegation. (JSC Release 77-78; NASA Release 77-234; FBIS, Moscow Dom Sv in Rusn, Nov 18/77)
Kennedy Space Center reported that NASA had awarded the Univ. of Ariz. a $50K contract extension to continue studying thunderstorm electrical fields and other phenomena in the Spaceport area. Total value of the contract, awarded in April 1974 and now extended to Jan. 15, 1978, would be $116 000. Under the direction of Dr. Phillip Krider of UA’s Inst, of Atmospheric Physics, scientists working with UA graduate and undergraduate students would use KSC’s sophisticated instrumentation during summer thunderstorms to study electrical-field changes and recovery curves created by lightning under varied conditions, and would create computer programs to determine and display the location of lightning discharges and thunderstorm characteristics. Techniques resulting from the study would help make Space Shuttle vehicle-processing, launch, and landing at KSC safe and efficient even in marginal weather. The U.S. studies would supplement a program known as TRIP (thunderstorm research international program), cosponsored by the Am. Geophysical Union and the Am. Meteorological Society, under which teams of atmospheric scientists would conduct research at KSC between 1976 and 1978. (KSC Release 33-77)
MSFC announced it had issued requests for proposals to build a tethered satellite system for launch on an orbiting Space Shuttle. The idea had been to provide long-duration measurement, observation, or performance time in earth’s atmosphere between 80 and 120km altitude, where density would be insufficient to support the flight of aircraft or balloons, but too thick for free-flying satellites. Exploration here had been limited to short-term flight of sounding rockets or low-level satellites. One concept had been to use a 100km cable to “troll” a tethered satellite from an orbiting Shuttle; the pull of gravity, with constant tension on the cable, would keep the captive craft at the end of its string, oriented toward earth. Typical missions for a tethered satellite would be global mapping of earth’s magnetic or gravity fields; cargo transfer between space vehicles; retrieval of satellites or space debris without Shuttle maneuvering; transfer of large amounts of energy to a remote experiment, or from a remote (possibly hazardous) power source to a space station. MSFC would manage tethered satellite activity for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-82)
U.S. aviation experts had changed their minds about the USSR’s MiG-25 “Foxbat” interceptor plane and now considered it superior to western planes of its type, the Chicago Tribune reported. New Scientist magazine had quoted aviation experts who had examined the Foxbat flown to Japan last Sept, by defecting pilot Viktor Belenko; their conclusions were completely opposed to earlier assessments that described the Foxbat as crude and outdated. Shortly after its landing in northern Japan, the Foxbat had been described as a “manned rocket” less advanced than previously thought. The magazine said that U.S. officials now considered it unsurpassed in ease of cockpit maintenance and a masterpiece of standardization unmatched in the U.S. The experts said they were impressed not only with the speed and rate of climb, but also with the electronics on the Foxbat, now believed to have the most powerful airborne fire-control radar in the world as well as a highly sophisticated computerized flight-communications system that could perform most of the missions without the pilot [see Jan. 26]. U.S. and Japanese experts had examined the Foxbat for 2mo before returning it to the USSR; Belenko, now in the U.S., was still being debriefed. (C Trib, Feb 7/77, 1-2) Orbit parameters reported Feb. 8 were: 281km apogee, 218km perigee, 89.2-min period, 51.6° inclination. This first manned launch of the year was part of a USSR program of earth-orbital research using the Soyuz capsules on a one-mission basis, according to NY Times reporter Christopher S. Wren, who noted that the USSR had continued manned flights while the U.S. was waiting until the Space Shuttle became available in 1979 or 1980. Thomas O’Toole reported in the W Post that the cosmonauts might stay in orbit as long as 2mo; both pilots had been trained for space walks, and the choice of an all-Air Force crew indicated that Soyuz 24 might be a military mission. Tass reported successful docking and occupation of the Salyut 5; it later described housekeeping and biological experiments, plus communications with ocean-going vessels, studies of crystal growth and surface tension, and use of an infrared radiometer for long-distance nighttime observation of earth’s surface and temperatures. The cosmonauts continued exercising with special equipment to measure body functions. On Feb. 21, they tried a new system for recharging the space station atmosphere: Tass said the air was satisfactory, but the test would verify the system for future prolonged flights. A multifunctional system would supply compressed air to control stabilization or to compensate for leaks in the compartments. Tass announced Feb. 23 that the crew had begun preparations for leaving the station. (The unexpectedly early termination of the Soyuz 24 mission recalled reports that the Soyuz 21 mission ended ahead of time because the Salyut 5 environmental-control system had produced an “acrid odor” that “became unbearable” [A&A 76, Oct 18].) A commentary recorded by Gen. Shatalov for broadcast Feb. 24 on the Moscow Domestic Service noted “a whole series of cyclones and strong winds with snow” over the landing site in Kazakhstan. However, the cosmonauts landed safely at dusk Feb. 25 on a farm near Arkalyk on the Kustanay steppe, and were brought to the local airport by helicopter and flown from there to Baykonur. They held a press conference at Baykonur Feb. 24, in which Glazkov called the Salyut 5 spacecraft “a fine old work horse” that had brought them home safely. (NYT, Feb 9/77, 11, B6; WPost, Feb 8/77, A16; Feb 9/77, A12; C Trib, Feb 9/77, 1:12; FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7-26/77; Moscow Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 10-25/77; Moscow Inti Svc Rusn, Feb 9-25/77; W Star, Feb 25/77, A4)
NASA announced it had awarded RCA Astro-Electronics Division of Princeton, N.J., a $10.5 million fixed-price contract for a closed-circuit television system to support the Space Shuttle program. The contract, running from Jan. 1978 through June 1982, would cover design, development, production, qualification, and delivery of CCTV systems for training, certification, and flight. It would include hardware for the first orbital test vehicle design, with options for TV equipment on additional orbiters and for Canada-built remote manipulator systems. Cameras and monitors would fly in the crew compartment and the payload bay, and on the arm of the remote manipulator. JSC would provide technical direction. (NASA Release 77-259)
MSFC announced award of a $279 714 contract to Sperry Support Services, a division of Sperry Rand Corp., Huntsville, Ala., for design, construction, and delivery of equipment for the mated vertical ground-vibration test (MVGVT) of the Space Shuttle, scheduled for 1978. The test would confirm the theoretical model used in dynamic analyses of the Space Shuttle, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters. (MSFC Release 77-39)
A cryogenically cooled infrared telescope carried aboard the Space Shuttle would become the major infrared research instrument in space, AvWk reported. NASA studies had indicated such a telescope could gather spectroscopic data on objects 1000 times fainter than now visible. (AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)
MSFC announced that United Space Boosters, Inc., the firm that would assemble and check out the solid-fuel rocket for the Space Shuttle, had begun a manpower buildup that would eventually include about 150 employees. The present contractor work force of about 60 had been housed in Bldg. 4666 at the center. The firm, a subsidiary of United Technologies Corp. of Sunnyvale, Calif., had received in Dec. 1976 a contract for work at both MSFC and KSC to include stacking, launch operations, and refurbishing the reusable rockets. Responsibilities would include designing tools for applying thermal-protection materials to the boosters, electrical and instrument-verification testing, and installing instrumentation on the booster structure and on the booster aft skirt for tests scheduled at MSFC and at the Thiokol plant in Utah. Employees of USB doing MSFC work at KSC later in 1977 would number from 150 to 200, but the contractor would keep a cadre of about 80 at MSFC through the Shuttle test period. (MSFC Release 77-26)
MSFC announced it had awarded to Contractors Cargo Co., South Gate, Calif., a $227 120 fixed-price contract for moving the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise eight separate times during its testing at MSFC in 1978. Now in the midst of approach and landing tests (ALT) at DFRC, Enterprise would fly on its Boeing 747 carrier to MSFC on March 17, 1978, to be mated with an external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters and erected on a dynamic test stand for vertical ground-vibration testing. The contract called for design, testing, and delivery to MSFC of an orbiter ground-transporter to travel about 6 km between the airfield and the pretest-preparation building, a trip to be completed within 2hr on March 18, 1978. The “prime mover,” a 480-hp tractor with 10 wheels, would be attached to 2 rear dollies each having 32 wheels and a forward dolly with 16 wheels. The segments would be joined by a “strongback” construction, and the entire rig would weigh about 24 000kg (52 9001b). Length of the transporter would be nearly 50m (about 160ft), the width of about 24m would accommodate the orbiter’s wingspan, and the height from ground to top of a vertical stabilizer would be about 16m (about 54ft). For an operating demonstration before the arrival of the orbiter at MSFC, the transporter would carry a weightload of nearly 100 000kg (220 0001b), half again the weight of the orbiter. Contractors Cargo was the same firm that had moved Enterprise from the Rockwell plant at Palmdale, Calif., to DFRC in Jan. 1977. (MSFC Release 77-106)
The USAF announced it had issued contracts to Martin Marietta Aerospace at Denver and General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Divison at San Diego for design of a large space structure to be carried into orbit on the Space Shuttle and erected and deployed in space. The contracts, each for $750,000, called for conceptual design of a flight-demonstration model of an antenna-like structure to be assembled and deployed in a form exceeding the size of the orbiter cargo bay (60ft long by 15ft in diameter). Plans called for automated assembly in space with manned supervision. The flight article would also serve to verify the Shuttle’s ability to deploy other DOD craft that might require assembly in orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 77, 4)
ARC announced that 7 U.S. biological experiments launched Aug. 3 on the USSR’s Cosmos 936 had landed by parachute in Siberia Aug. 22. The Soviet satellite also carried experiments from France, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and East Germany. Five of the U.S. experiments had followed up those on the first cooperative U.S.-USSR biological satellite Cosmos 782 launched in Nov. 1975; 4 of them had Soviet coinvestigators, and all of them used some Soviet scientific or technical assistance. The last U.S. biosat was Biosatellite 3, launched in 1969; without the Soviet flight opportunity, the U.S. biology experiments would have to wait for Shuttle flights in the 1980s. (ARC Release 77-37; NASA Release 77-169)
Spacelab, ESA’s manned reusable space laboratory scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments in life, physical, and materials science, Nature reported. Although Spacelab’s multinational management and unique financing scheme (ESA members would pay for the laboratory on a voluntary basis) could limit its scientific potential, participants would receive a proportionate share of construction contracts and experiment facilities. Management problems included the question of apportioning payment of NASA’s $10 million launch fee. (Nature, April 7/77, 491)
NASA announced that MSFC had issued requests for proposals from industry to make studies of, and supply data for NASA to use in developing techniques for packaging, transporting, fabricating, erecting, and operating large structures in space, in preparation for a major demonstration in space in 1983 or 1984. An early Shuttle flight would carry an automated beam-fabrication module to make aluminum structural members; later flights would demonstrate use of both aluminum and composite materials. After a few beams were manufactured on early flights, later missions would perform limited assembly, culminating in fabrication and erection of a large structure for continuing use, such as a lOOkw solar-power facility to supplement onboard Shuttle power for various experiments. The capacity demonstrated in these missions would aid in creating a more complex assembly as part of a space-construction base in 1985 or thereafter. The proposal called for completion in 9mo and another 2mo to prepare a report. MSFC would receive proposals until Mar. 18, 1977, and would manage the study project for the Office of Space Flight. (NASA Release 77-35)
MSFC reported that the number of visitors to the center in 1976 had increased 11 °7o over the previous yr to a total of 95 529, representing each of the 50 United States and several foreign countries. The guided bus tours of the center, cosponsored by MSFC and the Alabama Space and Rocket Center, last year added new items and increased activities at some of the former Saturn test sites. The tour stop presenting the story of the Space Shuttle and its payload had added a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle main engine. Tourists could also enter a full-scale mockup of Skylab to see how the astronauts lived in orbit; and the east and west test areas being converted for Shuttle testing were now available for viewing. The Redstone test stand already on the tour route had been refurbished and was added to the Natl. Register of Historic Places. (MSFC Release 77-3)
President Carter’s first budget proposal contained additional funds for NASA, Nature magazine noted. The new administration had recommended $13 million for studies of potential missions to Mars after Viking; the previous administration had requested $5 million. Planetary scientists, pleased with the increased budget request as well as with Carter’s recent remarks on the Space Shuttle, viewed these actions as presidential support of the space program. (Nature, Mar 3/77, 5; Spaceflight, Mar 77, 8)
The Washington Star reported that the first Space Shuttle fuel tank emerged from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans on its way to tests at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Miss. NASA contractor Martin Marietta had built the 520 OOOgal tank, half as long as a football field, at a cost of about $2.5 million. If successful, as many as 500 similar tanks would be built during the next 15 to 20yr. The 153ft-long tank, almost 30ft in diameter, was built of aluminum alloy and was disposable, designed to fall away and disintegrate in the atmosphere just before the Shuttle reached orbit. Shuttle flights would cost about $10 million each, as compared to $150 million each for earlier launches. (W Star, Sept 10/77, A-3)
NASA announced it had selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., and Perkin-Elmer Corp., Danbury, Conn., to negotiate contracts totaling more than $131 million for two major elements of the Space Telescope. Lockheed would design, fabricate, and integrate the telescope support-systems module, provide systems engineering and analysis, and support NASA in ground and flight operations. Perkin-Elmer would design, manufacture, and deliver the optical assembly and equipment, including systems engineering, support of the launch, verification of the orbit, and plans for mission operations. The 8ft-diameter telescope, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 1983, would offer an astronomical capability beyond anything possible from the earth’s surface or any telescopes launched so far because of its improvements in resolution, power, light sensitivity, and wavelength coverage. It would be refurbished periodically in orbit or could be returned to earth on the Shuttle for repair or upgrading. The support module would provide electric power, communications, data processing and storage, attitude sensing and control, and environmental control to the telescope assembly and up to 5 additional scientific instruments accommodated by the telescope. MSFC, which had overall project management responsibility, would manage the contracts for the support module and the optical assembly; GSFC would manage scientific instrument development. (NASA Release 77-153)
MSFC announced it had awarded a $276 597 contract to Bryson Construction Co., Decatur, Ala., for modification of the Redstone Arsenal airfield to accept the Space Shuttle and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft. The contractor would install a concrete pad 75m long and 55m wide for a derrick to unload the orbiter from the 747. (MSFC Release 77-56)
NASA reported that MSFC had received 119 proposals for experiments in materials processing to be performed on Space Shuttle and Spacelab flights. As lead center for the Spacelab program, a cooperative venture of NASA and ESA, MSFC had been given project management responsibility for the first three Spacelab payloads. An MSFC team had evaluated the proposals, and the center would announce selection of between 10 and 20 experiments by the end of July. (NASA Release 77-103; MSFC Release 77-91)
The $500-million Space Shuttle with no crewmembers aboard took its first ride over the Calif, desert, carried piggyback on its converted Boeing 747 for a 2hr test at nearly 5km altitude. Operating the 747 were veteran NASA test pilot Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr.; copilot Thomas C. McMurtry; and flight engineers Victor W. Horton and Lewis E. Guidry, Jr. The Enterprise, prototype of the reusable craft designed to carry cargo and scientists into space in the 1980s, was secured to the 747 by mounts at its nose and tail; the combination craft stood almost 20m from the ground to the top of the orbiter’s tail. The explosive bolts provided to separate the two craft in free flight were armed during this first test, in case of emergency. NASA officials said the weight of the Enterprise (about 65 000kg) did not strain the capacity of the 747, which weighed nearly 200 000kg empty and had carried much greater loads in cargo and passengers. “Most of the time we couldn’t even tell the Shuttle was here,” Fulton said after the flight, which reached speeds of about 450kph as the crew turned and banked the combined ships, shut down some of the 747 engines, and performed other maneuvers to check stability. The Enterprise would be unmanned during the next 5 combined test flights; in May, a 2-man crew would conduct 6 more tests of the 747/orbiter combination, and in July the orbiter would be released from its carrier for a series of unpowered flights. (W Post, Feb 19/77, A3; W Star, Feb 19/77, A-8)
MSFC announced it had completed modifications of the Saturn test stand used in the 1960s for static-test firings of the first stages of the Saturn 1 and IB and scheduled for structural tests of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster. The tests would use a short-stack SRB (lacking two center segments, measuring 18.3cm less than the actual boosters) to simulate prelaunch, flight, and recovery reactions. Each Shuttle launch would need two SRBs each simultaneously generating 11.79-million newtons (2.65 million lb) of thrust at liftoff; separating at burnout from the external tank, the casings would parachute into the ocean for recovery and reuse in as many as 20 flights. (MSFC Release 77-95)
A 25-article series in Science News by Jonathan Eberhart on the Viking mission won the 1976 AAAS-Westinghouse science writing award Feb. 22, Science reported. Henry S.F. Cooper’s New Yorker article on the Space Shuttle received honorable mention. (Science, Mar 4/77, 864)
NASA announced it had selected 5 materials-processing experiments to be flown on an early orbital-test flight of the Space Shuttle beginning in 1979. The Materials Experiment Assembly (MEA) would offer scientists an interim opportunity to conduct studies before Spacelab missions began; it would be automated and unattended, containing its own power source and a minicomputer to collect data. Principal investigators and their experiments were Dr. J. Bruce Wagner, Jr., Ariz. State Univ.—solid electrolytes containing dispersed particles; Ralph A. Happe, Rockwell Inti.—containerless preparation of advanced optical glass; Dr. Herbert Wiedemeier, Rensselaer Polytechnic Inst.—vapor growth of alloy-type semiconductor crystals; Dr. John W. Vanderhoff, Sinclair Laboratories, Lehigh Univ.—large-particle-size monodisperse latexes; Dr. S.H. Gelles, Gelles Associates, Columbus, O.—liquid miscibility gap materials. (NASA Release 77-222)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that, as part of the Solar Sail Development Project, it had awarded 6 contracts to build a spaceship powered by solar wind. The craft, using large extremely thin ORiGiftAL RASE- 53 OF POOR QUALITY Artist’s concept of solar sail making rendezvous in 1982 with Hatley’s comet. Launched from an orbiting Space Shuttle, an SOOm-sq structure could carry an 800 to 900kg spacecraft on such a mission. (NASA 77-H-128) metallic sails to capture the energy of solar photons, would tack like a sailboat into the “wind” to head toward the sun or would use photon energy to head for the outer planets. Speed of the ship would vary with distance from the sun, following the inverse-square law that solar intensity would decrease as the reciprocal of the distance from the sun, squared. Cost of the contracts for fabricating sail material and designing sails, booms, and navigation systems would total $800 000. (NASA Release 77-39)
The NY Times reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, testifying at the Senate hearing on confirmation of his nomination as NASA administrator, had told the committee that no U.S. manned landing on Mars could occur before 1990. If NASA had an operating Space Shuttle by 1980 that could be used to assemble a vehicle in space and to store the fuel needed for a trip to Mars, work on a manned Mars ship could begin in 1984 or 1985 at the earliest, Frosch said, with completion a year or two later. (NYT, June 7/77, 13)
NASA announced that the largest Space Shuttle component—its external propellant tank—would roll off the assembly line in New Orleans Sept. 9. The huge tank would then go by barge to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories in Miss, for the first static firing of the Shuttle main engines. The external tank consisted of 2 propellant tanks and an intertank structural connector; the forward tank would contain liquid oxygen, the larger aft tank liquid hydrogen. It would be the main structural member carrying the orbiter and the two solid-fuel rocket boosters. At launch, the tank would feed cryogenic propellants to the three main engines on the orbiter; the solid-fuel rocket boosters on each side of the external tank would use their own fuel and would separate about 2min into flight for later recovery. The mated orbiter and external tank would thrust for another 6min, separating just before the Shuttle reached orbital velocity. The complete external tank was 47m (154ft) long; the Shuttle orbiter it would carry was 37.2m (122)ft long. (NASA Release 77-179)
DOD would request $2.77 billion for space-related activities in FY 1978, $478.5 million more than its FY 1977 appropriation, Defense Daily reported. The increase, resulting from procurement of the Navstar global positioning satellite system and increased DOD activity on the Space Shuttle, would include costs of ground security at JSC and KSC for defense-related Shuttle payloads. DOD had planned to use the Shuttle for critical manned military observations, and had agreed on a formula to reimburse NASA for launching military payloads. (DD, Mar 15/77, 57)
Two giant crawler-transporters that had ferried Saturn V rockets to the launch pad at KSC and were scheduled for similar work in the Space Shuttle program had been designated National Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks, Today newspaper reported. At ceremonies held Feb. 3 beneath one of the vehicles, more than 100 persons watched the unveiling of a plaque noting the creation of the 18th national landmark identified since the Am. Society of Mechanical Engineers began singling them out in 1973. Present at the ceremony were KSC employees who had helped build the pair of 2.7-million-kg platforms; ASME officials and members from across the U.S. on their way to a national meeting in southern Fla.; and former astronaut Donn F. Eisele, who had been command-module pilot on the 1968 Apollo 7 flight that resumed moonshots more than a yr after the fatal fire in an Apollo training exercise. Eisele had since become a manager for Marion Power Shovel Co., the Ohio firm that built the transporters at a cost of $14 million. Ray Clark, KSC director of design engineering, accepted the plaque from Dr. Stothe P. Kezios, presidentelect of ASME, with the comment that the transporters were “barely broken in” with mileage on each at just over 800km; they might accumulate 10 times that amount carrying Shuttle equipment during their second yr of operation, he added. (Today, Feb 4/77, 10A)
NASA belt-tightening measures that might cut pay for about 60 high-ranking JSC employees might have the same effect at KSC, Today newspaper reported. The Houston Post reported earlier that the JSC employees had heard their Civil Service job grades would be reduced, with possible loss of $5000 to $10 000 in annual pay to follow 2yr later. A JSC spokesman said the grade reductions had resulted from a slowdown in space programs requiring reorganization of the center. Similar grade reductions were a possibility for KSC, which had been told by NASA Hq to cut its operating budget from $119 million to $109 million. KSC Director Lee Scherer had ordered a freeze on new hiring to allow a complete review of operations and consideration of measures to save money. KSC’s director of public affairs, Charles Hollinshead, said activities subject to possible funding cuts after Oct. 1 would be “things we can cut that don’t impact the launch schedule [for expendable rockets] or Space Shuttle preparations.” (Today, June 3/77, 16A)
MSFC announced that on Jan. 28 NASA had invited industry to submit proposals for supplying design, development, and manufacture of Space Telescope support systems module and optical telescope assembly. The telescope should permit observation of about 350 times the volume of space now acessible to ground-based telescopes. MSFC said it expected award of contracts by Oct. or Nov. 1977 if Congress authorized the mission and appropriated the necessary funds. The 2.4m telescope, included in NASA’s FY 1978 budget recently submitted to Congress, would weigh about 10 tons. The Space Shuttle would carry it as a payload in 1983, launching it to orbit at about 500km altitude at an inclination of 28.8° to the equator. Once there, it could serve for a decade as an in-space observatory operated remotely from the ground, but would be designed for maintenance and servicing by a space-suited astronaut or for retrieval and return by Shuttle for overhaul and subsequent relaunch. NASA would announce to the scientific community in Feb. an opportunity to submit proposals for scientific instruments to be carried on the Space Telescope for its initial launch. (MSFC Release 77-16; NASA Release 77-19)
Central Florida officials who had counted on Space Shuttle employment to stimulate the local economy hoped it would differ from the boom-and-bust cycle of the Apollo program, the NY Times reported. The Apollo program had brought about 26 000 employees to KSC, but the economy declined with layoffs when the missions ended. NASA had estimated an 11 000-employee strength at KSC for the first Shuttle mission; the Shuttle program should continue for at least 5yr, agency officials said. (NYTApr 26/77, 13) April27: A series of Stanford Univ. experiments had apparently verified the existence of quarks, hypothetical fundamental pieces of matter possessing fractional electric charges, the NY Times reported. Dr. William Fairbank, professor of physics at Stanford, described the findings—first evidence of quarks since their theoretical exposition in 1964—at the Am. Physical Society annual meeting in Washington, D.C. If matter consisted of protons, electrons, and neutrons (carrying charges of +1, -1, and 0, respectively), quarks—the building blocks of these particles—would have fractional charges of +1/3, -1/3, +2/3, and -2/3. Fairbank emphasized that the results were not final, and that the university had scheduled follow-up tests. (NYT, Apr 27/77, A18)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Corp. allowing the company as a commercial venture to design, manufacture, and test an upper-stage system, including integration services, for Space Shuttle missions having payloads weighing up to 2000kg. Carried into low earth orbit on the Shuttle, the upper stage called SSUS-A (for spinning solid upper stage, Atlas Centaur class) would take payloads into transfer orbit where a kick motor would put it into a circular geosynchronous orbit 35 900km above earth. A similar agreement last yr with McDonnell Douglas was for an upper stage called SSUS-D (for Delta class) suitable for use with payloads weighing up to 1100kg, like those being orbited on Delta vehicles. NASA had planned to procure SSUS-A systems only from firms with which it had such an agreement; under the agreements, firms would be free to sell stages either to NASA or directly to customers. The agreements would specify performance requirements, define a delivery schedule to meet NASA’s Shuttle schedule, and establish unit ceiling prices and a ceiling profit. (NASA Release 77-29)
MSFC officials had said the Space Shuttle main engine might cost nearly twice the original estimate, Today reported. In 1972 when Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Division got the contract to build the engine and deliver 24 units, the estimated cost was $500 million; latest estimate was $450 million more. Project director James R. Thompson and his deputy John Harlow said the increases had resulted not only from design problems and inflation but also from delays and changes ordered by NASA and Congress. {Today, June 25/77, 6A)
MSFC announced it had requested price quotations on designing a space spider (a device capable of building large-scale structures). The spider, containing prefabricated materials, would attach itself to the core of a planned structure and spin a larger structure, of any diameter, around the core. MSFC engineers had sought estimates of costs and data on the best size of spider to fit inside the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 77-62)
The NY Times reported that the General Accounting Office, Congress’s investigative arm, had told the lawmakers to consider delaying completion of the Space Shuttle fleet, originally planned to include five ships. Two had been built so far. GAO said Congress should go ahead will building a third Shuttle but should put off construction of the other two until “there is sufficient confidence in the shuttle development program and more information is available on the space transportation system operations cost and plans for future space activity.” Today noted that this report was “the most sweepingly and harshly critical” of a number of negative assessments of the Shuttle issued by GAO. Among its charges were that the Shuttle would cause sonic booms over Calif, and Fla. upon landing; that its tires would blow out and cause a crash when it tried to land; that it could make too few orbits; that there was no proof it would reduce the costs of carrying cargoes into space; and that hardly anyone would want to use its services except DOD and NASA itself. GAO pointed out that other nations, led by Japan, had been developing their own launch vehicles and were likely to use them instead of paying to use the Shuttle; it also said NASA had erred in setting its fees low to encourage users to change over from expendable launchers. NASA’s plan to recover expenses later, when costs had fallen with increased use, might never be possible, the GAO said. Former NASA administrator James C. Fletcher said he disagreed with most of GAO’s comments: NASA would solve the technical problems as it had solved others, he said, and delaying acquisition of the fourth and fifth Shuttles would be wasteful. “If they are procured while tooling and assembly lines are in place, they unquestionably can be procured at far less cost than would be incurred by delay.” A 3-yr delay would run up the program cost by from $3 billion to $4.5 billion, he said. (NYT, June 5/77, 43; Today, June 4/77, 8A)
NASA announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for the 30 to 40 openings as Space Shuttle astronauts after a yr-long recruiting effort. Candidates selected would report in 1978 for a 2yr training period at Johnson Space Center. Of the 8037 applicants, 6735 were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot; 1142 of the applicants were women. NASA would announce selections in Dec. 1977. (NASA Release 77-145; JSC Release 77-39)
MSFC reported that its homemade Shuttle orbiter [see Nov. 23] had made its practice run through the center and had played stand-in during practice hoists into the 430ft (131m) test stand where the Enterprise would be mated to the other Shuttle components for the first time. Werner H. Rubel, supervisor in MSFC’s product planning branch, said the idea and design for the stand-in orbiter had originated in his group, where Jerry B. Bennich and John L. Ransburgh had done the engineering work; the mockup and prototype assembly branch had performed final assembly. (MSFC Release 77-232) MSFC announced successful completion of the first loading test of the Space Shuttle external tank to ensure that tne test article, test facility, and hardware could handle the super cooled propellants (liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen) to be used by the Shuttle main engine. (MSFC Release 77-234)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded to the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti., a contract modification for additional work and services to the Space Shuttle main engine program, covering long leadtime hardware and material procurement to provide follow-on engines. Each engine, designed for use up to 50 times before overhaul, would be capable of 1 668 075 newtons (375K lb) of thrust at sea level and 2 090 654 newtons (470K lb) at altitude. (MSFC Release 77-78)
JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement with Rockwell Inti. Corp. for engineering-change orders on the Space Shuttle orbiter. The supplement, valued at about $226 million, would bring the value of the Rockwell contract to about $3.2 billion. The supplement would cover changes such as addition of lightning protection, payload and systems integration, avionics changes, provision of spares, and support of the carrier aircraft during ALT. (JSC Release 77-76) JSC announced it had signed a contract modification with Ford Aerospace covering hardware and software systems engineering, plus maintenance and operation of JSC’s mission control center and other ground-based data systems. The modification, valued at more than $1.4 million, would bring the value of the Ford contract to about $51.3 billion. (JSC Release 77-77)
MSFC announced arrival June 24 at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories of a huge steel structure to simulate the Space Shuttle or-biter in main propulsion-test article firings later in 1977. The article would include the simulator with an aft fuselage, an external tank, and three Shuttle main engines; first test would take place in Dec. The simulator, about 29m (95ft) long and weighing about 110 000kg (243 0001b), had moved from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans to NSTL in Miss, on the barge Pearl River, having traveled from Calif, to Michoud via the Panama Canal on the NASA barge Poseidon [see May 10]. (MSFC Release 77-118; NASA Release 77-132)
The Washington Star reported that U.S. and European scientists were planning a two-spacecraft mission to an unexplored area of space to get a first look at the sun and its solar system from a new perspective. No spacecraft had as yet ventured off the so-called plane of the ecliptic (the solar equatorial plane) by more than 15° latitude relative to the sun. Using two spacecraft, one below the plane of the ecliptic and the other in the usual latitude relative to the sun, scientists could learn more about solar physics and conditions responsible for variations in earth’s climate. The mission would use two unmanned spacecraft weighing 6S0 to 8001b each, launched by a Space Shuttle. The report said NASA would request funds for the “solar polar” (or out-of-ecliptic, OOE) project in its next budget, giving engineers time to meet a favorable 10-day launch period in Feb. 1983. ESA, whose members included most western European nations, was said to be ready to share in the mission; it would build one of the vehicles, the U.S. the other. JPL would manage NASA’s part of the mission, estimated to cost about $141 million. (WStar; Oct 31/77, A-6) During October: The USAF reported that the first two-seater F-16 airplane, a fighter-trainer version known as F-16B, had made a successful first flight at General Dynamics Corp.’s Ft. Worth, Tex. facility. The test flights were to evaluate the handling of this version, weighing 6001b less than the standard single-seat F-16 when fueled, and to use rear-cockpit controls to put it through takeoff and landing, formation flying, and roll and pitch. The one- and two-seat versions of the F-16 were almost identical in size and appearance, each 48ft long with a 300ft2 wing area, but the F-16B had a larger canopy to cover the second pilot and would carry 1100 fewer gallons of fuel. Development of the new plane, first fighter designed to withstand forces up to 9g, was managed by the Aeronautical Systems Division at Wright Patterson Air Force Base. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 77, 1) •
The Apollo program was a tough act to follow, Space Shuttle pilot Lt. Col. Charles Fullerton said in a Today wire service report. Acknowledging the declining public interest in space, Fullerton noted that, after Apollo, “Everything else has to be anticlimactic.” {Today, Apr 4/77,1A)
A Space Shuttle orbital-maneuvering system engine had completed acoustic environment testing at JSC, and a second engine had fired 1000 times in life-cycle testing at the White Sands, N.M., test facility, Aviation Week reported. The latter achievement demonstrated the engine’s ability to perform 100 missions, a project requirement. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 13)
Fifteen yr almost to the day after the U.S. placed its first man in earth orbit, NASA would begin flight tests of the Enterprise-first Space Shuttle orbiter off the assembly line—to be carried piggyback on a Boeing 747 on Feb. 11, 1977, for its first trip through earth’s atmosphere. The flight of Marine Lt. Col. John H. Glenn on Feb. 20,1962, lasted less than 5hr; since that flight, the U.S. had accumulated 22 504 man-hours in space by using 43 astronauts on 31 separate manned missions that included 9 trips around the moon, 6 moon landings, and 3mo earth-orbital missions on Skylab. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft Friendship 7 weighed only 1315kg, with barely enough room for the pilot and a few instruments, and had parachuted into the Atlantic after its one-time use. The orbiter would weigh 67 500kg empty, could carry up to 7 crew members, and was designed to land on a runway and be prepared for another flight within weeks. In contrast to Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, Spacelab missions carried by the Shuttle might last from 7 to 30 days. First of 6 orbital tests of the Shuttle was set for 1979, and operational flight for 1980. (NASA Release 77-21; NASA pre-ALT rept Feb 11/77)
Two main items in NASA’s $4 billion budget request for FY 1978 — the Jupiter-orbiter mission and the Space Telescope—had met with strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported in the NY Times. The items were two of three major new starts sought by the agency; the third, a new earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C), had not been opposed, nor had additional funding for Space Shuttle development. NASA officials had not expected opposition to the Jupiter project, which had the endorsement of numerous scientists and the White House and had been authorized for eventual development by both houses of Congress. However, Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) had persuaded the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which he chaired, to block funds for the Jupiter project in view of charges by many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of its funds on planetary science rather than on deep-space astronomy, which would be the aim of the Space Telescope. The House Appropriations Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote accordingly. NASA had concentrated its Jupiter appeal on the Senate appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime critic of NASA spending, who had nevertheless been impressed by JPL officials who argued that the Jupiter project should receive immediate funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982 when Jupiter would be relatively close to earth, which would not occur again until 1987. Without the new start, JPL would have to lay off 300 to 400 scientists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch of two Voyagers this summer. If the Senate should approve the Jupiter project and reject the telescope, a conference committee would have to settle the matter; NASA might have to choose between the two projects, or to start both with greatly reduced first-year funding, Wilford noted. (NYT, June 10/77, A-17; Nature, June 23/77, 659)
NASA announced a yr-long schedule of test runs and captive-flight tests on the first-built Space Shuttle orbiter, Enterprise, that would take place at the Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Called approach and landing tests (ALT), the series of flights with a modified Boeing 747 serving as a ferry aircraft and airborne launch platform would begin with several taxiing tests with the orbiter atop the carrier; following would be six inert-captive flights in which the jumbo jet would carry the unmanned orbiter to a 7620m (25 000ft) altitude. Unmanned flights would verify performance of the two vehicles in mated flight. Then would come a series of captive-active flights with the orbiter’s systems powered up and the Enterprise manned by 2 astronauts. The first orbiter off the assembly line arrived at DFRC Jan. 31 from Rockwell Intl.’s Palmdale plant; upon completion of ALT, the carrier would take the prototype to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground-vibration tests. After these tests, NASA said, the Enterprise would return to Palmdale to be prepared for orbital flight in the early 1980s. The orbiter now under construction (OV-102) would be the first used in actual orbital-flight tests, now scheduled to begin in mid-1979; six test flights would demonstrate the orbiter’s capabilities in earth orbit before the start of operational flights, scheduled to begin in 1980. (NASA Release 77-16)
NASA announced it had awarded a cost-plus-fee contract worth about $43.5 million to McDonnell Douglas Technical Services, Inc., Spacelab Integration Division, Huntsville, Ala., for Spacelab integration. The contract, lasting from March 1977 through Dec. 1983, would include design, development, manufacturing, and operational testing of NASA’s Spacelab components. NASA planned to provide all operational services including flight operations, crew training, and maintenance, after the European Space Agency delivered the lab. Spacelab would remain in the Space Shuttle cargo bay to perform earth observations and experiments in materials science, physics, life science, communications, navigation, and space systems. (NASA Release 77-47)
NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise successfully went through its fourth free flight with its streamlined 57001b tailcone off, increasing drag and reducing the altitude achievable by its 747 carrier (to about 18 000ft) as well as the distance it could glide after separation. Three previous free flights, tailcone on, had lasted about 5.5min each; this time the Enterprise, fitted with 16 0001b of dummy engines with nozzles 8ft in diameter, wide enough for a man to stand upright in, would have a glide time of only about 3 min. Pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly, alternating at the controls of the orbiter, brought it to a stop on a runway at Edwards AFB after recording a touchdown speed of 212mph and 5000ft of landing roll. NASA’s goal had been no more than 9000ft of landing roll, showing that the orbiter could land at any major airport in the world. Fitzhugh L. Fulton, pilot of the 747 carrier plane, said the aerodynamic resistance created by the dummy engines had caused “heavy shaking” on both the orbiter and the 747 during the hr-long ascent to launch altitude. Tom McMurtry, copilot of the 747, said the turbulence resembled “what you might get in a commercial airliner . . . only we couldn’t change altitudes to get away from it as an airline pilot does.” NASA officials said the last free flight, scheduled for Oct. 26, would end with the microwave landing system controlling the touchdown. (DFRC Release 31-77; postflt rept, free fit 4, SpSh orbiter ALT; NYT, Oct 13/77, A18; WPost, Oct 13/77, C-ll; LA Times, Oct 13/77,1; JSC Roundup, Oct 14/77, 1; W Star, Oct 13/77, A-10; C Trib, Oct 13/77, 1-13)
NASA announced a successful 60-sec firing of the Space Shuttle main engine on Mar. 12 at rated thrust conditions of 2 082 560 newtons. Employees of the Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell Inti. Corp., contractor for the SSME, conducted the test at NASA’s Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA Release 77-54)
NASA announced it had awarded Computer Sciences Corp. a $41 million contract for support services to communications and instrumentation at KSC, the major site for Space Shuttle launches beginning in 1979. Services would be in 2 categories: the first, covering 3yr, would include modification, installation, operation, and maintenance of an operational intercommunications system, operational TV system, and checkout-control-monitor subsystem. The second category, lyr with 2yr option to renew, would cover KSC work on communications, measurements, telemetries, computer services, data storage and retrieved, program planning, and reliability and quality assurance. (NASA Release 77-104; KSC Release 104-77)
NASA officials, assuming a constant purchasing power for the agency over the next 10 to 15yr, had made plans for some 560 Shuttle flights between 1980 and 1991, averaging 60 flights per yr between 1985 and 1991, Nature reported. Assuming a maximum payload of about 29 500kg, Shuttle users (including NASA, DOD, other government agencies, private industry, and foreign organizations) would pay fees from $3000 for a simple automatic payload to $20 million for the entire cargo bay. NASA had claimed a 40% savings in launch costs for the Shuttle compared to expendable rockets; a higher discount for U.S. users would increase its cost-effectiveness. Nature said early Shuttle critics, like space scientists who viewed it as a competitor for limited NASA resources, were now supporting the Shuttle as a research tool. (Nature, Apr 7/77, 489)
MSFC announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Aerospace’s Denver division a $928 217 contract for construction work on a test stand for the Space Shuttle program. Modification of the giant hydrodynamic support system last used for Saturn V dynamic tests in the 1960s would allow mating all elements of the Shuttle for vertical ground tests scheduled to begin in 1978. The complete vehicle (orbiter, external tank, and two solid fuel rocket boosters) would occupy the stand together for the first time. (MSFC Release 77-79)
The Washington Post reported that NASA had asked Congress to let it use $100 million of Space Shuttle production funds to pay for higher costs and delays in developing the first two Shuttles. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA Administrator, told the appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that $65 million would bring production up to schedule and the other $35 million would go into contingency reserves that had run between $100 and $150 million; they were “down near zero right now,” Frosch said. Associate Administrator John ip. Yardley said the rocket to put the Shuttle into orbit was 5mo behind schedule; also running behind were computer controls and fuselage parts. Asked why NASA requested a fund shift that might cause problems in the future, instead of a supplemental appropriation, Frosch noted that twice when NASA had asked Congress for supplemental budget increases, it had had to wait until the next fiscal year for approval. (W Post, Dec 2/77, A-2) •
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert A. Frosch, and Hans Matthoefer, minister for research and technology for the Federal Republic of Germany, had signed a memorandum of understanding for participation in a Jupiter orbiter/probe mission to be launched by the Space Shuttle in 1982. The mission would send an orbiter and a probe on the most detailed investigation to date of the environment and moons of Jupiter, the first opportunity for 114 investigators to measure Jupiter directly as well as remotely from various orbital positions over a long period of time. The orbiter, carrying 10 instruments, would circle Jupiter for at least 20mo; the probe, carrying 6, would plunge into the atmosphere. West Germany would provide a retropropulsion module to inject the orbiter into its path around Jupiter, as well as the scientific instruments and the services of 14 German investigators in preparing the two spacecraft and analyzing their data. JPL would manage the U.S. project, ARC the probe, JSC the Space Shuttle. An office in West Germany would manage FRG’s share. (NASA Release 77-211)
NASA announced it would conduct the third “manned inert” flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about July 26 at Dry den Flight Research Center. At the controls of the orbiter atop its Boeing 747 carrier would be astronauts Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton, making their second piggyback run in this test series. They had made the first captive flight June 18; the second, on June 28, had Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. In the first flight, lasting 56min, Haise and Fullerton had checked out the orbiter flight controls at low altitude and low speed. For the third test, the 747 would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7895 meters (25 905ft) where it would “push over” in a practice separation; the orbiter and 747 crews would go through all the motions except actual separation. The flight would be a dress rehearsal for the first free flight of the orbiter, scheduled on or about Aug. 12. (NASA Release 77-146; JSC Release 77-41)
JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement with Rockwell Inti. Corp. Space Division deleting two items from the Space Shuttle orbiter contract: a neutral-buoyance trainer, and vibroacoustic tests on the aft fuselage of the orbiter. This work had been scheduled for Rockwell’s plant in Downey, Calif., with support from JSC and KSC field offices. The decrease of $25 334 750 had lowered the value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract with Rockwell to $3 013 971 603. (JSC Release 77-38)
NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA Release 77-44)
ARC announced selection of 10 women volunteers aged 35 to 45 with nontechnical backgrounds as test subjects in an experiment to help set medical standards for future Space Shuttle passengers. The experiment, ope of a series using varying ages and sexes, would require 9 days of total bedrest to simulate weightlessness, and occasional spins in a centrifuge to simulate Shuttle reentry. Results would show whether or not age and gender affected the ability to cope with spaceflight. (ARC Release 77-15; NASA Release 77-61)
KSC announced it had awarded a $39 812 contract to Ky. State Univ. for continuing research on effects of prolonged exposure of experimental animals to variations in the atmospheric level of oxygen. Previous studies in the field had been on short-term exposure to 100% oxygen, but little was known about prolonged exposure to oxygen at low to moderate concentrations. Ky. State’s first grant for this work in March 1974 had exposed vinegar flies to higher levels of oxygen than normal and drastically shortened the life span, whereas exposure to lower than normal levels had greatly reduced reproductive capacity. This work had also suggested that certain individuals might prove better adapted genetically for survival in abnormal oxygen environments. The findings would be useful in planning atmospheres for long-term manned space missions aboard the Space Shuttle or on space colonies. (KSC Release 91-77)
The Washington Post reported that NASA would try to save the Skylab space station “which is moving closer to earth and may fall in bits and pieces over the next few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch a “remote-controlled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new orbit, where it would be available for future astronaut visits. The 118ft Skylab launched in 1973 had been circling the globe every 1,5hr at a 200mi altitude. It had been home for three 3-man crews for as long as 12wk at a time; its last 84-day manned mission in 1974 was still the world’s endurance record for time in space. (W Post, Oct 30/77, A-10)
Marshall Space Flight Center director William R. Lucas announced that the teleoperator retrieval system project assigned by NASA to the center would be headed by John H. Harlow, who had been deputy manager of the Space Shuttle main engine project since 1976 and served previously as assistant manager in the Shuttle Projects Office. (MSFC Release 77-206)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its first free flight at Edwards Air Force Base in Calif, with a “flawless landing” on a runway in the Mojave desert 53min 51sec after taking off at 8am local time (11am EDT) and 5min 22sec after release from its 747 carrier. Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Charles Gordon Fullerton were the Enterprise pilots; veteran test pilots Thomas C. McMurtry and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew the Boeing 747. Spectators, estimated to number about 70 000, had begun arriving the previous night (Thursday, Aug. 11) to cheer the landing just after 9am local time with the desert temperature nearing 100°F. The orbiter had separated from its carrier 3min late because the heat of the air had slowed the climb. The 747 had “strained its engines” to carry the 73ton Shuttle as high as possible; it had climbed to 27 000ft (8100m) before it started downward, in order to gain speed. The 122ft-long orbiter, released at 22 100ft (6738m) altitude, had soared one way, the 747 another, to ensure separation. Pilots of the T-38 chase planes following the flight had assured the crews of the 747 and the orbiter that they were clear of each other. “Thanks for the lift,” Haise told the 747 crew as the craft separated. Haise had rehearsed the free flight the previous day in a small twin-engine jet modified to behave like the Shuttle. Actual separation, which could not be rehearsed in advance, was the only way to prove that the Shuttle would lift cleanly over the tall vertical tail fin of the 747. Separation had occurred without difficulty, however, and both pilots reported themselves delighted with the orbiter, which had handled in unORIGINAL PAGE- 53 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 QF POOR QUALITY Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise separates from its Boeing 747 carrier in first free flight, August 12, 1977. (NASA 77-H-552) powered flight as easily as design engineers had predicted. It was “a lot like flying a Concorde,” according to Haise, and Fullerton described it as a "very crisp, very stable airplane.” On the orbiter’s way down, Haise had pulled up in three inflight “flare” maneuvers to test its landing characteristics. One of the identical redundant computers on the orbiter had failed at separation, cutting off flight-control accelerometers, without affecting the flight. The Enterprise landed like a glider, without engines, relying on its battery of computers and “the most advanced control system ever installed in a spacecraft.” It had approached the ground at an 11° angle, more than 3 times as steep as a commercial jetliner’s approach, and at a speed of 338kph (210mph) compared to a typical 747 landing speed of 170mph. The orbiter had touched down a mile in front of the aiming point, because Haise underestimated its glide capability; it had rolled another 2mi before stoppping. For this first free flight, the orbiter wore a tail cone over its three aft rockets; on the fourth flight, scheduled for Oct., NASA would remove the cone, causing the orbiter to land more steeply (as it would upon returning from space). In regular use, the Shuttle as a weight-saving measure would have no power after firing its rockets to deorbit, no airbreathing engines for maneuvering in the atmosphere; it would be slowed by air friction only and would glide down at 200mph or more to a landing. For the actual spaceflight early in 1979, the Shuttle would ride into orbit pushed by solid-fuel rocket motors on a giant external tank and by the liquid-fuel rockets on its tail. Purpose of the free flight exercises was to verify the orbiter’s subsonic airworthiness, the operation of the integrated system, and the pilot-guided vs. automatic approach and landing capabilities. The ability to land at an airport instead of parachuting into the ocean gave the Shuttle the “versatility and economy required to make space operations routine in the next decade,” according to the W. Star. (NASA Release 77-160; NASA Actv., Aug/77, 2; NYT, Aug 13/77, 1; WPost, Aug 13/77, Al; WStar, Aug 13/77, A-3; B Sun, Aug 12/77, 7; C Trib, Aug 13/77, 1-1; Time, Aug 22/77, 64)
JSC announced that three life sciences specialists would begin a 7-day simulation of a typical Spacelab mission planned for the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Living aboard a high-fidelity mockup of the Spacelab and Shuttle-orbiter crew deck would be physician Dr. William E. Thornton, mission specialist, and Dr. Carter Alexander, payload specialist, both of JSC, plus payload specialist Dr. Bill A. Williams of ARC. Dr. Thornton would perform medical monitoring and health services for the simulation crew. ARC had shipped a rack of 20 life sciences experiments to JSC for the simulation, and JSC had provided 6 other experiments. Life sciences payloads like the simulation experiments would be flown on the Spacelab missions to show the effects of space on living organisms, improve health care for the crews of actual missions, and help in designing life-support systems for space and earthbound clinical research and health care. (JSC Release 77-32) May IS: NASA announced the expected arrival of a USSR research ship off the Virginia coast near Wallops Flight Center about June 1 to participate in a series of rocket launches to investigate ionization sources in earth’s upper atmosphere. The research ship Professor Vize would operate offshore as the Soviet launch platform. The joint American-Soviet particle intercalibration (JASPIC) project would compare techniques used by both nations to measure the intensity of electrons and protons entering the lower ionosphere, and to define the role of these particles in nighttime ionization of the lower ionosphere in the midlatitudes, thought to cause high-latitude auroras. The researchers would base comparisons on results of 4 sounding-rocket launches from Wallops and 5 Soviet MF-12 rocket launches from the ship. One of the NASA rockets would release a chemical cloud that might be visible over the east coast. A similar joint activity in Aug. 1976 had launched 22 pairs of rockets over a 2wk period. U.S. and Sov et scientists had decided in 1975 that discrepancies shown by the scientific literature in measurements of ionosphere energetic particles might arise from instrumentation differences, and had agreed to joint measurements and subsequent comparisons at the same time and place. (NASA Release 78-71)
During confirmation hearings, Dr. Frank Press, President Carter’s nominee as director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, had stated that NASA should broaden the scope of its technology-transfer efforts and its planned use of the Space Shuttle, AvWk reported. The administration should continue funding planetary exploration and space science (areas adaptable to the Shuttle’s unique capabilities), but should also make NASA’s technological knowledge available to industry. Press, former chairman of MIT’s Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, had specialized in earthquake research and detection of underground nuclear tests. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 21)
The possibility of teleportation-transfer of objects from one place to another by radio waves came closer with the announcement of a new way to create identical copies of a three-dimensional object by using a sculpture-photography system based on the same principles of chemistry and electronics now used in making printing plates. As reported in the Chicago Tribune, Wyn Kelly Swainson, a young man with a degree in English literature and some training in science, had obtained his first patent on a device being developed with the help of the Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio. Swainson began with the idea of reproducing great works of sculpture without painstaking handwork: a plastic material hardened by light rays would be targeted by intersecting laser beams, controlled by a computer programmed with the image of the object to be copied. Swainson said IBM had already produced an instrument to record computerized shapes, convert the electronic data into light rays, and feed them through the lasers scanning a container of plastic. Where the beams intersected, they would cause a chemical reaction hardening the plastic; washing off the unhardened material would leave an exact copy of the object previously computerized. In theory, a three-dimensional hologram of an object even of complex metals could be analyzed for its precise composition, converted to electronic data, transmitted, and reproduced as often as desired. (C Trib, Jan 30/77, 1-5) Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, with tailcone covering engine-nozzle location, moves on a 90-wheel rig January 31 from the Rockwell plant to DFRC 3 5mi away in preparation for approach and landing tests. (NASA 77-H-77) January 30—February h Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle, towed atop a 90-wheel trailer from Rockwell Intl.’s plant in Palmdale, Calif., made its first trip to Edwards AFB 57km away. Escorted by a convoy of security and patrol cars, the Enterprise moved at 8kph and drew hundreds of spectators to view its configuration (24m wingspan and 21m vertical tailfin). Tests of the 38m-long space vehicle would begin Feb. 18 with a series of “captive” flights; first manned flight to an unpowered landing would occur July 22. (WStar, Jan 30/77, A-7, NYT, Jan 31/77, 12; W Post, Feb 1/77, A-3) ORIGINAL PA&E IZ OF POOR QUALITY	n
The United States planned to orbit in 1983 a 9080kg 645cm telescope that would observe images almost to the edge of space and the beginning of time, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. “Without the blurring of the atmosphere,” said Dr. John Bahcall of Princeton Univ.’s Institute for Advanced Study, “we would be able to see things that are 10 times smaller than we have seen, or 10 times farther away. It would be like reading the writing on a quarter that we could only tell was round before.” If approved by Congress, the $435 million Space Telescope would be carried from earth by astronauts manning the Space Shuttle. The telescope would investigate quasars radiating thousands of times the energy generated by ordinary stars of the same size, and would observe the birth of stars, map nearby planets and galaxies, and compute distances to the nearest stars. In addition to optics half the size of Mount Palomar’s, the Space Telescope would carry lenses and instruments to scan ultraviolet and infrared spectra not accessible to earthbound telescopes because of atmospheric blockage. The telescope would relay its views to earth using geostationary satellites over the U.S. NASA would send Shuttle astronauts to the telescope every 5yr to replace wornout or damaged parts. (W Post, Jan 21/77, C-24)
KSC reported that the number of visitors in the first 3mo of 1977 was 283 734; the number in March, 114 845, highest so far this yr was 2.8% below the March 1976 level. The 3mo total was 9.3% less than the first 3mo of 1976. The visitor center had displays, exhibits, space science lectures, and space movies, plus a new hall of history opened in 1976. Visitors could see the vehicle assembly building for Space Shuttle preparations and the Apollo Saturn on display nearby, drive around Pad A where Shuttle operations were in progress, and visit the Cape Canaveral Air Force station. (KSC Release 87-77)
JSC announced selection of John C. Stonesifer as head of the center’s new life sciences experiments program office, which would manage planning, development, and operation activities at JSC, ARC, and KSC for all such experiments to be carried on the Space Shuttle and other missions in the future. Stonesifer would continue to act as chief of JSC’s bioengineering systems division until designation of a replacement. He had joined NASA at LaRC in 1957 and transferred in 1962 during the Mercury project to the space task group; he had been chief of JSC’s recovery branch before becoming head of bioengineering systems. (JSC Release 77-72)
Kennedy Space Center announced it had awarded Planning Research Corporation (PRC), McLean, Va., a $23 626 661 contract extension for engineering support services. Under the 12-mo cost-plus-fixed-fee extension, PRC would continue through May 19, 1979, its design engineering of Space Shuttle equipment and other tasks for KSC’s design-engineering directorate, including design of new and modified ground-support equipment and minor facilities-design support for all KSC programs. The Spaceport and Cape Canaveral in Fla., Vandenberg AFB, and Dryden Flight Research Center had received support under the contract. The extension brought the total contract amount since the original award in May 1974 to $97 306 220. (KSC Release 53-78)
Work on the dynamics test stand had begun in preparation for the next series of Space Shuttle mated vertical ground-vibration tests, the Marshall Star reported. After changing the configuration inside the stand from a “hanging” to a “sitting” arrangement, MSFC engineers would adjust the platform to fit the vehicle assembly. For the first series of tests, the orbiter and external tank had been suspended from airbags on a truss structure high in the stand, to simulate the Shuttle after the solid-fuel rocket booster had separated and before external-tank jettison. The next series would test the ET, orbiter, and SRBs mated in the liftoff configuration; the SRBs would sit on a hydrodynamic support system to which the ET and orbiter had been attached. (Marshall Star, Aug 2/78, 1)
NASA announced it had tentatively selected 4 more experiments for its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) scheduled as a major Space Shuttle payload in 1980. The four scientific experiments—to study hazards to man of ion particles in space, the chemistry of micrometeoroids, the interstellar wind, and cosmic-ray nuclei—would join 23 technology experiments selected for LDEF earlier in 1978 [see Jan. 9]. LDEF, an unmanned reusable free-flying facility carrying technical and scientific experiments mounted in special trays, would offer an easy and economical way to expose primarily passive experiments to the space environment during 6 to 9 mo of LDEF orbit. Selected experiments and principal investigators were: free-flyer biostack experiment, Dr. Horst Bucker, Universitat Frankfurt-am-Main, W. Germany; interstellar gas experiment, Dr. Don Lind, Johnson Space Center; high-resolution study of ultra-heavy cosmic ray nuclei, D. V. Domingo and Dr. K. P. Wenzel of ESA (the Netherlands), and Prof. C. O. Ceallaigh, Dr. D. O’Sullivan, Dr. A. Thompson of the Dublin Inst, for Advanced Studies, Ireland; and chemistry of micrometeoroids, Dr. Fred Horz, JSC. (NASA Release 78-20; LaRC Release 78-5; JPL Universe, Feb 3/78, 1; ESA newsletter, Feb 78, 3)
NASA announced selection of 16 experiments in space technology for the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) mission, scheduled as payload for the first Space Shuttle operational flight in 1980. LDEF, managed by Langley Research Center, was a reusable unmanned free-flying structure carrying various technical and scientific experiments in special trays, providing an easy and economical means to conduct primarily passive experiments in earth orbit. NASA had selected the 16 experiments from 190 candidates that responded to an opportunity notice distributed in June 1976. Investigators selected to date represented 6 universities, 6 private organizations or research institutes, and 5 NASA centers. Seven experiments were from France, 2 from England, and 1 from Canada. R&D value, compatibility with LDEF and other experiments, and effort cost had been selection criteria. Technical areas included materials, thermal-control coatings, detectors, power, micrometeoroids, electronics, lubrication, optics, and space-debris detection. Eighty percent of LDEF’s experiment trays had been filled; the remaining space would contain micrometeoroid-detection panels. LDEF would remain in orbit 6 to 12mo for experiment exposure to space environment. The Space Shuttle orbiter would retrieve and return it to earth; experiments would go to their investigators for data analysis. (NASA Release 78-1)
The JSC Roundup reported on a 2-day conference, “Meeting Our Energy Needs Today and Tomorrow,” with Dr. Peter Glaser, commonly thought of as the initiator of the solar-power satellite concept, as featured speaker. Glaser, designer of three instruments deployed on the lunar surface by the Apollo astronauts, had proposed a solar-power-satellite concept in 1968 before the days of concern with an energy shortage. He said the scientific community had slowly become aware that solar energy “shines brighter than ever as the major energy source.” Glaser summarized the advantages of collecting the solar energy constantly available in space, as opposed to disadvantages of any terrestrial energy source: absence of gravity and weather; avoidance of thermal pollution and waste; and the ability to direct a beam of collected energy to any location on earth, sunny or not, having usable land or not, close to the user or not. Solar-energy development would depend on development of the Space Shuttle, he noted, and was an idea becoming economically attractive and socially acceptable. Microwave and laser beams could transmit this energy to earth; directing a microwave beam accurately had been demonstrated. As for safety, Glaser pointed out that one cannot concentrate microwaves into a weapon system, whereas lasers could be lethal, so that all nations would have to agree that the laser method would never be used as a weapon. Glaser described the phased-array transmitting antenna already constructed on a 5-story-high project in the Aleutian Islands. He estimated 84% solar-power satellite efficiency in producing 30kw of power, as compared to current power plants with an efficiency range of about 40%. (JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 4)
MSFC reported that a new 0.8km (0.5mi) antenna range had operated satisfactorily in testing Space Shuttle antennas for range safety. The new range had a 27.4m (90ft) transmit tower and a 22.8m (70ft) model test tower. Antenna tests had begun in May on a 1/15-scale model of the Space Shuttle orbiter, external tank, and two solid-fuel rocket boosters installed in the tower. Engineers had measured radiation patterns of the six range-safety antennas (two on the ET and two on each of the 2 SRBs) to ensure that a signal from the range-safety officer would reach the vehicle at any altitude. The range-safety antenna system was interconnected to immediately relay to the ET and both SRBs a destruct signal received on any one of the six antennas. Future Shuttle tests possibly requiring antenna-pattern measurements included the teleoperator retrieval system, 25kw power module, large space structures, and satellite power systems. (Marshall Star, June 28/78, 1)
INTELSAT announced it would hold open its offer of a new satellite system for world maritime communications, since its board of governors had authorized continued development of a maritime communications package to be carried on a number of its Intelsat V international comsats as well as further discussions on provision of maritime services by a global-satellite system of three modified Intelsat V satellites and three European MARECS satellites, beginning in 1981. Observers expected that the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT), after its formal establishment, would eventually take over maritime communications. The board also had authorized Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp. to continue studies on maritime-communications equipment sets for its fifth, sixth, and seventh Intelsat V satellites. Although the packages could not increase international communications capacity, they would offer the equivalent of 30 voice circuits for maritime shore-to-ship and ship-to-shore communications and would improve the quality of on-demand voice, telex, telegraph, and data communications. Aerospace Daily reported that the choice between NASA’s Space Shuttle and ESA’s Ariane to launch Intelsat V had been put off until Dec. The board had apparently voted on at least two options, one of which was a compromise using both launch vehicles. The board had deadlocked, because of “a lot of abstentions,” said one source. (INTELSAT Release 78-27-1; A/D, Sept 25/78, 110)
Av Wk reported that Congress might override President Carter’s decision not to fund a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in NASA’s FY79 budget. Congressmen of both parties had said that a 4-orbiter fleet would limit the development of a civilian space program, making the U.S. extremely vulnerable in strategic use of space. Officials who considered addition of a fifth orbiter inevitable had pointed out that Carter’s decision to defer acquisition would increase Shuttle program cost by $235 to $250 million if the administration should later change its mind. Some congressmen had also expressed displeasure with the administration’s apparent inability to provide stated goals and directions for NASA’s space capabilities and with the attempt to cut NASA advance-planning funds. {AvWk, Feb 27/78, 20)
MSFC announced it had awarded RCA Government Systems Division an $880 000 contract to develop and deliver three video-instrumentation tape recorders for use on Spacelab 1 and subsequent missions. Under the contract, RCA would deliver three STAR-4 units before April 1980 for integration into Spacelab program equipment before the first launch planned for 1981. Spacelab crew members would use the units to record visual and analog data during communications blind spots, while the Space Shuttle was out of contact with NASA ground stations. The information would be played back for transmission when communications were reestablished. The units, capable of about 500 record-playback operations between tape changes, could record for 45min simultaneously on one video and two audio channels under computer control. Video bandwidth was 5MHz, audio bandwidths 50 to 8000hz. The instruments would undergo rigorous testing for high performance and reliability, and to ensure equipment compatibility with the manned-spacecraft environment. NASA would install two STAR-4s as part of the Spacelab 1 payload and keep the third as a spare. {Marshall Star, Nov 29/78, 4)
NASA announced it had selected Global Associates, Oakland, Calif., to provide operating services at the Michoud Assembly Facility, New Orleans, La. Services provided under the contract would support NASA program activity and missions of the Depts. of Agriculture, Defense, and Commerce tenanted at the Michoud facility, as well as refuse collection and telecommunications services at Slidell Computer Complex, Slidell, La. MSFC managed both facilities. Under the 1-yr cost-plus-award-fee contract, with four 1-yr options for extension, Global Associates would provide management, personnel, and materials for plant engineering, maintenance, telecommunications, and property and supply, as well as mail, transportation, medical, and food services. Proposed cost over the 5-yr period was approximately $26.5 million. NASA’s primary program at Michoud was manufacture and assembly of external tanks for the Space Shuttle, including those for service as test articles, on test flights, and on operational missions. (NASA Release 78-192)
NASA announced plans to develop hardware systems to support materials-processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle in mid-1981. The materials-processing in space (MPS) program would take advantage of near-weightlessness in earth orbit to eliminate sedimentation in liquid materials and to reduce movement of liquid caused by heat, allowing precise control of processes such as casting and crystal growth. MSFC had asked industry to submit proposals by Feb. 23 for support of 8 materials-processing experiments. on 1981 Shuttle/Spacelab missions, specifically a fluids-experiments system and a solidification-experiments system using a high-temperature furnace; other hardware systems to be developed would support individual experiments and related earth-based systems. The fluid-experiments system would use an area in the Spacelab for optical observation of fluid phenomena; it would accommodate a variety of cells for use in a broad range of experiments. The solidification experiments system would require a multiuse system for processing metals, alloys, eutectics, semiconductors, crystals, ceramics, glasses, etc., in orbit by melting, refining, and resolidification in near weightlessness. Scientists at MSFC’s ground control laboratory would process “control samples” under conditions identical (except for gravity) to those on the spacecraft. (MSFC Release 78-20; Marshall Star, Feb 22/78, 2)
MSFC announced successful completion of the first test of the Space Shuttle external tank, a major milestone leading to firing tests of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system. The Dec. 21 test assured that the main propulsion test article (the test facility and associated hardware) could handle super-cold propellants, liquid hydrogen, and liquid oxygen used by the Shuttle main engine. Propellants used to fill the external tank had flowed through connecting piping to the 3 engines until stopped by the main-engine valve; test engineers then made sure the engines had cooled down to operating temperature, several hundred degrees below zero. A series of static firings of the external tank, a simulated orbiter with a flight aft fuselage, three main engines, and associated piping would validate system operation. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 4)
For 4yr, the LaRC Space Systems Div. and Flight Dynamics and Control Div. had analyzed the Space Shuttle orbiter’s entry guidance and control system at the request of JSC, the Langley Researcher reported. The system had been designed to control the orbiter from deorbit until landing, regulating both the aerodynamic surfaces and a reaction control system (RCS) composed of small rocket thrusters such as those on Apollo spacecraft, so that orbiter control had turned out to be a hybrid between aircraft and spacecraft control. Onboard computers could direct the entire orbiter entry without pilot input, or a pilot could take over control if necessary. A primary tool in the LaRC analysis had been a reentry flight dynamics simulator (RFDS) that permitted evaluation of the onboard-control system in both the automatic and the manual modes. It had also aided in developing alternate control systems to be used by the pilot if the main control system could not handle a situation. The simulator cockpit, though not an exact representation of the orbiter cockpit, did contain all the instruments and controls necessary to simulate flight: cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) showed displays identical to those on board, changing guidance information automatically as the orbiter entered various flight regimes. Push buttons and toggle switches would permit the pilot to take over any of the control functions. LaRC investigators had found that the system was dangerously sensitive to possible sensed angle-of-attack errors in the automatic mode at hypersonic speed. Shuttle astronaut Col. Henry Hartsfield had been unable to maintain vehicle control in the manual mode. This and other problems had led to major system redesign that had been tested at LaRC and found to solve the sensed angle-of-attack problem. Investigators had then begun work on other system problems. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 1)
Cosmonaut Valery Kubasov had spoken of the possibility of joint experimental flights by the USSR’s Salyut-type orbital station and the U.S. Space Shuttle, according to a Tass report. Kubasov noted that such flights could use the joint approach and docking procedures worked out for the Apollo-Soyuz test project and tested during the joint Soviet-U.S. flight of Apollo and Soyuz in July 1975. A new agreement between the USSR and the U.S. on cooperation in space research for peaceful purposes had came into force the previous May, Kubasov pointed out. He added that millions of Americans, like the citizens of the USSR, had viewed the Soyuz-Apollo program as a display of goodwill by the two nations and the beginning of great cooperation between nations in space. However, Av Wk reported that any U.S. Space Shuttle/Soviet Salyut space station joint mission was in deep trouble, if not already dead, because of increased U.S. concern over technology transfer to the Soviets and the current abrasive political climate between the two countries. A NSC interagency committee had reevaluated the entire joint mission idea, while U.S./Soviet discussions on the project were in limbo. The project probably would have been discussed during a planned technology-oriented trip to the USSR by presidential science adviser Frank Press, but the White House had canceled the trip in disapproval of the Soviet treatment of dissidents. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, July 12/78; AvWk, July 17/78, 13)
NASA announced that fabrication and testing of components was continuing at various locations throughout the U.S. in preparation for a scheduled first manned orbital flight of the Space Shuttle September 28, 1979. NASA had accelerated production and installation of thermal protection system (TPS) tile for Orbiter 102, had increased staffs at both the Rockwell facility and the Lockheed plant where the tiles were made, and had obtained new tile-inspection equipment. Testing of the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME) continued at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories; between Sept. 10 and Oct. 12, two engines had been test-fired for a total of 3794sec. Ten of the tests reached rated power level (RPL), accumulating 3096sec. Engine firings through Oct. 11 totaled 350 for 26 530sec total time, including 8909sec at RPL. NASA had scheduled full-duration testing of the three-engine cluster forming the main propulsion system for early in 1979, when the first manned orbital-flight configuration engines would become available. The third static-test firing of a solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) motor occurred Oct. 19 at Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s test site near Brigham City, Utah. Early data indicated the test firing and gimbaling of the motor nozzle were satisfactory. MSFC had mated all the Space Shuttle elements—two SRBs, an external tank, and an orbiter (101)—for the first time in vertical vibration testing to verify that the structure would perform as predicted during various stages of flight. (NASA Release 78-162)
If research now in advanced stages went well, Space Shuttle orbiter crews would enjoy tasty and nutritious meals served in an attractive manner, NASA announced. Menus would be well balanced (3000 calories a day) with hot entrees, “reasonably cold” fruit beverages or dessert, and plenty of condiments. A typical daily menu on the Space Shuttle might be: breakfast—orange drink, peaches, scrambled eggs, sausage, sweet roll, cocoa; lunch—cream of mushroom soup, ham and cheese sandwich, stewed tomatoes, banana, cookies, and tea; dinner-shrimp cocktail with sauce, beefsteak, broccoli au gratin, strawberries, pudding, cookie, and cocoa. Many of the foods (breakfast bars, for example) would come off supermarket shelves. All meals would be prepared with variety in mind, so that a crew would have a different menu for sue successive days; on the seventh day the cycle would begin again. Dining would be from a food tray at a table in the galley, or the tray could be held in the lap or affixed to the wall. Ordinary eating utensils would be used. Foods planned for Shuttle crews included (thermostabilized) thermal/heat-processed foods canned or packaged in laminated foil pouches, such as cheese spread, tuna, beef with barbecue sauce; (intermediate moisture) foods preserved by controlling the available moisture, such as dried apricots, peaches, breakfast bars; (rehydratable) dehydrated foods reconstituted with water, such as scrambled eggs, beef patty, chicken and noodles, all beverages; (irradiated) foods exposed to ionizing radiation to effect preservation, such as bread, rolls, and beefsteak; (freeze-dried) foods with all water removed to be rehydrated, or eaten as is with saliva acting as the moistening agent, such as strawberries, shrimp, bananas; (natural form) foods such as nuts and cookies. All this was far from the space meals of an earlier era, when Mercury and Gemini astronauts had to squeeze various kinds of food into their mouths from tubes, or when floating crumbs had to be recaptured before they got into the instruments. Some of the same people who had pioneered space food preparation were still working at JSC putting together the Space Shuttle food systems. From the beginning of the national space effort, the topic of food had captured the attention of both observers and participants. On short spaceflights, food was not too important; it became a more serious consideration, then a vital one, as crews began to range farther and stay longer. First menus had included only the tubes of paste-like food served at room temperature, lukewarm dehydrated cubes, or a few freeze-dried items. By the time of the long-duration Apollo flights, the types of and systems of preparing space food had become more sophisticated, and new means of heating and cooling had brought improved palatability. A breakthough came during Apollo 8 when the crew was surprised with a home-cooked Christmas dinner: pieces of turkey with most of the trimmings, eaten with a spoon rather than squeezed from a container. The turkey and gravy was a thermostabilized product packaged in a laminated foil pouch, leading to the development of a “spoon-bowl” plastic pack for rehydratable foods into which water was injected through a valve. Contents were spooned out through a zippered opening. Main differences between Space Shuttle food and that served on earlier flights would be greater variety and larger amounts, more efficient handling of food, and more comfortable natural dining arrangements. (NASA Release 78-176)
NASA announced successful completion of the second full-duration ground-static firing of a huge solid-fuel rocket motor to be used in Space Shuttle flights beginning in 1979. Thiokol Corporation’s Wasatch Division, prime contractor for MSFC development of the motor, had conducted the firing at Brigham City, Ut. The 125ft-long (38.1m) motor on the test fixture had fired for more than 2min, reaching a thrust level of 28321b (12 596 736 newtons). The test firing had used 1 102 4001b (500 048kg) of propellants. The contractor had gimballed the motor nozzle early in the test and again later in the firing for about half the total burn time; the solid-fuel rocket booster’s motor nozzles during Shuttle launches would provide directional control for the entire Shuttle assembly. MSFC had scheduled the next test for early summer. (MSFC Release 78-6; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1)
Space platform studies by NASA’s Office of Space Science (OSS) had raised questions about the extent to which OSS would use Spacelab during the 1980s, Aerospace Daily reported. During the next yr or so, users would evaluate cost-effectiveness of the modular Spacelab being developed by ESA to fly in the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay against that of free-flying satellites and larger undefined space platforms. In the meantime, experiments and instruments for Spacelab would be selected partly on the basis of their adaptability to later missions aboard free flyers. Operating-cost estimates and the outlook for funding had tempered earlier OSS optimism about using Spacelab [see Nov. 30]; the platform studies would likewise curb optimism if they substantially described activity that might be carried out better or cheaper on free flyers. A member of the NASA Advisory Council’s space science advisory committee noted at a Spacelab review that NASA could develop two Explorer-class free flyers at about the same cost as a few Spacelab flights. The space platform studies also had some political dangers: NASA had sold Spacelab previously as an integral part of the space transportation system, and would lose credibility if it backed off. However, Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, pointed out to the committee that the platform studies were intended to avoid the Spacelab situation, which had handed science and applications researchers a facility they had little if any role in defining. If NASA proceeded with a platform, Hinners said, it would be because mission requirements had been identified, “not because somebody who likes to build things says, ‘Here it is.’ ” (A/DNov 4/78, 144)
DFRC announced it had begun a 2 wk flight program with Calspan Corp., using the total inflight simulator (TIFTS) to investigate advanced flight-control systems like those used in the Space Shuttle. TIFTS, a small twin-engine commercial passenger aircraft with the nose modified to include an additional pilot’s cockpit, was one of the largest airborne simulators equipped with variable stability and 6 deg of freedom. Test pilots had flown the simulated mission from the nose cockpit (with safety pilots in the normal cockpit) to improve understanding of the flying qualities of advanced craft when landing, especially in actual touchdown under differing pilot-task conditions. (DFRC X-Press, June 30/78, 2)
The USAF had budgeted $664 million for space procurement in FY80, up from $379.6 million in FY79, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Major increases were in the defense support program (early-warning satellite by TRW and Aeroject), up $48 million; the satellite data system (Hughes), up $80 million; the defense satellite-communications systems (DSCS), up $65 million; and the Space Shuttle (Rockwell Inti.), up $73 million. The USAF had planned to buy five satellite systems in FY80: an RCA defense meteorological satellite program (DMSP) spacecraft; a defense support program spacecraft; a satellite data system spacecraft; and two DSCS spacecraft. One spacecraft to be purchased in FY79 would be a DMSP. The Air Force had last purchased boosters (three Martin Marietta Titan Ills) in FY78 and planned none for FY79 or 80, “assuming Shuttle stays on schedule,” a USAF official said. (D/SBD, Aug 10/78, 188)
NASA reported successful static firing of a Space Shuttle main engine Oct. 30 at the National Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss. The firing lasted for more than 13min, testing its ability to return the Shuttle orbiter to a landing site in case of mission abort during launch. The main engine operated continuously for 823sec, longest burn time an engine should require during an actual mission. A Shuttle orbiter would use 3 main engines having a normal burn time of about 8min. (NASA Release 78-173)
MSFC announced it had begun preparations for stress tests of the Space Shuttle orbiter at Lockheed-Calif.’s 430ton (390 metric tons) steel test rig at Palmdale, Calif. The 6-story “reaction frame” rig had more than 350 hydraulic jacks exerting loads on the orbiter to simulate those to be encountered at launch, during spaceflight, and on reentry into earth atmosphere. Lockheed would perform the tests under contract to Rockwell Inti., builder of the orbiter. (Marshall Star, May 17/78, 2)
AvWk reported that the third instead of the fifth Space Shuttle mission would attempt to raise the orbit of the abandoned Skylab space station, bettering chances of Skylab’s remaining in orbit until the Shuttle could come to the rescue. NASA had scheduled the third Shuttle flight for Oct. 1979; the fifth, for Feb. 1980. A Martin Marietta teleoperator propulsion unit carried on the Shuttle to boost Skylab to a higher orbit would be left in space for retrieval by the fifth Shuttle flight. MSFC would build a solar panel for the teleoperator to keep it in orbit for as long as necessary. (AvWk, Jan 23/78, 22)
NASA announced it had selected four American scientists as payload specialists for the second Spacelab mission scheduled for 1981. Those named were Dr. Loren Acton of Palo Alto, Calif., research scientist at Lockheed’s Palo Alto research laboratory; Dr. John-David Bartoe of Reston, Va., and Dr. Dianne Prinz of Alexandria, Va., both research physicists at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory; and Dr. George Simon of Alamagordo, N.M., chief of the solar-research branch at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory. Two of these scientists would be selected to fly on the orbiting space laboratory to operate the scientific experiments; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and assist the two in orbit. The Spacelab investigators’ working group (IWG), composed of Spacelab 2 principal investigators having experiments on the mission, had selected the payload specialists, each of whom was a coinvestigator on one Of the Spacelab 2 experiments. Scientific investigations on Spacelab 2 would be mainly in astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar-physics research, with others in plasma physics, botany, medicine, and space technology. Scientific instruments on the mission would be “pallet only,” exposed to space in the orbiter’s cargo bay. Payload specialists would operate their experiment equipment from the orbiter’s crew cabin, working in shifts to run the experiments 24hr a day. The mission, scheduled for launch from KSC in 1981, would orbit at an altitude of about 450km (250mi) for 9da. MSFC had been responsible for payload specialist training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission. (NASA Release 78-120; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1) August 4\ MSFC announced it had awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., a $2.7 million contract to develop and deliver a flight experiment solar-array wing by May 1980 for a Shuttle orbital-flight test in November 1980. A significant step toward producing large amounts of power in space, the experiment would verify structural and dynamic characteristics of the solar-array wing, its electrical performance, and the readiness of solar-array technology for planetary- and earth-orbit Space Shuttle payload applications. The solar-array wing, 32m (105ft) long and 4m (13.5ft) wide, folded and stored in the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay during launch, would be extended to its full length and retracted several times during the test. When its solar-cell surface was fully extended, the array’s 82 panels would convert solar energy to produce 12.5kw of power. Only three of the panels would be active in the experiment flight. The experimental solar-array wing would demonstrate that use of this technology to augment power for Shuttle and Spacelab could extend mission duration and lead to a solar-electric propulsion stage. Solar-array technology could have Shuttle-payload applications such as space-base construction, satellite power systems, and power modules. NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology had directed the solar-array program as part of a larger effort on solar-electric propulsion for long-term missions in the mid-1980s. (NASA Release 78-123; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1; DSFC X-Press, Aug 11/78, 4; A/D, Aug 4/78, 151; AvWk, Aug 14/78, 15)
After 2 decades as key booster in NASA’s space program, the Atlas Centaur would remain “old reliable” for a variety of planetary, commercial, and military payloads launched in the 1980s, Lewis News reported. The Centaur project had begun in November 1958 when DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) awarded the first contract to General Dynamics after a study recommending a high-energy upper stage for the Atlas launch vehicle. Before the study, Pratt and Whitney had received a contract for a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Since Centaur would be the first space-launch vehicle to use a liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen combination, a whole new technology was needed for handling materials, behavior, fabrication, and testing of liquid hydrogen in a space environment, not only to make Centaur a success but also because this fuel was to be used for the upcoming Apollo program. In 1958 Centaur received its first mission assignment, definition of geosynchronous orbit, and in 1960 its first deep-space mission. The creation of NASA resulted in transfer of the Centaur program from ARPA to NASA in July 1959. LeRC, which had pioneered research in hydrogen technology and had fired an experimental liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine with 50001b thrust as early as 1953, received technical management of Centaur in 1962. The first successful flight of an Atlas Centaur in Nov. 1963 included the world’s, first inflight ignition of a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Centaur had proved its operational capability in 1965 by successfully injecting a dynamic model of the Surveyor spacecraft into a prescribed transfer trajectory, resulting in a simulated lunar-target impact. After successfully launching Surveyor (for the first soft landing on the moon) and Pioneer 11 (for a flyby of Jupiter), NASA in the mid-1960s had directed its efforts to integrating the Centaur with the USAF Titan booster. General Dynamics had built an improved Centaur adaptable to both the Atlas and the Titan boosters; Martin Marietta had conducted studies for NASA on integrating the Titan booster with an improved Centaur, and on modifications needed to the Titan launch facility at ETR. Atlas Centaur missions had included earth-orbiting spacecraft such as the applications technology satellite, orbiting astronomical observatories, Comstar, high-energy astronomical observatories, and FltSat-Com. Atlas Centaur, used for future missions with HEAO and FltSat-Com spacecraft, would remain one of NASA’s prime launch vehicles until the Space Shuttle became fully operational. (Lewis News, July 21/78, 1)
The NYT reported that the Soviet Union had built and bombers drop-tested a new manned space vehicle similar to the U.S. Space Shuttle. The delta-winged reusable vehicle had been dropped from a Soviet Tupolev TU-95 Bear bomber in atmospheric tests of the spacecraft’s aerodynamic and handling qualities, like recent tests of the Space Shuttle. No known space testing of the delta-winged vehicle had occurred, although the Soviets might have begun orbital tests with a second new manned-flight craft with space-tug capabilities. Design characteristics of the test vehicle were apparently similar to those of both the U.S. Shuttle orbiter and the lifting-body research vehicles flight-tested earlier by the U.S. Air Force and NASA. The vehicle strongly resembled the USAF/Boeing X-20 DynaSoar concept, which had been viewed as a space station resupply vehicle before the program was canceled. The Soviet spacecraft was described as smaller than the 150 0001b NASA Shuttle orbiter, but larger than the Soyuz expendable manned transport. The NYT said the new vehicle indicated the USSR believed it had the technology to proceed with building reusable manned spacecraft. (NYT, Mar 21/78, 12)
LaRC reported on its Jan. 17-19 seminar on Large Space Systems Technology (LSST) attended by more than 200 persons who had exchanged ideas on the technology needed to build large space systems in the future. The group had tried to guess what research and technology the multimission needs of the Space Shuttle would be in 1985 to 2000; NASA had scheduled no definite programs for 1985 to 2000, but wanted to ensure performance of economical and well-organized future missions. Seminar subjects included predictions of structural behavior in space, particularly under loads and stresses; advanced materials and techniques for joining various kinds of structures; distribution of controls for large structures; and electronics equipment needed for operation and control of structures. Those attending had represented six NASA centers, 24 aerospace firms, 8 universities, and 4 DOD centers. To continue cooperation between government agencies and industry, LaRC planned to hold a similar seminar yearly. (LaRC Release 78-3; Langley News, Jan. 27/78, 1)
The U.S. Army had devised a charged-particle beam weapon using negative hydrogen neutralized through an exchange cell as an antisatellite-kill mechanism, AvWk reported. The program had been code-named Sipapu, an American Indian word meaning sacred fire. Its application to ballistic-missile defense would be as an accelerator with small angular divergence; an antisatellite version with a range of several thousand km could destroy enemy vehicles without maneuvering to intercept. AvWk said that a smaller adaptation of the device, requiring lower power levels, could be orbited in 2 or 3yr, probably by NASA’s Space Shuttle. The Accelerator Div. at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory had worked on Sipapu for the Army, with USAF participation; the Army’s Ballistic Missile Defense Command would spend $4.3 million this year and $5 million in FY79 for charged-particle beam weapons, and $3 million in the coming yr for high-energy laser weapons. {AvWk, Mar 20/78, 13)
NASA announced it would rotate the Skylab space station 180° in its orbit Nov. 3 because of low temperatures encountered by one of the control moment gyros (CMG) as a result of periodic long-term shading from the sun. The sun angle was a function of the orbit inclination (in Skylab’s case, 50° relative to the equator), the position of the earth around the sun, and certain other seasonal factors. When the CMG, essential to Skylab’s holding a stable attitude, was in shadow for ^xcessive periods, the bearing temperature dropped, interfering with lubrication and increasing friction on the bearings that could lead to possible CMG failure. Turning the Skylab in its orbit before mid-November would expose the CMG to more sun and maintain normal bearing temperatures. The reversed position was not expected to change Skylab’s orbital-life predictions significantly. The maneuver would use none of the remaining nitrogen thruster fuel now on reserve for docking with the teleoperator-retrieval system, planned for the second Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 78-172; Marshall Star, Nov 8/78, 2; JSC Roundup, Nov 10/78, 1; WPost, Nov 4/78, A-6; AvWk, Nov 13/78, 65)
NASA announced Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. biotechnologists and engineers would use frogs on the Space Shuttle as research subjects to study inner-ear balance as the cause of space sickness that had afflicted some astronauts. Under a 6mo contract with Ames Research Center, Lockheed researchers would first study the behavior in space of the frog’s otolith nerve bundle, which closely resembled man’s. Microelectronic sensors inserted in the frogs would periodically feed data into recorders on the ground and in space. Preflight ground-based tests using a centrifuge would furnish baseline data to compare with information obtained in weightlessness. (JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 4; NASA Act, May 78, 10)
NASA reported it had halted MSFC preparations for vibration tests of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise May 12, when the upper dome of the prototype liquid oxygen tank buckled inward while being filled with water. Pressurizing the tank to lib later removed the wrinkles. The tank implosion would delay Enterprise vibration testing, but the program office would have to review delay of the overall Space Shuttle program. (JSC Roundup, May 26/78, 1; Marshall Star, May 10/78, 1)
NASA announced it had made several personnel changes. Richard Smith, deputy director at MSFC, had been appointed deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Hq for a one-yr tour of duty beginning August 15. Smith had transferred to NASA in 1960 from the rocket research and development team at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal, when the development operations division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency had become the nucleus of MSFC. He had managed the Saturn program, and in January 1974 had become director of science and engineering, and later deputy director, of the center. Smith had received NASA’s exceptional service medal for contributions to the Apollo and Skylab programs as well as the medal for distinguished service. (NASA Release 78-112; NASA anno July 19/78) NASA had named Harry Sonnemann deputy chief engineer at Hq, responsible to the chief engineer for managing program assurance, safety and environmental health, and the systems engineering divisions. Sonnemann had come to NASA in October 1977 from the office of the assistant secretary of the Navy, where he was special assistant for electronics and special assistant for antisubmarine warfare and ocean control from 1968 to 1977. He had also worked on the development of large seismic arrays as assistant director for field engineering in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency’s nuclear test detection office from 1964 to 1968. (NASA anno July 20/78) Scientist-astronaut Dr. Joseph Allen had returned to active flight status at JSC’s astronaut office. From August 1, 1975, until his return to JSC, Allen had been director of the office of legislative affairs at NASA Hq; and he would continue those duties in addition to his astronaut duties until a replacement was named. He had returned to JSC as senior scientist-astronaut and was eligible for selection as a Space Shuttle crewman. NASA had selected Allen as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; he had completed the initial academic training and a 53-wk course in flight training at Vance AFB, Okla. Allen had been mission scientist as a member of the astronaut-support crew for Apollo 15, and was staff consultant on science and technology to the President’s Council on International Economic Policy. (NASA Release 78-33) NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Edward Ifft chief of international programs policy at Hq. Dr. Ifft had been a U.S. Foreign Service reserve officer, whose last assignment was director of the State Department’s office of disarmament and arms control. While a graduate student, Ifft spent a yr at Moscow State Univ. under a U.S.-USSR cultural exchange program doing research on low-temperature physics. He had joined the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1967; then moved to the State Department where he had been deputy chairman of the U.S. delegation that negotiated the threshold test-ban treaty in Moscow in 1974; and had participated in negotiations with the U.S. and USSR for a comprehensive test ban. (NASA Actv, July 78)
A simulated Space Shuttle orbiter had represented the Enterprise during practice hoists into the tall tower where the latter would soon be tested, the Marshall Star reported. The real orbiter had recently completed a series of landing tests in Calif, and would next undergo a series of tests at MSFC to see how the orbiter and other Shuttle components would maintain guidance and control under vibration during launch and powered flight. MSFC engineers would use the simulated orbiter to rehearse tests; for example, they had towed the simulator along center roadways to check clearances. The team had then practiced hoisting the simulator into the 131m (430ft) test stand. After completing tests at MSFC, the simulator would go by barge to KSC to check out procedures for launch. Vandenberg AFB had asked to borrow the simulator for its Shuttle launch facilities. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Bethpage, N.Y., plant of Grumman Aerospace Corp. had almost completed fabrication of an automatic device for forming continuous structural beams in space. MSFC had developed the “beam builder” to demonstrate techniques for fabricating large structures in space; the device would form triangular beams from flat rolls of very light materials, a complete section of the beam being easily supported with one hand. Housed in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle in earth orbit, the machine would form continuous miles-Iong beams for building large structures such as satellite power systems and service platforms. (Marshall Star, Apr 12/78, 1)
LaRC reported the White House had issued a statement July 20, 1978, commemorating the ninth anniversary of man’s first walk on the moon. The statement read in part: “Nine years ago today, the world paused to watch two brave men tread the surface of the moon. It was a moment without precedent in human experience, a moment when terrestrial life reached out to touch another world. It is a source of pride for us that those men were Americans. Today, the lunar surface is criss-crossed in a half dozen places with the footprints of American astronauts and implanted with a variety of American scientific instruments. “The Space Shuttle, our next major manned space project, will begin regular, routine economical operation in the early 1980s. ... In the deeper reaches of space, we will continue to seek to expand our knowledge of the solar system and the universe of which we are a part. “As time and technology take us ever more deeply into the space age, it will continue to be our policy to conduct operations in space as required for our national well being and to support the right of all nations to do likewise. In so doing, we remain committed to the underlying principle of the exploration and use of space for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of all mankind.” (Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2; Spaceport News, July 21/78, 1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 4; DFRC X-Press, July 28/78, 4)
NASA announced it had officially designated Space Shuttle orbital flight tests (OFT) as Space Shuttle 1 (SS-1), Space Shuttle 2 (SS-2), etc. Following orbital flight tests, the same designation system would continue for Space Transportation System operational flights. For example, if the OFT phase had consisted of six flights, the next flight (first flight of the STS operational phase) would be Space Shuttle 7 (SS-7). John Yardley, associate administrator of STS, had requested that emphasis be placed on a gradual conversion to the new official designation system. (NASA anno Aug 22/78)
AvWk reported that NASA had been struggling with institutional and funding arrangements for launching a Hughes-built corn-sat, Syncom-4, without giving Hughes the unfair advantage of a free Space Shuttle launch. The problem required prompt attention, because NASA had to make decisions within a few weeks if Syncom-4 was to fly on an early Shuttle mission. Hughes had designed and offered Syncom-4 specifically to fit the Space Shuttle payload-bay design, since NASA had wanted to deploy a test spacecraft on a Shuttle orbital mission. Under the Hughes proposal, the spacecraft would have no significant communications capability, and NASA would launch the unit free of charge; however, the satellite-user community (the state of California, Agency for International Development, and the Interior Dept.) had asked that the spacecraft include some communications capability instead of merely verifying a design. NASA had to decide who would pay for the added capability and whether Hughes would have an unfair advantage. Without a decision, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch said the whole exercise could revert to the original concept, with no significant communications channeled through the satellite. NASA might decide to run an open competition for systems to demonstrate Shuttle-launched communications spacecraft in the same manner as Syncom-4. However, Frosch was concerned that in an open competition Hughes could be “competed out of it in a way that is not quite proper,” since the Syncom-4 concept had been a Hughes innovation. “As it has developed,” Frosch explained to a House appropriations subcommittee hearing, “it is not completely clear that there is a proper solution to this dilemma.” (4v-Wk, Feb 20/78, 60)
NASA announced that Dr. Lo I. Yin, a scientist at GSFC, had demonstrated his invention of a hand-held x-ray device at the annual convention of the National Medical Association in Washington, D.C. The Lixiscope (low-intensity x-ray imaging scope), a gun-shaped instrument weighing about 0.67kg (1.251b), was powered by a single penlight 2.7v battery and a small radioactive source. Although Dr. Yin had not claimed his invention could replace x-ray equipment, he saw its value in mobility—in military situations or sports, for example. Dr. Yin had done this work under NASA’s technology utilization program, aimed at identifying and transferring aerospace technology benefits to the general public. NASA had patented the Lixiscope, and the license would be available at no cost. (NASA Release 78-127) GSFC reported that 100 representatives from U.S. industry and research institutions had met there to discuss possible applications of the Lixiscope, which had originated out of a need for single-photon imaging in x-ray astronomy. The sensitivity of the Lixiscope was so great that it could significantly reduce the dose of radiation received by a patient. Pulling a trigger on the device would unshield the radioactive source and send into the object being examined a low dosage of x-rays to be absorbed by a phosphor screen that would convert them to visible light. Six companies had applied for a license to manufacture or distribute the Lix-iscope, not yet commercially available. NASA had estimated the cost of a mass-produced instrument composed entirely of existing technical components at about $5000. NASA was considering use of the device on the Space Shuttle. (Goddard News, Aug 16/78, 1)
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'
NASA reported that DOD had lent it 5 Navy divers to support simulated weightlessness tests in the Space Shuttle program. The divers, all fleet-salvage men selected for their expertise in erecting or dismantling underwater structures or equipment, had been assigned to the neutral buoyancy simulator at MSFC. Working underwater in full-scale segments of the Space Shuttle, they would assist test engineers with contingency procedures, equipment operation, evaluation of space-construction techniques, and other activities scheduled for Shuttle and Spacelab missions. (NASA Activities, Jan 78, 5)
MSFC had been responsible for a variety of ground tests around the U.S. to prove flightworthiness of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster, the center newsletter reported. Each Shuttle mission would use 2 of the 578 097kg (6Q0ton) SRBs, 45.46 meters (149ft) long and 3.7 meters (12ft) in diameter, each providing 12 232 550 newtons (2.75 million lb) of thrust for about 2min from the launch pad to burnout and separation at an altitude of 45.3km (27mi). Tests at MSFC had put loads on a “short” version of the booster to duplicate load conditions encountered on the launch pad, in flight, during parachute deployment, and in water impact and recovery. Other MSFC engineers had tested the flight system designed to gimbal (or swivel) the motor nozzles at the lower end of each booster to guide the Shuttle on a proper course. Engineers at United Technologies Corp.’s Chemical System Div. near San Jose, Calif., had tested 8 small solid-fuel booster-separation motors, fired simultaneously to separate each SRB and move it away from the Shuttle during flight. Each end of the two boosters would carry 4 motors, a total of 16 on each flight. These would have about 88 960 newtons (20 0001b) of thrust and would fire only about 1 sec each to accomplish separation. The separation motor had completed development testing; the Calif, test series would qualify it for flight. Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. near Brigham City, Utah, had run full-duration full-thrust static firings on the SRB; high-speed sled runs in New Mexico had tested one phase of the SRB’s parachute-recovery system (deployment of the pilot chute only) to see whether the nosecap of the system, when ejected, would clear the vehicle without becoming entangled; and the National Parachute Test Range at El Centro, Calif., had conducted airdrops of the entire parachute system. Other tests of SRB’s electrical system and prelaunch checkout system were in progress. (Marshall Star, Mar 8/78, 4)
The Natl. Academy of Sciences released a report of the ad hoc committee for review of the Space Shuttle main-engine development program. This review was requested by Senators Adlai E. Stevenson (D-Ill) and Harrison L. Schmitt (R-NM) in Dec. 1977 as an independent assessment by Natl. Research Council of the safety of the main engine during both orbital-flight and operational phases of the Shuttle program. The review was to be completed by the end of Feb. 1978 for consideration during FY 1979 NASA authorization hearings. The committee reported that it saw “no reason to suggest that a safe and reliable main engine cannot be developed ultimately for the manned orbital flight tests and the later operational flights,” but submitted a number of recommendations: first, since the flight schedule was not ready yet, the critical milestones should be reviewed later in 1978. Other recommendations included allowance of “adequate time to analyze root problems . . . rather than selecting technical ‘fixes’ to sure symptoms,” as well as a complete tear-down inspection of the main engine after the first and sixth flights (which had not been envisioned in the schedule). At a March 31 hearing before the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space, with Sen. Stevenson as chairman, Dr. Eugene E. Covert of the NRC described the ad hoc committee’s activities and the reasons for its recommendations, expressing appreciation for the cooperation of NASA and its contractors during the review. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, then summarized “the NASA reaction” to the report and its recommendations; Sen. Stevenson commended NASA’s prompt and positive response, but proceeded with further questions on schedule and funding. In addition to NASA staff (including associate administrator John Yardley, MSFC engine project manager J.R. Thompson, Shuttle program director Dr. Mike Malkin, and deputy director Roy Day, and comptroller William Lilly), the Rocketdyne engine project manager Dominic Sanchini was on hand to explain administrative and technical problems encountered with the main engine. The Senate committee report would contain all the testimony, the text of the ad hoc committee report, and further information on specific questions asked by Sen. Stevenson. (Text, hearing report 95-87, Sen Comm Cmte Mar 31/78; “Technical Status of the Space Shuttle Main Engine,” Natl Res Cncl, March 78)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology reported that Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) had called for hearings on the current status of NASA programs. Convened by the subcommittee on space science and applications and chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), the hearings would review NASA projects, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle and the tracking and data relay satellite system. Fuqua said it had been subcommittee practice to hold hearings in the fall before considering NASA requests for new and continuing work in the next year’s budget. John Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems, and William Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would testify Sept. 25. Dr. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, and Dr. Noel Hin-ners, associate administrator for space science, would testify Sept. 26. Dr. James Kramer, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, and Raymond Kline, associate administrator for management operations, would both testify Sept. 27. (H Comm on Sci & Tech Release 95-114) The USSR had launched Venera 12 Sept. 14 with a design and purpose similar to those of Venera 11, Tass announced. Onboard systems were functioning normally, and trajectories of both stations were close to original calculations. Venera 12 would also reach the vicinity of Venus in Dec. 1978. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 14/78)
NASA announced it had appointed Robert Allnutt associate deputy administrator. AUnutt, currently acting assistant general counsel for legislation at DOE, had been deputy assistant administrator for the Energy Research and Development Administration, responsible for program areas including procurement, personnel, labor relations, and construction. Following a career both inside and outside the executive branch, Allnutt in 1970 had been appointed associate general counsel to the congressionally-established Commission on Government Procurement to improve governmentwide policies, procedures, and legislation. In 1973 Allnutt had been appointed staff director and counsel of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, with jurisdiction over federal aerospace research and development activities including all NASA programs. NASA had named Isaac Gillam, IV, director of DFRC, where he had been acting director since the departure of David Scott in Nov. 1977; he had been deputy director there since Aug. 1977. Gillam, an associate fellow of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and a senior member of the American Astronautical Society, had joined NASA Hq in 1963 as a resource-management specialist and had gone to DFRC in 1976 as director of Space Shuttle operations. Before joining NASA, Gillam had served in the USAF. Lt. Gen. Duward Crow (USAF-ret.), assistant to the deputy administrator of NASA, had announced plans to leave NASA Sept. 1, 1978. Gen. Crow had begun NASA service in 1974 as assistant administrator for DOD and interagency affairs. In Oct. 1975 he had become associate deputy administrator of NASA, assuming his present duties following a reorganization in Nov. 1977. Crow had graduated in 1941 from the U.S. Military Academy and had served in the China-Burma-India theatre of operations. He had become comptroller of the USAF in 1969 and was assistant vice chief of staff from Oct. 1973 to July 1974 when he retired. He had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work on the NASA launch vehicles program. (NASA anno June 13/78)
Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
Mechanical failures during tests of the Space Shuttle main engines had threatened to delay the whole program, although the first orbital launch had been scheduled for next year, AvWk and Nature reported. Turbine blades in the engine’s high-pressure fuel pump had failed in 3 separate tests: twice the blades fractured or cracked, the third time a fire that followed the malfunction destroyed the evidence. Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, said that the setbacks had not lessened agency confidence in the basic engine design and that the Space Shuttle program should proceed on schedule; however, he admitted that chances of launching the first manned orbital flight in Mar. 1979 were “considerably less than 50-50.” A committee from the Natl. Research Council had begun in Jan. to assess the nature of engine failures and related problems, and to advise NASA and the U.S. Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space on the engine-development program, according to the NRC News Report. The study centered on the safety and reliability of the engines and had included evaluation of engine design, materials, fabrication, and testing. The Senate subcommittee had requested a report of the study in time to use it in considering NASA’s authorization request for FY79. (Nature, Apr 6/78, 482; AvWk, Apr 3/78, 18; NRC News Report, Apr 78, 1)	'
NASA announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Corp. a $32 million contract to develop a teleoperator retrieval system (TRS), a reusable TV-equipped propulsive device for use by Space Shuttle crews to deliver, stabilize, and recover satellites in orbit. Managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the contract called for delivery of flight hardware by September 1979. The TRS, a low-thrust box-like spacecraft operated from the Space Shuttle by remote control, could be carried in the orbiter cargo bay or left in space after completion of a mission for retrieval by the next Space Shuttle. First mission for the TRS would be a docking with Skylab to boost it into higher orbit or to aid a controlled reentry; a camera on the forward end of the TRS would permit an astronaut to maneuver it for rendezvous and docking, or for other purposes. The TRS would return to the Space Shuttle using its own guidance and control system. (NASA Release 78-96; Marshall Star, July 5/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, July 14/78, 2; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1)
Almost all major structural elements and systems of the first two flight-model solid-fuel rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle had either been delivered to KSC or were scheduled to arrive shortly, the Marshall Star reported. Delivered elements included eight booster-separation motors for one SRB, with eight for the other SRB due within the wk; all major components of the thrust-vector control (TVC) subsystems except the actuators, which were to arrive on Nov. 23; frustums and nosecaps for both boosters; the forward and aft skirts for the left-hand SRB (the aft skirt for the right-hand booster was en route by rail, and the forward skirt was scheduled for delivery Nov. 20); and most of the electrical-systems components. The parachute-recovery subsystem for the left-hand booster was at KSC; the system for the right-hand booster was due Nov. 22. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 4)
The Marshall Star announced it had begun ground-vibration tests of the Space Shuttle, using a computerized shaker system turned on by engineers in instrumentation trailers located near the test stand. The shaker system, the Shuttle modal test and analysis system (SMTAAS), had applied vibration cycles and force inputs and had acquired response information from the vehicle suspended inside a tall stand and canted 9° from vertical. In upcoming months engineers would use SMTAAS to “tune in” to the vehicle’s various vibration modes, comparing responses to mathematical predictions. Results of the tests would allow engineers to verify predictions of Shuttle reaction to the much more severe vibrations expected during launch. (Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78, 1; DFRCX-Press, June 16/78, 2; AvWk, June 19/78, 75)
NASA announced it would physically integrate ail Space Shuttle/ Spacelab experiments at Kennedy Space Center. Extensive analysis and cost studies had confirmed an earlier tentative decision to do the work at KSC rather than at centers managing the Spacelab mission. “Physical integration” consisted of installing experiments on Spacelab’s racks and pallets. After Spacelab operations became routine in the mid-1980s, physical integration should require about 100 civil service and contractor man-yrs per yr at KSC. The analyses required to integrate experiments for each mission would continue at assigned Spacelab management centers. (NASA Release 78-186)
MSFC had designed a geostationary-orbit platform that could perform the functions of more than a dozen domestic communications and weather satellites serving North America, AvWk reported. As early as 1986, NASA could use the Space Shuttle to assemble the platform, first U.S. large space structure in synchronous orbit. NASA would assemble the platform over the course of three Space Shuttle missions, using technology under design at MSFC and JSC. Analysis had predicted that over a platform’s 15-yr lifetime it could save 50% of the cost of operating communications and weather systems now scheduled to be placed in synchronous orbit during that period. Institutional rather than technical barriers had delayed completion of the platform project, but MSFC had reached agreement among common carriers and hardware manufacturers on the savings possible by using the platform. One concern of NASA planners was that grouping communications systems on a single platform would make them more vulnerable to Soviet attack; however, MSFC planned to issue an RFP of about $500 000 for major systems studies in FY79 and FY80 that would constitute Phase A evaluation of typical platform requirements; phase B would require about $1 million for FY80 and FY81 for system design concepts. (AvWk, June 19/78, 67)
NASA announced it had asked scientists to propose experiments for a 1984 mission to obtain a first global view of the Venus surface. Launched by the Space Shuttle, the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) spacecraft would circle the planet for at least 7mo taking radar pictures and measuring the atmosphere and the surface. It would be the most detailed scientific examination to date of the surface of Venus, perpetually covered by clouds. Announcing the solicitation, Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for Space Science, said: “NASA is engaged in a continuing program of space exploration, a major part of which is directed at the solar system. The VOIR program is a key step in that endeavor . . . While considerable knowledge of Venus’s atmospheric properties will be forthcoming from the Pioneer Venus mission, and while the Soviet Venera missions have provided valuable data on surface properties at three localities, information regarding the surface morphology on a global scale and all of the insights that this scientific information provides is lacking. A major technical goal of the VOIR mission, therefore, is to obtain global radar imagery with sufficient resolution to address fundamental questions regarding the origin and evolution of the planet, and to lay the groundwork for subsequent more detailed investigations of the surface and interior.” Hinners emphasized that VOIR had not been approved but said that early selection of scientific participants and investigations would assure a well-defined program upon approval. Under present plans, in 1984 NASA would launch one spacecraft from the Space Shuttle to Venus with a typical trajectory beginning in Dec. 1984 to arrive at Venus in May 1985. The spacecraft would remain in an elliptical parking orbit around Venus through May and June 1985, while the Deep Space Network was occupied with the Galileo project [see Nov. 10]. In late June or early July a propulsion maneuver would put VOIR into a near-polar orbit at an altitude of 300km (180mi). Radar mapping and other science gathering would begin in July and continue for 5mo. VOIR imagery should verify the presence or absence of continents, ocean basins, mountain belts, rift valleys, fault belts, or volcanoes, and might reveal the nature and time sequence of plate tectonic activity, as well as any relationship between this and volcanic episodes in the history of the planet. If impact craters were present (as suggested by earth-based radar observations), the mission might determine their size and frequency. The VOIR orbiter, weighing approximately 5000kg (11 0001b) at launch, would consist of a bus with a synthetic aperture radar and other science instruments. (NASA Release 78-180)
Although to most people “aviation” would mean airliners and military aircraft, with a sprinkling of light planes, most of the aircraft in service and about two-thirds of the miles flown were in branches of flying known collectively as “general aviation,” Lewis News reported, including private ownership for travel or sport; air taxi and commuter operations; agricultural flying; prospecting and exploration; law enforcement; firefighting; air ambulance; and pilot training. About 230 000 aircraft of varied types did jobs in the Free World, more than 90% of them in the U.S. General aviation had served all 13 200 U.S. airports, compared to the airlines’ 42%. In 1977 general aviation had provided transportation for 100 million Americans, using less than 0.7 of 1% of all fuel used for transportation in the U.S. and less than 6% of fuel used by all aviation, while carrying a third of all intercity air passengers. The general aviation industry had provided jobs for more than a quarter of a million Americans in the manufacture, sales, and service of its products; grossed about $1.5 billion in new aircraft sales; and exported about 30% of its total production, contributing more than $500 million to the U.S. balance of trade. {Lewis News, Mar 31/78, 3) During March: NASA announced arrival of the Space Shuttle orbiter, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster at MSFC for first assembly as a complete vehicle for ground-vibration tests. Using a facility originally designed for Saturn V moon-rocket testing, engineers would begin in early spring to evaluate the structural dynamics of the assembly and their effect on the Shuttle’s system. The mated vertical ground-vibration tests would consist of “floating” the Shuttle in the tall test tower and applying vibrations with exciters powered by amplifiers similar to those found on home stereo sets; sensors on the skin would record characteristics of the vibrations passing from one area to another. The resulting data would verify system-design and mathematical models of the control-system’s reaction to severe vibrations expected during launch and flight into orbit. The first test-article configuration would include an orbiter and external tank to simulate the high-altitude portion of a mission after separation of the boosters. The second test configuration would consist of solid-fuel rocket boosters filled with inert propellants, stacked in the stand along with the orbiter and tank to simulate liftoff conditions. The third test configuration would be the same as the second, except that boosters would be empty, simulating a mission just before booster separation. Tests would continue through most of the year stopping only to change test configurations. (NASA Release 78-47)
NASA announced it had decided not to reboost or deorbit the Skylab space station in orbit around the earth because success was unlikely. Uncertainties that had developed in Skylab systems, Skylab lifetime, Space Shuttle schedule, and teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) delivery had made further planning for a rescue mission impractical. Factors leading to the decision included deterioration of systems aboard Skylab (recurring control-moment gyro anomalies, marginal power conditions, and minimal attitude-control impulse gas); high sunspot activity that was accelerating decay of Skylab’s orbit; and reviews showing that a Skylab-rescue mission would be difficult to arrange before April 1980. Skylab, currently orbiting at about 426km (265mi) altitude, was being maintained in a low-drag attitude and would be continually monitored while NASA assessed the possibilities of damage on reentry, now predicted to occur between mid-1979 and mid-1980. Most of the vehicle would burn up during reentry, but some fragments probably would reach earth’s surface. Skylab’s flight path was 75% over the ocean; the probability of injury or damage from it was less than that from meteorites, according to estimates. (NASA Release 78-191) At a press conference following the announcement, Bill Haines of the Chicago Sun Times asked: “Way back in the olden days I remember that there was a lot of talk about space rescue, and one of the philosophies seemed to be that if we got into trouble or the Russians got into trouble, the other side would come to the rescue. Have you made any approaches at all to the Russians to see if they could do anything about this? If not, why not? And do you intend to?” John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, answered: “This is a little different from the space rescues that we had talked about. As you know, part of the ASTP program was to design docking equipment that could be prototypes of that. And we still have a long-range plan with the Russians, albeit rather fuzzy, to some day have this capability. “With respect to Skylab: After our ASTP, working with the Russians, of course, we had a fairly good working knowledge of the capabilities, at least that we knew of that were done in that program. And at least a year ago we got our own heads together and talked about whether or not they could do anything that we couldn’t do. We concluded that there are many problems that we won’t go into that it probably is not feasible, so we did not ask them. However, they are being informed of what we are doing here and if they make any proposals that we haven’t thought of that could be useful, we will certainly entertain them.” (NASA press conf Dec 19/78)
22pm EDT on the same date to produce an orbit with 35 469.1km perigee, 36 679.2km apogee, and 1.7° inclination. The drift had been too rapid, and an orbit-adjust maneuver June 20 had reduced it to 2 deg/day West. Goes 3 had been scheduled to arrive on station at 135°W July 16, 1978. All subsystems were on, except the visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR); the main power bus was normal. The S-band and UHF equipment had functioned properly, but NASA was checking specifics of gain, margin, and sensitivity. Although the space-environment monitor (SEM) subsystem had appeared satisfactory, it needed further testing for possible interference from other subsystems. NASA expected to check out Goes 3 and turn it over to NOAA for operation when it arrived at 135°W. Goes 3 would be a key element of the Global Weather Experiment, a worldwide yearlong accumulation of meteorological and oceanographic data that had begun in Dec. 1977. Largest international scientific experiment in history, with 140 nations participating, GWE was collecting information from sources that included nine satellites and scores of ships and aircraft, plus thousands of daily surface arid upper-air observations by several hundred buoys distributed in the southern hemisphere and by conventional observation methods elsewhere. The experiment, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) sponsored by the UN’s World Meteorological Organization and the Inti. Council of Scientific Unions, would last through 1979 and provide scientists with millions of pieces of information from all over the world. Goes 3 would not only provide the major western-hemisphere coverage in the experiment, but would also determine how much important meteorological information could be gathered from a data-sparse area of the world centering on the Indian Ocean. Goes 3 was the last NOAA geostationary satellite NASA would launch on an expendable vehicle; three additional geostationary spacecraft planned for the next 8yr, beginning with GOES-D, would be launched on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 78-72; MOR E-612-78-01 [prelaunch summary] Apr 26/78, [postlaunch] June 26/78; NOAA Release 78-66)
JSC announced it had selected General Electric Co., Space Division, Valley Forge, Pa., for negotiations leading to a contract for the Space Shuttle orbiter food system galley. The estimated $1.2 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, beginning December 1978 and ending January 1981, would be for a facility including food-preparation equipment (hot and cold water dispensers, oven, water heater) and serving equipment (meat trays). (JSC Release 78-43)
Dryden Flight Research Center commemorated the final flight lOyr ago of the X-15, piloted by Bill Dana, that reached in its 1 lmin free flight a top speed of 3716mph (5.38 times the speed of sound) and peak altitude of 255 000ft. This chapter in aeronautical history would be celebrated by the Edwards, Calif., AIAA section at a dinner meeting featuring Bill Dana. The article in DFRCX-Press concluded: “Recent press reports call the Space Shuttle engines the first reusable liquid rocket engines. How soon they forget.” {DFRC X-Press, Oct 20/78, 2)
... We are here today to recognize and honor six American pioneers of the farthest and highest of all frontiers, the frontier of space. We honor them for individual human qualities, dedication, skill, extraordinary courage. But we do more than that. What those men have done is the most visible part of a vast and continuing collective accomplishment of many people. Tens of thousands of Americans, many of you, including scientists, engineers, administrators, skilled workers, others, have contributed directly to the success of the American space enterprise. They in turn have had the support of an entire nation and the good wishes of an entire planet. The glory that belongs to the six recipients this afternoon of the Space Medal of Honor belongs equally to those who helped them, and in a real sense, to all humanity who prayed for them and who supported them. “It is fitting that these ceremonies take place today on the 20th anniversary of the founding of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. And it is, of course, fitting that they take place here where the ships that took men to the moon were launched and where we will take our next great step into space with the first flight of the Space Shuttle, which I sincerely hope will be before my next birthday. . . .
Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. had used an airfilm material-handling system at its Brigham City, Utah, plant to move and position Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket-motor components weighing up to 300 0001b, AvWk reported. The size of components for the Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket motors and the large number of Shuttle missions expected had led Thiokol to try new types of material-handling systems. Heaviest load moved had been a solid-fuel rocket-motor casting segment loaded with propellant weighing about 300 0001b on a transporter dolly weighing an additional 50 0001b, for a combined total of about 175 tons moved. (The motor would consist of four segments individually cast with solid rocket motor fuel in one of several pits at the Thiokol facility.) The airfilm system used compressed air to inflate urethane pads (bearings) attached to the bottom of specially-designed dollies; air forced into the bearings and seeping between them and the floor had created a space of two or three hundredths of an inch—enough to “float” the transporter and its load on a film of air. (AvWk, Jan 30/78, 56)
ESA’s Spacelab program board had turned down NASA’s proposal to barter Space Shuttle launch services for the second Spacelab NASA was committed to acquire, and the action was seen as final, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. NASA had hoped to exchange launch service in return for the Spacelab in order to reduce costs [see Sept. 12]. Although ESA itself favored the barter plan, the European governments had refused to commit themselves in advance to Space Shuttle flights. In lieu of the barter deal or any increased NASA funding, ESA might be asked to prefinance work on the second Spacelab until NASA could get the money. (D/SBD, Nov 8/78, 39)
After each Space Shuttle flight, parachutes used to slow the descent of the Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster (SRBs) would have to be washed, dried, and repaired before reuse; and KSC had modified for this purpose a facility formerly used as a news center and to refurbish Gemini parachutes, Spaceport News reported. Recovery vessels at sea would pull the parachutes from the water and wind them like fishing line on large deck reels for delivery to the facility, where they would be unwound, defouled, and hosed down. A chute arranged on hooks on an overhead monorail would proceed through the world’s largest automatic washer and dryer [see March 8] to remove any traces of corrosive sea water. Next the chute would be inspected for damage, with rips mended on special sewing machines. The chute then would be stretched on a worktable almost the length of the 220-ft building, and each individual panel would be systematically folded into place resulting in a tubular shape. A monorail would guide the bundle to a wedge-shaped packing canister. Depending on conditions, one parachute could move through the entire operation in less than 50hr. (Spaceport News, Nov 10/78, 3)
MSFC reported it had successfully conducted a first major test firing of the three Space Shuttle main engines during a 15sec run at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories in Bay St. Louis. MSFC had already successfully fired one of the modified engines for 520sec at 100% thrust, more power than needed for the first Shuttle mission. Test results would aid in establishing countdown procedures. More than 300 contractor and NASA employees had worked on the test series, described by, program officials as the most complex large propulsion-system evaluation undertaken in the U.S. space program. Test budget for firings and facilities was $52 million. Main propulsion-test articles were the Martin Marietta external tank containing propellant for firing tests, just as it would during Shuttle missions; the Rockwell Inti, orbiter simulator; three Rocketdyne main engines; and the Rockwell Inti, shuttle avionics test set, replacing the Shuttle-orbiter computers during tests. Key Shuttle launch and flight parameters to be verified by propulsion-test data were the cryogenic boil-off rate of external-tank propellants on the launch pad; rate of external-tank self-pressurization; engine-prestart requirements, such as pressure and temperature milestones; starting, throttling, and cutting off the engine, using external-tank propellants with the engines operating in close proximity; engine gimbaling; control-system response; loads placed by the engines on the orbiter; and launch acoustic data. Flight-dynamics engineers had been especially interested in verifying control-system models with the main propulsion-test data. Test 1, scheduled for 2.35sec, had been terminated at lsec because of an instrument problem. Test 2, scheduled for 15sec with the engines at 70% thrust, would assess propellant-flow paths from the tank through the orbiter and into the engines under thrust conditions. Test 3, planned for 15sec at 90% thrust level, would reverify overall propellant-system operation, and effect of the engine plumes on the test stand’s flame deflector. Test 4, planned for 40sec at 90% thrust, would define propellant flow and flame-deflector hot spots. Firings 5 through 7, lasting 500 to 600sec, would duplicate Shuttle flight profiles; firings 8 through 10 would run for long durations with flight-rated 77:1 nozzles; and firings 9 through 13 would have the 35:1 nozzles reaffixed for engine throttling, to demonstrate the effect on flight profiles. Although the main engine had taken the blame for Shuttle launch-date slip, the external tank and solid-fuel rocket booster tests also had failed to support a March launch. (Marshall Star, May 24/78, 1, May 17/78, 1; JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 1; AvWk, May 22/78, 55; May 29/78, 49)
NASA announced that a frame structure for mounting experiments inside the Space Shuttle orbiter’s payload bay had arrived by ship in Savannah, and would be transported by tug to the vehicle assembly building at KSC. Called an OFT (orbital flight test) pallet, the structure, fitted with NASA-developed subsystems, would provide electrical and other support to the experiments. This was the first of two pallet systems destined for use on two of the first six Space Shuttle flight tests. Designed and assembled by British Aerospace Corp. for ESA as part of the joint ESA/NASA Spacelab program, the pallet structure was nearly identical to that of experiment pallets to be used in Spacelab missions beginning in 1981. It was 3m (10ft) long and constructed in a U-shape to fit into the 4.5m (15ft)-diameter orbiter payload bay. Later in the Spacelab program, five pallets would be available for space missions. MSFC was responsible for delivery and system integration of the OFT pallets. (NASA Release 78-182)
KSC reported that NASA’s 4-engine Jetstar aircraft had completed the second of five flight tests of the microwave scanning beam landing system (MSBLS) installed at the orbiter landing facility. The first three flight tests were to verify the system’s ability to land the unpowered Space Shuttle orbiter safely on the 15 000ft runway; the final two would be to commission (declare operational) the runway-landing system. Because orbiters could approach KSC from either the northwest or southeast, the center would have to commission the system twice. Each of the first tests had taken about a week, as the Jetstar had made daily 2hr passes over the runway at different altitudes and azimuths. Precision laser tracking system instrumentation that could locate an aircraft at distances of 14mi and altitudes of 100 to 20 000ft had locked on to special instrumentation in the Jetstar, continuously tape recording the Jetstar’s position while the MSBLS tape recorded the same data. The tapes had been fed into a computer and compared; any positional errors in the MSBLS could then be corrected, aligning the landing system. (Spaceport News, July 7/78, 2)
The Washington Post reported that, as a result of belated discovery that Soviet radar in Europe would interfere with two NASA satellites scheduled for launch in 1980 to communicate with orbiting spacecraft, NASA would have to spend $100 million to redesign the satellites’ electronic systems. NASA had awarded Western Union a $786 million contract to build six 50001b tracking and data-relay satellites (giant orbiting transmitters and receivers, each carrying two umbrellalike antennas weighing 501b apiece and unfurling in orbit to a diameter of 16.5ft) that would have replaced 60% of NASA ground-station antennas at an estimated saving of more than $100 million a yr. The 3-mo delay necessary for redesign was important because it would affect communications with the Space Shuttle; failure by the Pentagon and the CIA to warn NASA of the size and scope of Soviet communications interference in high-orbit regions had delayed discovery of the problem. NASA testimony before two Senate committees revealed that Soviet radars from the Baltic tp the Black Sea were emitting beams that converged high over the Atlantic and Pacific in the exact places NASA wanted to put the TDRS. Built to replace obsolete and expensive ground antennas at Ascension Island; Quito, Ecuador; Santiago, Chile; Guam; and Hawaii, the TDRS would improve communications by allowing ground controllers to talk to other satellites and Space Shuttle astronauts during more than 90% of each earth orbit. The electronic interference was said to have been unintentional. NASA “did not fully understand the environment and the effects it would have on the system,” said C. Curtis Johnson, satellite project manager at Goddard Space Flight Center. “Otherwise, we would have been more careful in the specifications of the system.” NASA had considered reducing the number of satellites on order from six to four to save $100 million, estimated cost of the redesign. (WPost, July 2/78, Al)
MSFC reported that electronic simulators for Space Shuttle main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tanks had passed tests designed to check the Shuttle’s avionics during simulated missions. JSC would conduct Shuttle-flight simulations in a Shuttle avionics integration laboratory (SAIL) for which MSFC engineers had provided a mated elements system. All Shuttle avionics would work together in the SAIL for the first time in Shuttle-flight simulation that would include part of the countdown under normal, abnormal, and certain failure conditions. (Marshall Star, July 5/78, 2)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch in a briefing announced that NASA’s FY79 budget would propose an 8% increase, providing “buying power” at about the 1978 level. The space science request had gone up about 27%, largely because of the Space Telescope and the Galileo (Jupiter-orbiter) project. Applications and aeronautics were each up about 16%. The proposed FY79 budget was $4,371 billion; the FY78 budget was $4,064 billion. The FY79 budget requested money for only four Space Shuttle orbiters; Frosch explained that the four orbiters would use two launch sites (KSC and Vandenberg AFB) and that NASA and the Air Force would phase out the existing stable of expendable boosters. Omitted was OV-101, the Enterprise, which would be used for approach and landing tests or for spare parts, or could be reconfigured in an emergency to spaceflight status. The major new start NASA had included in the budget was the “Out of Ecliptic” (OOE) or Solar-Polar, a cooperative venture with ESA to fly two satellites to look at the structure of the sun’s surface and at sunspots and poles. Other new starts NASA had requested were the HALO (halogen-occultation) experiments to study upper-atmosphere pollution, and the earth radiation-budget satellite system to study incoming and outgoing radiation. Key application continuations would be Landsat C and D, the Nimbus-G environmental satellite, Tiros-N next-generation weather satellite, and Seasat-A. Space Transportation Systems would receive $1 827 700 000; Space Science $513 200 000; Space and Terrestrial Applications $283 400 000; Aeronautics and Space Technology $375 400 000; Tracking and Data Acquisition $305 400 000. Manpower would remain at the FY78 level, with 45 positions shifted from MSFC to JSC, KSC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA budget briefing, Jan 21/78; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1; W Star, Jan 23/78, A-8; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 13; Jan 30/78, 28)
Early analysis of Space Shuttle liftoff-configuration vibration-test results at Marshall Space Flight Center had revealed two primary deviations, the Marshall Star reported: excessive movement in a forward section of the solid-fuel rocket boosters that contained guidance gyros, and a problem with transfer of loads (or forces) at the attach points between the boosters and external tank. After installing brackets to strengthen the boosters at the gyros location, NASA would conduct individual tests on that booster section at a test facility used for smaller components. Additional studies of load distribution at the attach points would determine if additional tests were necessary. After the most recent test phase, engineers found that about 80% of the test modes had verified predictions of hardware behavior during flight. The final test phase, beginning early in 1979, would simulate the Space Shuttle configuration just before burnout and separation of the solid-fuel rocket boosters at an altitude of about 43.5km (27mi). (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 1)
Fourteen satellites, four of them NASA’s and two starting the Intelsat V series of international communications satellites, were on the preliminary schedule of NASA launches for 1979, Aerospace Daily reported. These missions would use expendable launch vehicles, and NASA hoped that its most significant mission of 1979 would be number 15: first flight of the Spaed Shuttle. The tentative 1979 schedule would begin the transition of payloads from expendable launchers to the Space Shuttle. The Delta launch vehicle, workhorse of the 1970s, would carry only 4 of 1979’s 14 missions. Only three of the payloads were commercial, and half the 1979 launches would be from Vandenberg AFB and Wallops Island rather than KSC. The three launches scheduled in the first quarter of 1979 would use all three launch sites and three different launchers. Second-quarter payloads, all sponsored by organizations outside NASA, would also use all three launch sites. NASA planned five launches in the third quarter, which it hoped to close with the Space Shuttle’s first flight. (A/D Nov 21/78, 95)	,
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan Lovelace, addressing members of LeRC’s launch directorate, had termed the launch-vehicle team “probably the best in the world. The record speaks for itself,” the Lewis News reported. Lovelace had visited LeRC to discuss the role of launch vehicles in NASA’s overall plans and to be briefed on other Lewis work.The expendable vehicles would make 13 launches through 1980, when the Space Transportation System (STS) would begin carrying payloads into space. Members of the STS team responsible for launching the Space Shuttle who would work with the LeRC launch-vehicle group “can learn team development, discipline, and mental rigor from the exemplary record of the Lewis team,” Lovelace said. (Lewis News, June 9/78, 1)
The W. Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee had cut NASA’s budget, endangering 3 of the agency’s most ambitious plans for the next 5yr: to search for life beyond earth, to keep the Skylab space station from falling back to earth, and to fly a rare joint mission with West Germany around the north and south poles of the sun. The subcommittee had cut $1.4 million from NASA’s request for $2 million to begin a program called SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), in effect killing the program. A NASA official said the funds would not be enough “to start design work on the antennas we were going to use to listen for extraterrestrial signals.” The subcommittee also denied NASA $20.5 million to use for Space Shuttle astronauts to fire the abandoned Skylab space station into a higher and safer orbit. NASA considered the most critical cut to be $5 million from the $13 million sought to start in 1983 the solar-polar orbiter mission that would have used two spacecraft, one built by the U.S. and the other by West Germany. The West Germans had warned that any U.S. delay meant that Germany would drop out of the mission. (IVPost, May 5/78, A13)
NASA had been considering FY81 and 82 missions to send a probe toward Halley’s comet and land it on Tempel 2 comet, and one that would return a sample of Martian soil to earth, AvWk reported. Return of a Mars sample—to be studied first aboard the Space Shuttle in earth orbit—had become the key mission sought by scientists planning Mars strategy for NASA, who viewed a sample mission as a direct follow-on to the Viking mission in progress. NASA would have to make its decisions this summer on specific missions for FY82. NASA might request the comet mission for FY81, in view of the determination by NASA planners and scientists to send a spacecraft near Halley’s comet, even though a plan to rendezvous with the comet had disappeared when NASA was unable to obtain a Halley mission in FY79. The Halley/Tempel 2 comet mission would consist of a 1985 Space Shuttle launch of a vehicle using solar-electric propulsion to encounter Halley’s comet in Nov. 1985 about 93 million mi from earth, eject a probe that would dive into the head or nucleus area of the comet, and return atmospheric data. The mother spacecraft would continue a high-speed flyby of the comet, either passing through the comet’s tail or flying a safer trajectory in front of it. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 14)
MSFC reported that the USAF had redesignated an interim upper stage (IUS) for Space Shuttle as the “inertial upper stage,” to reflect its inertial-guidance capabilities as compared to the NASA-sponsored spinning solid upper stage. The new name would also indicate that DOD payloads would use the stage well into the 1980s. (Marshall Star, Feb 1/78, 1; Spaceport News, Feb 17/78, 3)
MSFC announced it had test-fired Sept. 6 at the White Sands test facility a version of the rocket engine that would maneuver the Space Shuttle orbiter. The lOsec-duration burn was the first firing of the 6000-lb thrust engine in combination with propellant tanks, feedlines, and other components of the orbital maneuvering subsystem (OMS) pod. OMS engines using nitrogen tetroxide and monomethyl hydrazine as oxidizer and fuel had been designed for reuse in up to 100 space missions, with 1000 starts for a total firing lifetime of 15hr. The engines would provide thrust for final orbital insertion at the end of launch phase, orbit circularization, orbit transfer, changing and rendezvous maneuvers, and deorbit bums. (Marshall Star, Sept 27/78, 2)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would be guest speaker Oct. 5 at a NASA-LaRC colloquium and a public lecture to commemorate NASA’s 20th anniversary. Slayton, one of the original seven astronauts selected in 1959 for Project Mercury and the only one still active in the space program, was orbital flight test manager for JSC’s Space Shuttle Project Office. He had been chief astronaut and director of flight crew operations before going into space in July 1975 with the ApolloSoyuz Test Project. Title of Slayton’s colloquium lecture would be “The Space Shuttle”; his public lecture, “Manned Space Flight: Past Triumphs, Future Challenges.” (LaRC Release 78-47; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 2)
The third of four Space Shuttle solid-propellant booster motors (DM-3) to be tested during the development phase had been fired successfully the previous week at Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Division in Brigham City, Utah, the Marshall Star reported. First of a prototype solid-fuel rocket motor (SRM) to be tested in flight configuration, the DM-3 included several features not tested in earlier firings: The motor aft skirt, containing a thrust-vector (directional) control-actuation system for the nozzle was on the motor for the first time. Also part of the overall test was recording data on the pressure inside the exhaust plume (flame), showing how much force would impact the launch platform at liftoff, that JSC and KSC would use in launch-facility studies. An onboard hydraulic system powered the thrust-vector control, moving the nozzle to change vehicle direction, for the first time in an SRM development test. Final event was a test of the linear-shaped explosive charge that would sever the nozzle aft-exit cone from the motor about 25mi above earth during Space Shuttle flights. (Marshall Star, Oct 25/78, 2; JSC Roundup, Oct 27/78, 1)
President Carter at a press conference with editors and news directors was asked: “There was a big spread in the local (Cape Canaveral) newspapers yesterday that you were ordering cutbacks in the space program. And there are also rumors going around the Kennedy Space Center that as soon as the shuttle becomes operational, you will order even more cutbacks in an austerity program. So my question is this: What kind of space policy can we expect from your administration?” The President said: “I think a very aggressive space policy. Anyone who reads the documents that have been prepared very carefully, very thoroughly by the Defense Department, the CIA, NSC, all those who will use them, including Agriculture, Commerce, and finally approved by me, would say that it’s a very sound program based on scientific need and actually capitalizing now upon the great exploratory efforts that have been made in space. We look upon the Space Shuttle as a way to change dramatic, very costly initiatives into a sound, progressive, and innovative program to utilize the technology that we have available to us. “We’ll continue interplanetary space exploration. We’ll have a greatly expanded effort concerning astronomy assessments of the earth, weather, communications. We’ll expand our effort to bring into the space program now, both foreign countries and also private firms in our nation. And I think it is accurate to say that the Space Shuttle, which is approaching completion—we hope the first orbital flights will be less than a year from now—will open up a broad vista of new uses for our technology. “So, we’re not going to minimize or decrease our commitment to space at all. I think the spectacular efforts to send men to the moon and to make the first orbital flights, and so forth, have been just a precursor to now the more practical and consistent and effective use of our space technology. “So, it’s not a matter of playing down the importance of space; it’s a matter of using what we’ve already learned in the most effective way.” (Press Doc, Oct 20/78, 1976)
The Naval Research Laboratory reported that a team of its space scientists had evaluated two new types of far-ultraviolet electrographic cameras. Designed for possible use in the Space Shuttle program to investigate radiation spectra of distant stars and other celestial objects, both cameras would use alkaline halide photocathodes having more sensitivity in the vacuum ultraviolet below 2000A, and higher angular resolution, than cameras previously used. One camera, the internal-Schmidt-optics type, had an opaque photocathode like those NRL had used in previous sounding-rocket flights, in the lunar camera on the Apollo 16 mission, and on Skylab 4. The new camera, flown on two sounding-rocket missions, had on the first flight obtained far-ultraviolet images of the Andromeda galaxy and on the second had recorded the North America nebula in Cygnus and far-ultraviolet spectra of stars in Cygnus. The other camera developed by NRL, a more conventional end-window type, had a semitransparent photocathode intended for possible use at the focus of a large telescope or for making spectrographs on the Spacelab. This large-format electrographic camera, instead of using a phosphor screen, would record directly on film the electrons emitted by the photocathode, allowing better resolution and photometric accuracy. NASA had supported development of the electrographic cameras. (NRL Release July 20/78)
In an interview on NASA’s 20th anniversary, JSC director Christopher Kraft, Jr., said that speeding up the space program would require private capital. “Production in space will become an important part of our competitive position and have a great deal to do with the balance of trade.” Speculating on the future at JSC, Kraft said he believed it “highly probable that we’ll see a well developed space industry in the next ten years. I have an intuitive feeling that the thing is going to mushroom on us.” First major project for JSC would be to make the space transportation system operational: “If we’re going to make this thing a routine operation, it’s got to go in a more matter-of-fact manner, more like an airline operation, than we’ve seen in the past.”Tor the first 6 or 10 Space Shuttle flights, center employees could expect a level of activity similar to that during Apollo and Skylab “but after that point we’re going to have to phase into this new mode.” He emphasized he wasn’t implying airline pilots would fly the Space Shuttle: “It will still require highly trained astronauts because it is a very complex vehicle. With development of the transport system, we will see a new kind of astronaut—techniques will go into space very rapidly. The need for specific talent and skills will develop.” Kraft predicted that, in the next few years, the U.S. would “recognize a need for permanency of man in space. The best way to do that is with a space station. We will probably develop a permanent space station that would be carried up as modules in the Space Shuttle.” (JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 4)	.
On the basis of a 4mo interagency review requested in June 1978, President Carter announced a U.S. civilian space policy that would set the direction of U.S. space efforts over the next decade. The policy would reflect a balanced strategy of applications, science, and technology development that would: 1.	emphasize space applications that would increase understanding of earth resources, climate, weather, pollution, and agriculture, with the private sector taking increasing responsibility for remote sensing and other applications; 2.	emphasize space science and exploration in a manner that would retain the vitality of U.S. space technology, yet would provide short-term flexibility to impose fiscal constraints when conditions warranted; 3.	take advantage of Space Shuttle flexibility to reduce the cost of operating in space over the next two decades to meet national needs; 4.	increase benefits for resources expended through better integration and technology transfer among national space programs and through more joint projects when appropriate, thereby increasing the return on the $100 billion investment in space to the benefit of the American people; 5.	assure U.S. scientific and technological leadership in space for the security and welfare of the nation, and continue R&D necessary to provide the basis for later programmatic decisions; 6.	demonstrate advanced technological capabilities in open and imaginative ways that would benefit developing as well as developed countries; 7.	foster space cooperation with nations by conducting joint programs; 8.	confirm U.S. support of the continued development of a legal regime for space that would assure its safe and peaceful use for the benefit of mankind. Since space was becoming a place to work, an extension of the environment, the U.S. would pursue future activities in space when it appeared that national objectives could most efficiently be met through space activities. Finally, the U.S. found it neither feasible nor necessary to commit itself to a high-challenge space-engineering initiative comparable to Apollo. As resources and manpower requirements for Space Shuttle phased down, the U.S. would be able to give greater attention to new space applications and exploration, continue programs at present levels, or contract them. To meet the specified objectives, an adequate federal budget commitment would be made. The U.S. would maintain a position of leadership in space science and planetary exploration, said the President, continuing a vigorous program of planetary exploration and using the space telescope and free-flying satellites to usher in a new era of astronomy, space systems to develop a better understanding of the sun and its interaction with the terrestrial environment through space systems, and the Space Shuttle and Spacelab to conduct basic research. (White House Release Oct 11/78)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, and Professor S. Dhawan, secretary of the department of space and chairman of the Space Commission, Government of India, had signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) July 18 for launch in 1981 from the Space Shuttle of India’s first national satellite, INSAT-1. INSAT-1, a multipurpose spacecraft in geostationary orbit, would provide India with domestic public telecommunications and direct TV broadcasting and meteorology services. This was the first MOU NASA had signed with a foreign government setting forth terms and conditions under which NASA would furnish Space Transportation System launch services on a reimbursable basis. (NASA Release 78-109)
AvWk reported that the Senate Commerce subcommittee on science and space had become the second congressional group to add another $4 million for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter to NASA’s FY79 budget, challenging President Carter’s decision to defer purchase. This equalled the amount provided earlier by the House Science and Technology Committee. Overall, the Senate subcommittee had increased NASA’s $4.371-billion budget request by $13 million, but failed to agree with some earlier House changes that had given NASA a $15.5-million increase. Among Senate subcommittee changes were $3 million for advanced manned-space flight programs, $4 million less than the House; language added to stress the importance of continuing lunar exploration; $2 million of $4 million deleted by OMB, restored for Spacelab experiments; and $3 million added for large space-structures work, making a total of $111.3 million for this item. (AvWk Apr 24/78, 27)
NASA announced the five Pioneer Venus atmospheric-entry craft reaching Venus and the companion craft in orbit around Venus were the highlights of its space-exploration activities in 1978, the agency’s 20th anniversary yr. NASA had conducted 20 launches in 1978, mainly for other organizations and agencies; it was the third yr in NASA history with a 100% launch-success record. It had also seen completion, of major milestones in preparing for crew-carrying Space Shuttle missions scheduled to begin late in 1979. (NASA Release 78-190)
NASA announced that data returned by the American-British-European international ultraviolet explorer (IUE) satellite had suggested the existence of a massive black hole at the center of globular clusters in earth’s galaxy. A group of scientists headed by Dr. Herbert Gursky and Dr. Andrea Dupree, both of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge, Mass., had examined six clusters, three of them x-ray sources. NASA, in cooperation with ESA and the British Science Research Council, had launched IUE in Jan. 1978 into a modified near-equatorial synchronous orbit to study a wide range of celestial objects in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Dr. Gursky said the onboard UV instruments had delivered unexpected information when they penetrated the background denseness of the clusters, which were like miniature galaxies 15 000 light-yr away, to observe the cluster core. What they saw, according to Gursky, was probably radiation from a group of 10 to 20 bright-blue stars orbiting the core: “These stars may well be orbiting a massive black hole the size or mass of one thousand solar systems,” he said. However, existence of a black hole was not certain, as rotation of the stars in relation to the center of the million-star cluster had to be studied first. If the stars were indeed orbiting a massive black hole, Gursky believed they were right on the edge or, if not, might be providing their own gravitational equilibrium. What surprised the observation team, Gursky said, was the ability of the short-wavelength instrumentation to cut clearly through the million-star cluster. “For the first time we are seeing in a clean way the center or core of those globular clusters, and we were surprised. You can see the clusters in visible light, there are lots of red giant stars there, which mask what is going on in the center. Now we have a tool, the IUE’s shortwave ultraviolet, capable of going for the first time right to the core through the whole cluster,” said Gursky. Although the team would continue to observe the six globular clusters, Gursky doubted their findings could be definite until NASA put the space telescope in orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1983. That telescope, using much more powerful instrumentation including short-wavelength ultraviolet, could study the blue stars in more detail. (NASA Release 78-122)
NASA announced plans to conduct the first full design-limit test of the parachute-recovery system for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters. A B-52 aircraft flying at an altitude of 21 000ft would drop a 48 0001b dummy booster over the National Parachute Test Range at El Centro, Calif. Three main parachutes plus the pilot and drogue parachutes would deploy to slow the rate of descent. Primary objective of the test would be to simulate at a high dynamic pressure the loads that the main cluster of parachutes would encounter in actual use. MSFC would be responsible for the solid-fuel rocket boosters; Martin Marietta Corp. had been under contract to develop the recovery system; and DFRC would be responsible for B-52 operations. (Marshall Star, Apr 19/78, 3; DFRC Release 10-78)
NASA had formally designated as Project Galileo a 1982 mission to orbit a spacecraft around Jupiter for at least 20mo and send a probe into its atmosphere, NASA Administrator Robert Frosch announced. The designation had honored the 16th century Italian astronomer, first to observe Jupiter by telescope and discover its moons. Galileo would be the first planetary spacecraft carried by the Space Shuttle and the first planetary spacecraft named for a person, although NASA had christened the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 3 (0A03) “Copernicus” after it was launched. (NASA Release 78-11)
A delegation from NASA Hq meeting in Paris with ESA’s Spacelab program board would attempt to overcome W. Germany’s objections to a proposed barter agreement, under which NASA would provide four, free Space Shuttle launches instead of paying cash for Spacelab hardware it had agreed to buy, Aerospace Daily reported. The barter deal, proposed by ESA in 1977, had met with opposition from ESA-member governments. Main objection, stated most strongly by W. Germany, was that a European commitment to four Shuttle flights would be premature because European plans to use the Space Shuttle and Spacelab ought to be definite before a barter would make sense. NASA had agreed to the barter instead of paying cash for a full set of Spacelab hardware it had agreed to buy years before. ESA felt that, under the barter, the industrial consortium headed by VFW-Fokker Erno could continue to work with European money at a far more satisfactory pace than could be expected if they relied on NASA money. In exchange for the roughly $100 million the Europeans would pay, NASA would provide four free flights for Spacelab, two for ESA and two for Germany. Observers said that W. Germany’s reservations centered on uncertainty about ESA’s Spacelab program, and that its own commitment to two flights was premature. If (as was likely) W. Germany’s Spacelab missions would not use the Shuttle-Spacelab system’s full capability although it had agreed to the dedicated launches, Germany would have to fill up the Space Shuttle or absorb the resulting losses. Other concerns were the rising costs of Space Shuttle flights, as launch costs in deutschmarks increased while the value of the dollar decreased. (A/D, Sept 12/78, 43) Pegasus 1, launched Feb. 16, 1965, had gathered micrometeoroid data for use in designing spacecraft; data collection had ceased Jan. 13, 1968. The Pegasus 1 assembly weighed about 10 430kg (23 0001b) and was 21m (70ft) long. The spacecraft, weighing about 1900kg (32001b), had remained attached to the empty S-IV stage and the instrument unit of the Saturn I launch vehicle. Neither the satellite nor the attached S-IV contained radioactive nuclear power sources or materials. Pegasus 2 was still in orbit; Pegasus 3 had reentered Aug. 4, 1969, over the Pacific Ocean. Aerospace Daily reported that Pegasus 1 and associated hardware had reentered earth’s atmosphere Sept. 17 over Angola. A NASA spokesman said there were no sightings or reports of debris. (NASA Release 78-141; Marshall Star, Sept 13/78, 2, 20/78, 2; DFRC X-Press, Sept 22/78, 2; A/D, Sept 20/78, 91)
JSC announced it would issue an RFP for management-consulting firms to answer questions such as: Would controlling 40 to 60 Space Shuttle flights per yr limit JSC’s ability to perform its basic R&D job? How could JSC keep costs low to encourage maximum use of the space transportation system? How would increased Shuttle activity affect JSC relationships with other NASA centers and contractors? If Shuttle launches reached the expected rate of one or two per wk by 1985, JSC officials wanted to be sure these operations did not deplete already limited personnel and other resources JSC would need to remain a major R&D arm of the space agency. JSC planners had drafted an operations plan for the full-use era of the Shuttle, whose onboard capabilities had exceeded those of previous spacecraft. The plan would reduce the number of flight controllers now assigned to real-time ground operations, and would increase the effort put into flight planning. Because JSC flight control work would affect NASA-wide operations and JSC would have large responsibilities in future spaceflight R&D, center management wanted an outside examination of the plan and alternatives before making a commitment. (JSC Roundup, Aug 18/78, 1)
JSC announced it had signed a contract with Itek Optical Systems Division of Lexington, Mass., for the Space Shuttle orbiter camera payload system. The $4 890 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover the first flight system with an option for a second. Planned for spaceflight on pallets and test racks built by NASA or ESA in the orbiter’s 15 by 65ft cargo bay, the system would be a flexible photographic array for earth-imaging surveys, remote sensing, and supplementing nonimaging systems. The second option (to produce a large-format camera for the USGS) would, if exercised, increase the contract value by $1.5 million. (JSC Release 78-42)
NASA announced it had selected four 2-man crews to begin training for Space Shuttle orbital flights. Those chosen were John Young, commander, with Robert Crippen, pilot; Joe Engle, commander, with Richard Truly, pilot; Fred Haise, commander, with Jack Lousma, pilot; and Vance Brand, commander, with Charles Fullerton, pilot. Young and Crippen would crew the first orbital flight test (OFT-1) scheduled for launch in spring 1979 from KSC, with Engle and Truly as backup.	, NASA had planned 6 orbital flight tests increasing in complexity to check out the first U.S. reusable spacecraft. On the first 4 flights, the 75-ton orbiter would make an unpowered landing on a dry lakebed at DFRC; thereafter, it would return to a specially constructed runway at the KSC launch site. NASA had also considered an OFT mission to boost Skylab into a higher orbit; prime and backup crews to implement such a plan would be selected from those already named. (NASA Release 78-44; JSC Release 78-15; DFRC X-Press, Mar 24/78, 4; JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 1)
Engineers from Rocketdyne and NASA were trying to determine why a liquid-oxygen heat exchanger on a Space Shuttle main engine had failed during a test at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., Av Wk reported. This was the first failure of a heat exchanger (an engine component converting liquid oxygen to gaseous oxygen to pressurize the Space Shuttle’s external propellant tank). Earlier in 1978 the Natl. Research Council’s Assembly of Engineering had noted that, although the exchanger had not encountered any difficulties, the system “poses a potential threat to the total shuttle system” from a single-point-failure standpoint. The committee said that, whereas redesign to add systems redundancy was impractical at that point, the system warranted continued examination for potential design improvements. NASA agreed with that assessment. Inflight heat-exchanger failure might start a serious fire or explosion that could result in loss of the spacecraft. Failure during the test had resulted in some engine damage, but none to the test-stand. Testing with different engines was continuing. (AvWk, Dec 18/78, 8)
ESA’s Geos2 had apparently suffered a collision in space that did not affect its payload performance but had badly disturbed experiments studying the low-energy plasma, Nature magazine reported. Geos 2 had become fully operational Aug. 2, with all onboard instruments functioning well; prospects for a full 2-yr, mission had been excellent until 07.13 GMT Aug. 5, when UHF telemetry temporarily shut off. The fault had seriously affected the low-energy plasma experiments: the electrical-reference potential of the spacecraft appeared to have jumped 12v for half of each 6-sec spin cycle. This seemed to be the result of slight damage to a solar-array panel that apparently shorted the output of a string of cells to the structure whenever they became illuminated. The design of Geos 2 had attempted to eliminate differential charging; the conductive indium oxide coating of the solar cells was supposed to offer a shorting path in the case of mechanical damage. The Space Shuttle might some day serve as a vacuum cleaner to gather the many manmade objects floating in space. In the meantime, the geostationary corridor had rapidly become crowded, and spacecraft designers would have to consider the probabilities and consequences of space collisions. (Nature, Aug 17/78, 631)
MSFC reported that 17 scientists had signed contracts to develop materials-processing experiments, first to be conducted in the weightless environment of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and partially based on results of investigations during the Apollo, Skylab, Apollo-Soyuz, and SPAR (space processing applications rocket) programs. Among the products of interest to the scientists were improved medicines; electrolyte materials for smaller, higher capacity batteries; and larger, more perfect crystals for electronic applications. The $12 million program, covering a 5yr initial period, should produce significant scientific results for developing specific useful materials and products in space. NASA had aimed the programs at science and technology in both research and manufacturing activities leading to privately funded materials-processing in space. Five of the 17 scientists would have a chance to fly their experiments on an early orbital test of the Shuttle in a materials-experiments assembly (MEA) package that would not only produce valuable scientific data but would also define further experiments and hardware needed before the first extended flight on Spacelab or Space Shuttle. A Shuttle satellite-deployment mission would fly four of the MEA experiments again, along with five others; the fifth would fly again on the third Spacelab mission devoted almost exclusively to materials processing. Four more of the scientists would have experiments on this mission. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 1)	'
NASA reported that John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had testified before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on Space Shuttle status. Yardley said a detailed program review of cost, schedule, and performance had indicated substantial progress that year. He cited successful completion of approach and landing tests of Orbiter 101 (Enterprise), which had been shipped to MSFC for mated ground-vibration tests; mission-duration test firings of the main engines at the rated power level; and completion of the first phase of the 3-engine main-propulsion configuration testing. A review of the Shuttle schedule had shown that all program elements could be ready for a Sept. 28, 1978, first manned orbital flight (FMOF), if all planned tests were successful and if adjustments to the orbiter’s maneuvering-system pod and the solid-fuel rocket motors were complete. Unforeseen problems or unsuccessful tests could delay the schedule; however, NASA believed the probability of flying the FMOF during CY1979 was high. Significant Shuttle problems disclosed by the review had been in the main engine and in vehicle weight. Engine development, although slower than desired, had produced a design that, if tests went well, could be flight-certified by Sept. 1979. The weight problem had not affected early flight tests, but might hamper both the Galileo mission to Jupiter and certain USAF missions. Measures to reduce weight in the orbiter and external tank could satisfy all mission requirements until mid-1984, and performance augmentation options now under study could meet Shuttle mission requirements after that time. NASA would need additional funding to support the revised FMOF schedule, and to complete the Shuttle design and development test and evaluation program. Funding requirements had arisen not from any single program element but from several items (including the main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, external tank, and thermal-protection system), on which more work was needed than had been estimated. Shuttle development costs in FY79 and FY80 had exceeded previous plans, and current estimates of total Shuttle development costs were 8 to 9% higher than the earlier estimated $5.2 billion (1971 dollars). NASA had discussed Shuttle funding with OMB .as it affected the FY80 budget, and had reviewed with DOD the potential impact if additional Shuttle development funds were unavailable in FY79. Preliminary assessments had shown the first FMOF would be delayed an additional 6 to 9mo beyond the Sept, date, and delivery of production orbiters would be delayed up to lyr. (NASA Release 78-145; NASA testimony, US Sub-comm on Sp Sci & Appl, Sept 28/78; JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 1; Marshall Star, Sept 27/78, 1)
NASA announced that the Egyptian government had reserved four small self-contained payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. At the NASA Hq ceremony July 13, Dr. Mohamed Shakar, minister of the embassy of Egypt, and Dr. Farouk El-Baz, research director for the Smithsonian Institution’s Center for Earth and Planetary Studies, gave NASA officials a down payment to reserve Space Shuttle space. The payloads called “getaway specials,” each weighing no more than 90kg (2001b) and no larger than 0.5m3 (5ft3), would fly on a space-available basis. NASA had received payments for about 240 small payloads so far; purchasers had included private individuals, commercial firms, and foreign countries. The Egyptian purchase marked the first foreign educational use of a Shuttle payload, as Egyptian students would compete in proposing experiments for the Shuttle missions. Dr. El-Baz would direct evaluation of the proposals. (NASA Release 78-107)
The Marshall Star reported that MSFC had begun ground-vibration tests of the Space Shuttle in its liftoff configuration in the dynamic-test stand, first test of the Space Shuttle with all elements mated in flight configuration. The test phase would run through November. Test-preparation crews from Bendix worked around the clock to prepare the stand, the Shuttle, and the shaker systems for the second phase of ground-vibration testing. The Space Shuttle’s weight rested on the aft skirts of the two solid-fuel rocket boosters bolted to hydrodynamic support systems at the base of the test tower. When pressurized, the support systems would allow adequate vertical, lateral, and rotational movement of the entire Space Shuttle. Test engineers had predetermined a total of 83 shaker positions for the combination of Space Shuttle elements; using a spacecraft computers system to drive the shakers, the engineers could select different positions to determine vehicle response. The computerized system would automatically control up to 24 shaker channels from the 61 that were available, rated at 10001b, 1501b, and 501b force. (Marshall Star, Oct 25/78, 1)
French and West German space officials had told a House committee that increasing costs would limit use of the U.S. Space Shuttle and the European Spacelab, Av Wk reported. A NASA official had admitted that Spacelab could have been built less expensively under a single nation’s management, but denied that Space Shuttle operational costs had increased prohibitively. Wolfgang Finke, director of West Germany’s Dept, of Space and Transportation, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that not only had the price of conventional launches increased steadily, but also “the new space transportation system will not revolutionize the cost of space transportation. On the contrary, the estimates for the fare of a Shuttle roundtrip and the fringe costs going with it went up considerably, putting a real brake on our more ambitious plans to utilize the new system.” As for Spacelab, Finke said the results of a West German materials-processing experiment would need a series of experiments for confirmation, with a cost level “well above the range of traditional materials research costs.” Hubert Curien, president of the French space agency, said that “anticipated cost of Spacelab experiments now reaches such heights that their funding raises very serious problems for national budgets and constitutes a very severe limitation.” Finke noted in conclusion that administrative costs of international cooperation had increased costs of the overall project. A NASA official agreed that if Spacelab had been built in the U.S. under one management, total cost would have been less. (Av-Wk, May 22/78, 28)
NASA reported that a flight-configured Space Shuttle engine fired in tests at NASA’s Bay St. Louis, Miss., facility had exceeded 5000sec, the level to be met by a production engine to certify the main propulsion system for manned flight. Testing of the Space Shuttle main engine had increased dramatically, both in number of tests and time accumulated, since Aug. 12, 1978. Two engines had each accumulated approximately 7100sec of testing time, putting total engine-testing time over 25 OOOsec in 342 tests. Among these were five consecutive runs of 520sec, the length of time needed to put the Shuttle into orbit, on one engine at rated power level. Preliminary flight certification, which required a flight engine to have run 5000sec, was expected in the spring of 1979. Full-duration testing of the complete main propulsion system (a cluster of three engines) would resume in early 1979 when the first manned orbital flight configuration engines would become available. (NASA Release 78-144; JSC Release 78-40; Marshall Star, Sept 13/78,1)
Europe’s space industry was looking beyond Spacelab to future programs that would maintain technological advances and employment as well as joint development activities with the U.S. in manned spaceflight, AvWk reported. With delivery of the first Spacelab scheduled for next yr, European industry said U.S. delay in ordering a second flight unit might disrupt skilled manpower employment and management performance. Also, European industry officials had told NASA that its charges for Space Shuttle flights were too high, and that Europe should have special treatment in Space Shuttle/Spacelab use. W. Germany’s ERNO, Spacelab prime contractor, had proposed to NASA and ESA a second Spacelab as the basis for a barter agreement [see Sept. 12] under which costs of the second Spacelab would offset future Space Shuttle services for Europe. An ERNO spokesman had warned that NASA should not increase Spacelab 2 technical requirements to a point where the cost to Europe’s space industry was unreasonable. On the other hand, the barter agreement should not give the U.S. full autonomy in operating Spacelab or producing future Spacelabs. Commercialization of the Space Shuttle was essential, because “twenty million dollars (1975 price basis) for a standard Shuttle launch and possibly the same amount for a standard Spacelab flight service Eire hardly suited to arouse the interest” of European users, particularly industry, the spokesman said. (AvWk, Oct 23/78, 17)
RCA Americom Communications, Inc., announced it would launch its Satcom-3 domestic comsat in Dec. 1979, more than a yr earlier than planned, and would study procurement of a fourth comsat either based on current design or the first of a new generation of spacecraft, Aerospace Daily reported. Satcom-3 previously appeared on a Space Shuttle schedule for launch in mid-1981. Latest plans called for a Delta launch like Satcoms 1 and 2; the Shuttle reservation would be assigned to Satcom-4. RCA Americom said it was advancing the Satcom-3 launch because traffic on the first 2 satellites was nearing capacity particularly in cable television, now using 900 earth stations, with 1400 to 1500 expected by the end of 1979. Satcom-3 would have the same 24-transponder capacity as the first two satellites, but would carry spare transponders and additional stationkeeping fuel to exceed its planned 8-yr lifetime. The company had asked the FCC for permission to station Satcom-3 at synchronous altitude over the equator at 132°W to serve the 50 states, mainly for cable-TV relays. RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div., which had built the three Satcoms, estimated the cost of the third spacecraft and its launch at $40 million. (A/D, Nov 5/78, 150)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel had recommended elimination of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster’s thrust-vector control (TVC) system and modification or replacement of the Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power unit (APU), Aerospace Daily reported. The panel said its proposals should make the Shuttle a safer system during its operational phase. With “emphasis shifting to the problems of reusable operation from those of technical breakthrough,” it said in a summary report, “. . . it is not too soon for NASA to review the Space Shuttle design from this point of view.” The report concluded that the recommendations were “not reservation on the panel’s part as to the readiness for SS-1,” but rather said the Shuttle “will fly well, and probably on the scheduled date.” Modifications could be expensive, and panel members noted that such work might absorb the expected “Shuttle dividend,” funds from declining Shuttle development costs that might be devoted to other programs. NASA Administrator Robert Frosch responded that NASA might apply the panel’s proposals in designing its next space transportation system, instead of modifying the present system. (A/D, Dec 5/78, 148)
The USAF reported it had mapped and measured on the most detailed Shuttle models tested so far at AEDC the air pressures and loads to be encountered by the Space Shuttle during launch. The 6wk program had been the first to use mockups of the complete Shuttle orbiter, external fuel tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters in AEDC’s 16-ft transonic wind tunnel. NASA would compare results of these comprehensive tests with data obtained at AEDC and elsewhere on smaller, less detailed models. NASA would follow up on the AEDC transonic tests with supersonic tests of the same models at Ames Research Center. AEDC had recorded surface pressures on a 3% scale model with 1646 measuring points scattered over its surface, one of the most comprehensive pressure models ever used there. It had tested a 2% scale model in the aerodynamic-force part of the study using 9 measuring instruments, the most ever installed on an AEDC model; and had measured air pressure at 25 points around the base of the Shuttle model. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 78, 4)
NASA had officially changed the date of the first Space Shuttle orbital flight from Mar. to June of 1979 because of engine problems, the NY Times reported. NASA said the June date would be tentative until additional tests confirmed that the Shuttle’s three main engines were free of problems. There had been signs the engine situation was improving. Launch date had been important because of NASA’s plan to use the Shuttle to rescue Skylab from an uncontrolled fall to earth next year, possibly by early summer. (NYT, May 18/78, B-10)
INTELSAT announced it would use both the Space Shuttle and ESA’s Ariane launch vehicle to orbit later spacecraft in the Intelsat V series. INTELSAT’s board of governors had ordered two Shuttle launches from NASA and one Ariane launch from ESA. Worth a minimum of $82 million, the orders would cover the orbiting of the 5th, 6th, and 7th satellites in the Intelsat V series during 1981-82. The Shuttle would give INTELSAT its first experience with reusable launch vehicles; Ariane would be INTELSAT’s first use of a non-U.S. launch vehicle. INTELSAT said its decision was difficult because neither vehicle had been proven in operation. The organizations had scheduled its earlier Intelsat V satellites, like the then-current Intelsat IV and IV-A satellites, for launch on NASA’s Atlas Centaur. The agreement had provided for an Atlas Centaur backup for the series, should the first Shuttle not be available. (INTELSAT Release 78-34-1)
NASA announced plans to launch the Canadian comsat Telesat-D (to be called Anik-B in orbit) from ETR on a Delta no earlier than Dec. 15, 1978. Telesat/Canada would reimburse NASA $19.2 million for launch support under a March 11, 1978, contract. Telesat-D would be the fourth domestic comsat launched by NASA for Telesat/Canada, which owned and operated the satellites. Telesat-D would replace Anik AI, launched in Nov. 1972 and positioned at 109°W over the equator south of California. With a 7-yr design life, Telesat-D would provide point-to-point voice, TV, and data communications traffic to Canada’s 10 provinces. In addition to 12 commercial channels in the 6 and 4GHz frequency bands, Telesat-D would offer 4 channels in the 12 and 14GHz frequencies; the en	be leased to Canada’s liepartment of Communications for 2yr with an option for a 2yr extension. CDC would devote these channels to social experiments such as telemedicine, tele-education, teleconferencing, and Eskimo broadcasting to demonstrate how satellites can reach remote locations with small ground stations (a use begun by the communications technology satellite Cts, a joint U.S.-Canadian experiment). These channels would also carry out purely technical assignments to gather data on signal propagation and on power generation and usage. NASA planned to launch Anik-Cl and -C2 spacecraft (Telesat-E and -F) on the Space Shuttle in 1981, to replace Anik A2 and A3 (Telesat B and Q launched in April 1973 and May 1975, respectively. (NASA Release 78-184; MOR M-492-201-78-04 [prelaunch], Dec. 12/78)
MSFC reported that a patent had been issued for a reel mechanism and associated control system invented by MSFC employees Ralph Kissel and Charles Rupp for the Shuttle tethered satellite system (TSS). NASA had considered the TSS as a means of enhancing Space Shuttle performance of scientific investigations and operational activities in space. The system would use a flexible tether line to deploy and retrieve subsatellites at distances as great as 100km from the orbiter. NASA had judged the mechanism and control-system invention would contribute significantly to overall feasibility of the TSS concept. (Marshall Star, May 24/78, 4)
LaRC reported NASA had appointed astronaut Donald Slayton to manage the orbital-flight test (OFT) program for Space Shuttle at JSC. One of the original 7 Mercury astronauts and a member of the U.S. crew of the Apollo-Soyuz test project, Slayton would be responsible in his new position for all mission-unique activities associated with the 6 Shuttle orbital-flight tests scheduled to begin in the spring of 1979. He would represent program manager Robert Thompson across the total program to ensure timely and appropriate resolution of all OFT mission-unique issues. (LaRC Release 78-12)
NASA announced it had selected 15 Space Shuttle pilot-astronaut candidates and 20 mission-specialist candidates as its eighth group of astronauts, including 6 women, 3 blacks, and an American of Japanese descent. The first women and minority astronauts could be in orbit within 3yrs. Selection criteria for the more than 8000 applicants had been motivation, educational background, and work experience. All but one of the 15 pilot candidates and 7 of the 20 mission-specialist candidates had come from the U.S. military services. Of the 35 selectees, 10 were from the Air Force, 9 from the Navy, and 1 each from the Marine Corps and the Army. The mission specialists selected had come from medical, biological, earth sciences, physical and chemical sciences, and engineering disciplines. The number of selections had been keyed to the expected need for Shuttle crews to supplement the 17 pilot and 10 scientist astronauts now on flight status in Houston. The new astronauts would begin 2 years of training July 1 at Johnson Space Center in Houston. ' Selected to train as mission specialists were Anna Fisher, Shannon Lucid, Judith Resnick, Sally Ride, Margaret Seddon, Kathryn Sullivan, USAF Maj. Guion Bluford, USMC Capt. James Buchli, USAF Maj. John Fabian, Navy Lt. Dale Gardner, Terry Hart, Steven Hawley, Jeffrey Hoffman, Ronald McNair, USAF Capt. Richard Mullane, George Nelson, USAF Capt. Ellison Onizuka, Army Maj. Robert Stewart, Norman Thagard, James Van Hoften; as pilot astronauts, Navy Lt. Cdr. Daniel Brandenstein, Navy Lt. Cdr. Michael Coats, USAF Maj. Richard Covey, Navy lt. Cdr. John Creighton, Navy Lt. Robert Gibson, USAF Maj. Frederick Gregory, Stanley Griggs, Navy Cdr. Frederick Hauck, Navy Lt. Cdr. Jon McBride, USAF Capt. Steven Nagel, USAF Maj. Francis Scobee, USAF Capt. Brewster Shaw, Jr., USAF Capt. Loren Shriver, Navy Lt. Cdr. David Walker, and Navy Lt. Cdr. Donald Williams. (NASA press conference Jan 16/78; Marshall Star, Jan 17/78, 1; W Star, Jan 17/78, A-5; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 19)
NASA announced it had invited scientists to submit proposals for life sciences experiments to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle and Spacelab in the early 1980s. The experiments would study physical effects of spaceflight on humans and other living systems, and would test equipment and procedures. These experiments would be performed in the pressurized cabin of the Space Shuttle orbiter, in a pressurized Spacelab module, or (if requiring continuous exposure to the space environment) attached to an unpressurized Spacelab pallet. Proposed investigations would have to meet one or more of the following life sciences objectives: investigate and understand physiological, performance, and biochemical changes observed in humans who had flown in space; identify and investigate significant biological phenomena that might occur during or after exposure to the space environment; and/or test and demonstrate under operational conditions the equipment and procedures that would be needed by the NASA life sciences program. (NASA Release 78-64)
JSC announced that technicians had installed four radiator panels and a flash evaporator system (FES) in a chamber of Building 32 to prepare for Nov. tests of the Space Shuttle heat rejection system. Radiator panels that would reject heat and maintain a livable temperature for Space Shuttle crews would contain Freon. 21 flowing continuously through system loops, picking up heat throughout the ship and depositing cold; heat would be pumped to a central location and vented into space. From 14 000ft to orbit, the FES would cool the ship; in orbit, it would supplement panels that would open and, using ship’s maneuvers, reflect heat. The Nov. tests would close off the 120-ft-high chamber and pump liquid nitrogen through tubes in the black walls, dropping temperatures to -320°; infrared lamps would then increase temperatures to the level required in space. This would be first testing of all system components as a unit. (JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 1)
NASA reported it had amended a contract with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Inti. Corp. to procure 9 Space Shuttle main engines, in addition to the 7 already on order. The amendment had authorized Rocket-dyne to manufacture and test the 9 engines during a 180-day period in which prices would be negotiated. Estimated cost of the amendment had been $250 million. The 9 engines would support the Space Shuttle program through the first 4 orbiters approved for production; the present contract had covered engines for the first Space Shuttle flight scheduled for 1979 and had included 3 ground-test engines and 1 spare. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 3)
LaRC announced it would hold a conference on safety, occupational medicine, and environmental health May 15-18, with about 60 representatives from all NASA centers attending. Welcoming remarks by Fred Bowen, LaRC technical manager for management operations, would cover audiometric testing, types of hearing loss, rehabilitative techniques, noise protection equipment, and computerized treadmill data. LaRC Director Donald Hearth’s remarks on the second day would include discussion of workmen’s compensation, disability, continuation of pay status, and LaRC’s occupational medicine and environmental health and safety programs. The May 17 agenda would cover space suit testing, new approaches in workplace health standards, fire protection, Space Shuttle safety challenges, the kinetic method of lifting, and system safety in wind-turbine generators. On May 18 participants would discuss nuclear safety in space systems, Space Shuttle occupant safety, and new firefighting equipment. (LaRC Release 78-28)
Federal Aviation Administrator Langhorne Bond said the British Civil Aviation Authority and the British Plessey Corporation had been “using the press and other news media to deliberately mislead and confuse the world aviation community” about a U.S.-backed all-weather approach and landing system. The FAA administrator said the time reference scanning-beam/microwave landing system (TRSB/MLS) had been developed in a “goldfish bowl” from the outset with wide public participation; he labelled as “simply not true” British allegations that the U.S. had conducted a misleading test program or issued false data, and that the TRSB system was unsafe. Bond said the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), at its worldwide meeting in April, would probably select TRSB as the international system and that the campaign to discredit TRSB had been a last-minute effort by the British and Plessey to influence ICAO’s decision. (FAA Release 9-78; W Star, Jan 7/78, A-l) During January: NASA announced it had tentatively selected 18 scientists to participate in the design and early operational phases of the Space Telescope project. The 10-ton observatory to be launched by the Space Shuttle in 1983 would make astronomical observations deeper into space and in more detail than ever before. The scientists would head teams representing investigations definition (design and develop the focal plane instruments and carry out major scientific investigations); astrometry science (ensure that a fine guidance system could perform the required astrometric functions); faint-object camera science (U.S. members to assist ESA’s team); telescope science (interpret performance requirements in terms of telescope design specifications); data and operations (establish instrument specifications for control system, flight operation, and ground data handling); and interdisciplinary science (provide a broad scientific overview of ST development). A Space Telescope science working group to give scientific guidance to the project would consist of team leaders, 2 telescope scientists, interdisciplinary scientists, and appropriate project personnel. MSFC had management responsibility for the telescope; GSFC would manage operations and the development of scientific instruments. (NASA Activities, Jan 78, 9)
NASA announced it had selected Teledyne Brown Engineering, Huntsville, Ala., for negotiations leading to award of a contract for payload/missions integration for the sixth Space Shuttle orbital flight test and for the first 3 Spacelab missions to be managed by MSFC. An experiment-integration contractor, Teledyne Brown would ensure that the group of experiments for each mission was compatible with the Space Transportation System scheduled to carry it into orbit. The contract would provide for manpower, materials, and associated services required for integration and operation of Spacelab payloads. Flights scheduled during 1980 to 1981 would offer opportunities for scientific investigations on Spacelab missions in the planning stage with scientists from throughout the world participating. These missions would give scientists the first chance to go into space as payload specialists and conduct their investigations in earth orbit. (Marshall Star, Feb 22/78, 1)
In its “Profile of a Mission,” Lewis News reported that a new era of opportunity in space had become available. The Space Transportation System (the Space Shuttle) would open the door to activities ranging from experiments in basic research on physical and chemical process, to using the weightlessness and vacuum of space as an environment for manufacturing products. LeRC’s Space Experiments Integration Office (SEIO) would help principal investigators proposing experiments that needed a space environment, by preventing duplication of effort and standardizing paperwork required for project approval. SEIO had management responsibility for one facility and four experiments, three of which were to fly on the long-duration exposure facility (LDEF) managed at LaRC: —The advanced photovoltaic experiment (APEX) on the LDEF consisted of three related approaches to investigating the solar spectrum and the effect of exposure to space on advanced photovoltaics and materials. For the first time, space-calibrated solar cells would be available as laboratory standards for assessing performance of new solar cells. —The space power experiment (SPEX) on the LDEF would evaluate the use of commercially available components for a space-power system. With three LDEF trays carrying commercially available terrestrial solar cells and a fourth carrying commercial power electronics and batteries, successful operation of these components in space could significantly reduce costs of future space-power systems. —In the ion-beam texturing and surface-coating experiment on the LDEF, which would expose such surface samples to launch stress and near-earth space, ground tests before and after exposure would record the optical properties of the surface of each sample and compare durability of ion-beam-textured surfaces with that of state-of-the-art surfaces. If the ion-beam-textured surfaces exhibited higher durability, use of thermal-control coatings for spacecraft would increase. —The cryogenic fluid-management experiment (CFME), a payload attached to a Spacelab pallet, would obtain long-duration low-gravity engineering data on systems for storage/acquisition/supply of liquified gas (subcritical) to verify the possibility of successfully operating such a system in space. The zero-gravity combustion facility (OGCF), a versatile reusable assembly that would permit a Spacelab experimenter to study combustion free of earth’s buoyancy forces, would carry out tests ranging from rapid burning to long-term smoldering of a variety of liquid, solid, and gaseous fuels. {Lewis News, June 9/78, 3)
NASA announced that 11 of its 16 launches scheduled for 1979 would be reimbursables (launched by NASA for other agencies or corporations). Paying customers included DOD, NOAA, the United Kingdom, Western Union Corp., ComSatCorp, and RCA. As in 1978, most of the 1979 launches would emphasize use of space for the direct benefit of people: communications, environmental, and meteorological information. Activities in 1979 would include the first launch and orbital flight of the Space Shuttle; Jupiter and Saturn encounters by two Voyager spacecraft; and the Pioneer 11 flyby of the rings of Saturn. NASA would launch the Space Shuttle from KSC into its first orbital flight Sept. 28 with astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen as crew. They would land 53hr later at DFRC. The 1979 schedule would begin with two launches Jan. 25: DOD’s spacecraft charging at high altitudes. (SCATHA) from Cape Canaveral, and a stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE-A) from Wallops Flight Center. In April NASA would launch NOAA-A for NOAA and Navy-20 for DOD from Vandenberg AFB. It would launch in May FltSatCom-B from Cape Canaveral, and UK-6 for the United Kingdom from WFC; Westar-C in July and Intelsat V-A in Aug., both from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp; in Sept., its third high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-C from Cape Canaveral, and its Magsat-A from Vandenberg; in Oct., the solar maximum mission (SMM-A) from Vandenberg. NASA would launch Intelsat V-B from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp in Nov.; in Dec., NOAA-B for NOAA from Vandenberg, and RCA-C for RCA from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-196)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
NASA officials had unveiled the prototype of a parachute-cleaning machine strongly resembling a carwash operation, Today reported. If approved, the facility would become part of KSC’s system to refurbish Space Shuttle parachutes. Each of the Shuttle’s two solid-fuel rocket boosters jettisoned into the Atlantic Ocean shortly after launch would carry 4 nylon parachutes; both the boosters and the parachutes were designed for recovery and return to KSC for another launch. The carwash-type facility would rid the parachutes of salt water before washing and drying them in large machines. The current system had rinsed parachutes in the same water they were washed in; the new system would save some of the 20 OOOgal of water now used by the washing machine. In the carwash-type system, parachutes would move along an overhead rail, rinsed 3 times by water sent through high-pressure nozzles. The 3 main parachutes were 230ft long and 115ft in diameter, weighing 16001b dry and 20001b wet; the fourth parachute measured 145ft in length and 54ft in diameter, and would weigh 12001b dry and 14001b wet. On completion, the new system should require 2hr to wash and 2hr to dry each parachute. (Today, Mar 8/78, 8A)
Av Wk reported MSFC’s intent to demonstrate within 5yr the assembly of a large space structure in low-earth orbit, to exploit Space Shuttle capability. MSFC had proposed assembling a 10 x 30m (33 x 98ft) structure in space to demonstrate fabrication and assembly techniques, followed closely by a Space Shuttle mission to demonstrate deployment of a large antenna 50 to 200m (164 to 656ft) in diameter. The USAF Space and Missile System Organization (SAMSO) had also expressed interest in flying a Shuttle-based antenna-deployment test before 1985. Although most U.S. aerospace companies had been working on structures in space, Grumman Aerospace Corp. had been in the forefront in large space-structures work; MSFC had awarded Grumman four of six contracts for large space structures development, and JSC had awarded it at least one significant contract. MSFC’s approach had been to define tools and procedures needed, and to evaluate whether such operations would be possible and to what degree. Most building-block study for large space structures had assumed the use of open-truss aluminum beams joined by diagonal and cross braces, with beam sections lm (3.2ft) wide and length varying according to mission. Grumman had just begun to demonstrate a beam-building machine [see Apr. 12]. Both NASA and Grumman had been scheduled to evaluate the beams for deviations from specifications such as straightness or basic strength, and for individual subsystems such as the automatic welders used to affix the cross sections. In Sept. Grumman would transfer the beam-builder to MSFC for tests of beam manufacturing in a vacuum, to simulate space conditions. (A vWk, June 12/78, 49)
KSC announced award to the International Hydrodynamics Co., Vancouver, British Columbia, of a contract for systems to recover expended Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket-booster (SRB) casings. The $1 million contract would cover fabrication, testing, and delivery of the recovery systems with associated equipment and hardware. Recovery of SRB casings would mean sizeable savings to the Shuttle program; estimating 19 reuses of a casing, the savings realized by reuse (including cost of retrieval and refurbishment) would be $47 million. (KSC Release 37-78)
NASA announced it had awarded TRW Defense and Space Systems Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., a contract for the materials processing in space (Spacelab) program at an estimated cost of approximately $9.7 million. TRW would be prime contractor for various aspects of the Materials Processing in Space (MPS)-program, the contract to cover the initial phase of the MPS Spacelab-payloads project expected to begin in September 1978 and continue through 1981. TRW would develop (and support the operation of) specialized and general purpose payload systems that would accommodate a variety of different materials processing experiments during recurring earth orbit missions of the Space Shuttle. NASA had selected the first series of experiments from among proposals by scientists from the U.S. and numerous foreign countries. Objectives of the MPS program were to study new or improved processes and to identify candidate products of initial commercial interest: electronic materials, metals, glasses, and certain chemicals produced by processes such as crystal growth, solidification, and containerless processing. MSFC would manage operational aspects of the program. (NASA Release 78-103; ARC Astrogram, July 27/78, 3)
Aerospace Daily reported that House-Senate appropriations conferees would allow NASA to reprogram FY79 funds from Space Shuttle pro-, duction into development as it had done with $100 million in 1978, if the agency first asked Congress for a budget supplement to restore the production money. Reporting on a Sept. 14 compromise $4.35 billion NASA money bill, the conferees promised that NASA would receive “prompt consideration” of a supplemental request. The reprogramming suggestion seemed to address the major concern: whether or not NASA could increase the rate of development spending ahead of supplement approval. Under a reprogramming, production would be slowed pending restoration of funds, but development could proceed at a rate consistent with the expected extra money. This arrangement had followed up on an earlier House provision dropped by the conferees, allowing NASA to set up a reserve fund for Shuttle development by taking $30 million from three science programs. The conferees had approved NASA’s $20.5 million request for development of a teleoperator retrieval system, with the proviso that NASA get approval from both appropriations committees before obligating more than $10 million of the money, and that the balance of $10.5 million be available “only for Space Shuttle funding requirements in the absence of committee approval.” Both committees had been skeptical of the TRS proposal because its use in a Skylab mission might be impossible in view of Shuttle delays and the deterioration of Skylab’s orbit. Conferees also had agreed to add $500 000 to the money bill to start a Stereosat program; the House had added $4 million, the Senate nothing. The conference had compromised on an add-on of $2 million for a solar-power satellite system, ratifying the House cut of $5 million from expendable launch vehicles. It had also eliminated funds for the SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence) program. (A/D, Sept 15/78, 65)
NASA announced it had selected astronauts Dr. Owen Gar-riott and Dr. Robert Parker to be mission specialists on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the early 1980s. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in crew-activity planning, consumables usage, and Space Transportation Systems/payload interaction. The 7-day flight, a verification test of Spacelab systems and Spacelab/orbiter interfaces, would carry about 40 experiments. Garriott had flown on the second manned Skylab mission of 56da duration; Parker had been a mission scientist and spacecraft communicator during Apollo and Skylab. Ten European nations, under agreements with the European Space Agency, had developed and financed Spacelab to be carried in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter as a fully furnished laboratory adapted to the weightless environment of space and pressurized for working without space suits. Spacelab 1 would also carry two payload specialists (one European and one U.S. citizen) to operate the scientific instruments. (NASA Release 78-121; JSC Release 78-34; JSC Roundup, Aug 4/78, 1; Marshall Star. Aug 16/78, 3; DSFCX-Press, Aug 11/78, 3; Langley Researcher, Aug 11/78, 1)
AvWk reported that the Soviet Union had labeled the U.S. Space Shuttle a killer-satellite development, and U.S. officials planning talks with the USSR had been debating how to refer to the Space Shuttle in these discussions. NASA had been concerned about the effect on the Space Shuttle program of antisatellite negotiations, although U.S. negotiators had stated they had no intention of trading away Space Shuttie capability for USSR concessions. Informal negotiations on limitation of antisatellite-weapons tests had been set for May; U.S. officials said that NASA must have expected the Space Shuttle to be part of antisatellite discussions. As the Soviets had not cited the Space Shuttle by name, but rather as a “manned system of dual use,” U.S. officials had not decided whether the concessions sought by the USSR would be on overall Shuttle capability, on individual Shuttle capabilities, or on individual potentially antisatellite Shuttle missions. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 17)
The USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) announced award of a contract to Boeing Aerospace Company, Seattle, Wash., for full-scale development and initial production of an inertial upper-stage (IUS) vehicle system, consisting of a 3-axis-stabilized vehicle of multiple solid-propellant stages with an avionics section including a reaction-control system. Although the USAF had primary responsibility for development of the IUS, NASA would participate in development because it also would use the IUS. The basic concept, a 2-stage vehicle for use with the Space Shuttle and on the Titan for some USAF missions, had one 20 0001b solid-propellant motor and one 60001b solid-propellant motor that would deliver a 50001b spacecraft to geosynchronous orbit. NASA also planned two other vehicle configurations, one to carry large spacecraft on planetary missions and another for deep-space missions such as Galileo, a probe of the planet Jupiter. The Space Shuttle would deliver all NASA IUS vehicles to low earth orbit for use in pushing spacecraft to higher orbits or to earth-escape trajectories. The first NASA IUS flight would be a mission planned for summer 1980 to launch a tracking and data-relay satellite (TDRS); first use of a 3-stage IUS would be the Galileo mission planned for launch Jan. 1982. (Marshall Star, Apr 19/78, 1)
Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. had delivered the last of eight empty solid-fuel rocket motor-case segments to MSFC for use in the final burnout phase of Space Shuttle ground-vibration tests scheduled for early 1979, the Marshall Star reported. Current vibration testing was in the “liftoff’ phase using motor cases filled with inert propellant; this phase would be completed and the Space Shuttle elements removed from the dynamic-test stand by the end of 1978. All the elements would be returned to the stand, including the empty motor-case segments, for final vibration-test phase simulating the actual Space Shuttle situation just before solid-fuel rocket-booster separation after expending the solid propellant. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 1)
NASA announced the inception of Orbit 81, an RCA educational program to involve inner-city high school students in designing and developing a scientific experiment for launch on the Space Shuttle in 1981. The program had resulted from discussions among representatives of the Camden, N.J., public school system, NASA, and RCA. Other high schools were conducting similar programs, but NASA officials called the Camden project unique because it was the only “total involvement program covering all the disciplines, arts, and skills” taught in the curriculum. Students taking courses other than science and mathematics could be active participants in the project. Selection of an Orbit 81 experiment would take place when students had gained enough scientific insight to participate in the decision. The program would include enrichment courses in space science, summer sessions, and tours of NASA and RCA facilities. RCA had donated surplus laboratory equipment to the schools; NASA would provide literature, special programs, lectures, and demonstrations. Students of Camden and Woodrow Wilson High Schools had attended a space colloquium presented by NASA and RCA. RCA had made an initial payment to NASA as part of the $10 000 reservation fee to ensure that the Orbit 81 payload, which could weigh up to 90kg and occupy no more than 0.14m3, would have a place aboard the Space Shuttle when launch time arrived. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 11)
Boeing had awarded a $2 million contract to United Technologies’ Chemical Systems Division to build seven servoactuator systems (and two actuators for preflight testing) that would raise the inertial upper stage (IUS) to deployment position in the Space Shuttle payload bay, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Each system would consist of two servoactuators (one for backup), composed of an actuator and electronic controller positioned on either side of a tilt table in the payload bay to which the IUS would be secured. On command, the system would physically tip the tilt table to a predetermined position (e.g., 58°) for IUS deployment. The actuator motor would drive an extendable shaft 41 to 57in long to rotate the tilt table. Pyrotechnic devices on the tilt table would release the IUS, and springs would launch it into space. First flight of the IUS on board the Space Shuttle was scheduled for 1980. (D/SBD, Dec 20/78, 239)
The House subcommittee on space science and applications had added funding of $4 million to the NASA FY79 budget for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter and a new stereosat earth resources spacecraft, AvWk reported. The subcommittee had also added $7 million to NASA’s Office of Space Transportation funds for advanced planning, plus $3 million each for. large space-structures work and solar power satellite studies. (NASA’s initial budget request had not included solar power satellite funding, because of Dept, of Energy priority in this area.) The subcommittee had added $40.5 million to the NASA request and cut $25 million, resulting in a net $15.5 million increase. Funds for a stereosat came with a subcommittee call for development of the $40- to $45-million spacecraft based on significant funding from the user community; primary users would be geologists exploring for petroleum and minerals. Other subcommittee additions were $10 million for distribution of Landsat data and training programs to states for crop-prediction research, encouragement of microwave development, and work on an operational Landsat system; $4 million to stimulate, bioengineering work; $1.5 million to support industrial application of NASA technology; and $4 million for modifying NASA’s tracking system to facilitate full and timely handling of Spacelab data early in Spacelab’s flight program. (AvWk, Mar 6/78, 13)
As the climax of a 4-mo attempt to stabilize and trim the orbital position of Skylab, a NASA team of engineers and controllers from JSC, MSFC, IBM, and three tracking stations (Bermuda; Madrid; and Goldstone, Calif.) had successfully put the space station in an orbital position they hoped would prolong its lifetime in space, JSC announced. Maneuvers in June had put the space station in an attitude intended to reduce atmospheric drag at its orbital height of 389km (242 statute mi). Assuming that the gyros continued to function, NASA hoped the new attitude would extend the orbital lifetime of Skylab by 6 to 12mo to late 1979 or early 1980, giving NASA time to arrange an early Space Shuttle test flight to reboost Skylab into higher orbit, or deorbit it into a remote ocean area. Maneuvers had begun in Mar. when engineers and flight controllers at the Bermuda tracking station checked out Skylab systems and brought its batteries to a fully charged state. On June 8, flight controllers had turned on the dormant control-moment gyros in the Skylab attitude-control system. (The other part of the system, the thruster attitude-control system, would expel nitrogen gas through nozzles to move Skylab into various attitudes in its orbit.) A computer with various sensors to indicate position had controlled both systems. Although one gyro that failed during the last Skylab mission in 1974 could not be used, the other two gyros were activated and worked as expected. On June 9, controllers had commanded Skylab into a solar inertial attitude in which the spacecraft’s solar cells always faced the sun. On June 11, they had maneuvered it into the desired “end-on velocity-vector” attitude, docking port forward and long axis parallel to the ground along the flight path. Skylab had remained in that position while engineers continued to monitor it, periodically transmitting minor corrections to the onboard computer controlling Skylab’s position. (JSC Release 78-25; Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; June 14/78,1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78,1; June 23/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, June 2/78, 2; June 30/78, 2; W Post, June 12/78, A-19))
NASA had not yet decided when to command the Skylab space station into a cartwheel maneuver that could extend its orbital life by 9 to 14mo, Science magazine reported. The maneuver could increase chances of a Space Shuttle mission either boosting Skylab or propelling it into controlled reentry. Major factor in the decision would be assessment of how long the station’s control-moment gyros could sustain the maneuver before failing; without the cartwheel, NASA believed reentry would occur between May 1979 and July 1980. According to Science, however, Skylab’s chances of remaining in the sky until NASA could get to it with a Space Shuttle were no better than 1 in 2. {Science, Apr 7/78, 28; AvWk, Apr 24/78, 15)
Langley Research Center announced it had presented to Thomas Blackstock its first major award for an energy-saving proposal. LaRC Director Donald Hearth had presented Blackstock with a check for $1245, largest monetary award ever given at the center for a suggestion. Blackstock’s idea was to upgrade the high-pressure air-supply system in the continuous-flow hypersonic tunnel so that it would run in an intermittent short-duration-flow blowdown test rather than in the longer duration continuous-flow mode. The tunnel, which represented LaRC’s only large-scale Mach 10 aerothermodynamic-test capability, had been important to the Space Shuttle testing and would aid in developing low-cost advanced space-transportation vehicles. Blackstock’s suggestion could save $30 000 the first yr without compromising the tunnel’s research capability; LaRC’s wind tunnels had consumed one-third of the electrical energy purchased by the center. (LaRC Release 78-24; LaRC Researcher, May 5/78, 1)
JSC announced that one of the world’s most unusual freight airplanes, the Super Guppy, would deliver a high-fidelity mockup of the Space Shuttle orbiter crew compartment from the contractor in Calif, to neighboring Ellington AFB in Tex. for transfer to NASA, marking first use of the Super Guppy for delivering Space Shuttle equipment. NASA would install the mockup (a detailed model of the cockpit and living quarters on the Space Shuttle orbiter) in a JSC training area for use in crew familiarization. The nonworking mockup was built by Rockwell Inti., prime contractor for the orbiter. The Super Guppy took aboard the mockup at Los Alamitos Naval Air Station near Los Angeles and flew it to Ellington, refueling at Davis-Monthan AFB, Tuscon, and Dyess AFB, Abilene. A modified Boeing YC-97J, the Super Guppy had the world’s largest internal dimensions in an aircraft; it could accommodate the fuselage of a 747, if sectioned. Its present configuration, test-flown by late NASA pilot Joe Walker in late 1965, v/as first used by NASA early in 1966. The Super Guppy, equipped with 4 Pratt & Whitney T34 turboprops, had flown more than 2 million mi carrying NASA cargo and had seen extensive use in the Apollo and Skylab missions. It had last landed at Ellington AFB in June 1976. (JSC Release 78-58)
MSFC reported that a failure in Skylab’s power system July 9 had caused loss of vehicle attitude; MSFC engineers had reconfigured the system and fully charged the spacecraft’s batteries, before performing reorientation maneuvers to return it to its minimum-drag attitude. Skylab was now about 240mi above earth, rolling at about 2 revolutions per hr. Engineers had planned maneuvers to stop the roll and place the vehicle first in a solar-inertial attitude, then in an end-on velocity vector that would encounter minimum atmospheric drag. However, Dr. Chris Kraft, JSC director, said in a copyrighted interview with the Dallas Morning News reported in the Washington Post: “I don’t believe Skylab is going to live long enough for us to get to it with the Space Shuttle . . . We’re going to have to live with the fact that Skylab is going to die a natural death.” (Marshall Star, July 19/78,1, July 12/78,1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 1; ARC Astrogram, July 13/78; 1; W Post, July 21/78, A14)
Rockwell Inti. Corp. announced that the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory had awarded its Los Angeles Division a $6.04 million contract to build test-aircraft structures using a revolutionary manufacturing process developed by the company and used on the Rockwell-built Space Shuttle. The AF Built-up Low-cost Advanced Titanium Structure (BLATS) program would use 2 Rockwell-developed processes (diffusion bonding and superplastic forming) in designing, fabricating, and testing a 10001b section of fuselage for use on a future advanced fighter. The 46mo contract called for construction of a complex about 8ft x 10ft x 3ft, representing the center fuselage section where the wings attach, and a portion of the aft fuselage where the engines would be mounted, and including the necessary fuel tanks. Rockwell engineers believed superplastic forming with concurrent diffusion bonding of titanium aircraft structure was the biggest breakthrough of the decade in advanced metals fabrication, because it might result (depending on the type of structure) in cost savings of from 50 to 70% and weight savings of from 30 to 50%, compared to conventional methods of building titanium parts. Besides the next generation of fighter aircraft, other applications of the process could be jet engines, spacecraft, and supersonic transports. (Rockwell Release LAD-8)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that, pending arrival of the age of the Space Shuttle, the USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAM-SO) was modifying a Titan III 34D booster to ensure prime and backup launch capabilities during Space Shuttle transition. The 34D was a modified Titan HID that the USAF had put into operation in 1971; SAMSO had recommended it in 1975 to the Defense Science Board studying how DOD could manage an orderly transition from expendable to reusable launch vehicles. Instead of a variety of boosters, the 34D would use a common Titan III core for east- and west-coast launches, with the option of dedicating a 34D launch vehicle to either coast as late’ as 6mo before launch. The 34D also was compatible with the new inertial upper-stage (IUS) vehicle, another SAMSO project in full-scale development by Boeing Aerospace Co. During the Space Shuttle backup era beginning in 1980, the 34D/IUS combination would be contingency booster for top-priority defense payloads. Plans called for development of seven 34D boosters to be used first for launching two defense satellite communications system (DSCS) spacecraft in July 1980 from Cape Canaveral. Four of the seven vehicles would serve east coast launches using the IUS, and three would serve polar launches from Vandenberg AFB. Differences between the 34D and Titan HID included solid-fuel rocket motors lengthened 5 ft each to align with new common-core attach points and payload fairing modified to extend from 40 to 55ft. The new fairing would make the 34D payload environment nearly identical to that of the Shuttle orbiter cargo bay, a step toward upper-stage commonality. The 34D program was in final design stage under contracts with Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and United Technologies Corp. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 78, 9)
NASA and ESA announced selection of experiments for the proposed 2-spacecraft solar-polar mission planned for launch in 1983 and designed for first-time observation of the sun from the unique perspective of its polar regions. The solar-polar mission would explore one of the remaining frontiers of the solar system: the third dimension of space, out of the plane of the orbits of the planets. All previous interplanetary space probes had flown in the orbits of the planets, essentially intersecting the sun’s equatorial regions. Congress had not yet approved the project, but early selection of scientific participants and investigations would allow a prompt start on approval. NASA and ESA would each provide one spacecraft, and the combined scientific payload would be divided between U.S. and European investigators. The Space Shuttle would launch both spacecraft simultaneously using an inertial upper-stage booster, directing them on a trajectory in the ecliptic plane (the plane containing all the planets) toward Jupiter. Swinging around Jupiter, the craft would use the gravity of that planet to move out of the ecliptic plane and back toward the sun in trajectories, one northbound and one southbound, essentially mirror images of each other. After passing over the north and south solar poles, the spacecrafts would swing through perihelion (the distance closest to the sun) in the ecliptic plane, pass respectively over the other solar poles, then fly back to the vicinity of Jupiter’s orbit. The period from launch until shortly after the second pair of polar passages would be approximately 5yr. The mission should provide important new knowledge about the solar wind, cosmic rays, and the 3-dimensional structure and evolution of the sun’s corona (the outermost solar atmosphere), and increase understanding of solar phenomena that shape and control earth’s space environment. In anticipation of a FY79 Congressional authorization of the mission, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, manager of the mission for NASA, had undertaken studies of the U.S. spacecraft, payload, and mission design concepts. More than ISO American and European scientists would participate in solar-polar investigations. (NASA Release 78-39; ESA Release Mar 13/78; JPL Universe, Mar 17/78, 1)
JSC officials were puzzled after a weekend surprise, the Houston Post reported: 240 000 or so people came out to see the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise. With interest in the space program supposedly flagging, the question was why so many—some of whom walked for miles to get to the Space Shuttle orbiter—showed up to see an airplane-like craft just sitting atop a large airplane. The newspaper quoted a highway patrol trooper with 9yr of traffic-patrol duty: “Never in my life have I seen people come like that.” Largest previous crowd had been the 135 000 who turned up at Ellington Air Force Base for a 2-day Blue Angels show. Charles Biggs, JSC exhibits manager, said JSC had made no effort other than the usual press releases to attract a crowd, “no bands, no celebrities, no giveaways, just the orbiter sitting there.” A tour guide commented: “What I thipk is that this is different than Apollo and going to the moon. I think the Shuttle is coming closer to the people. It is something they can relate to. They wanted to know when they can go on it.” (Houston Post, Mar 14/78,3A)
NASA had completed an ignition test Apr. 21 on 3 Space Shuttle main engines at the National Space and Technology Laboratory at Bay St. Louis, Miss., the JPL and KSC newsletters reported. The firing planned for 2.5sec had actually lasted only lsec, but NASA officials said the test had met most of the objectives. A low-temperature reading in the fuel-pressure pumps caused premature cutoff. NASA and Rockwell Inti, engineers would decide whether to repeat the test before moving to the next phase of the program. {JSC Roundup, Apr 28/78,1; Marshall Star, Apr 26/78, 2) During April: NASA reported it had increased emphasis on general-aviation research, addressing problems and concerns of the industry, which had used results from recent programs in designing new aircraft. Objectives of NASA’s general-aviation research had been to improve safety and efficiency, reduce environmental impact of general-aviation aircraft, and ensure a base of new technology adequate to support continued growth in the light-airplane utility. Aerodynamic research had emphasized airfoil development, resulting in significant improvements in performance in all speed ranges. Avionics research had aimed at reducing the complexity and cost of aircraft interaction with traffic-control systems improving navigation, guidance, stabilization, and systems management. In generating information needed to design low-cost advanced avionics systems applicable to general aviation in the 1980s and beyond, NASA had integrated results of its studies into specifications for final systems design, fabrication, and installation on a twin-engine general-aviation aircraft for flight evaluation in 1979 and 1980. NASA had also defined technical problems that had limited accuracy and efficiency in aerial application of agricultural materials. The NASA program also had emphasized safety measures, including an automatic pilot-advisory system (APSA), structural crashworthiness, stall/spin research, and investigation of alternative fuels such as automotive gasoline for aircraft. Reducing the environmental impact of noise and exhaust emissions generated by light aircraft had also been an objective of NASA’s aeronautical program, which would eventually assist industry and regulatory agencies in meeting future noise and pollution-reduction goals. (NASA Release 78-41)
NASA announced that President Jimmy Carter had presented 1977 presidential management-improvement awards to Curtis Helms and Thomas Winstead of MSFC’s structures and propulsion laboratory. The two were among 7 awardees, selected from 50 nominees, honored at a May 23 ceremony in the White House rose garden. Their redesign of the Space Shuttle external fuel tank, eliminating one of the two vent-relief valves, had reduced vehicle weight and program costs while still meeting venting requirements and reliability standards, resulting in total savings of $5.6 million. (NASA Actv., July 78, 27)
MSFC reported that 1.5-second ignition-test firings May 4 of a cluster of three Space Shuttle main engines at National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) had been successful, clearing the way for the second phase of verification tests. The three flight-type engines, previously acceptance tested individually at the facility, had undergone the cluster test in an assembly including the engines, a simulated orbiter midbody, and a flight-type aft fuselage to which the engines were fitted. Frank Stewart, MSFC test manager, said that sequencing was good and that he foresaw no problems with the first long-duration firing scheduled for May 15. The tests would evaluate system performance in a static-firing environment as a step in verifying the system for the first manned orbital Shuttle flight. Cluster firings would take place about once per month through July; the third phase of long-duration firings would begin in September and conclude in November, after the equipment had been modified. (MSFC Release 79-47)
Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, sent committee members a report prepared by staff of a review of cost, performance, and schedule aspects of the Space Shuttle program, based on NASA’s request for a $220-million addition to the FY80 budget request. The staff director wrote that recommendations in the report would, if implemented, improve budget requirement estimating, program cost, and schedule control, as well as NASA communications with the committee. (Text, oversight rept Aug 79)
NASA announced that a special staff of consultants appointed in May 1979 to assess Shuttle management had submitted its report to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. The report contained eight major conclusions (and comments). 1) When the Shuttle program began, NASA managers took an economical approach to space transportation. Subsequent budgets challenged managers to bring in a difficult technical program with limited funds. —(NASA originally envisioned a S5.15 billion program, predicting first manned orbital flight in 1978.) 2)	Shuttle management had achieved “a commendable level of accomplishment. . .considering fiscal constraints placed upon the program since its inception.” (Though this report necessarily focused on deficiencies, it noted that Shuttle-program personnel had individually and collectively achieved a great deal in a large and very complex program,) 3)	Shuttle management, in an effort to proceed toward completion even under funding limitations, had set up work schedules demanding more performance than could be delivered. (This approach had resulted in deferment of some of the planned work each year, as funds required exceeded those available. When critical new work became necessary within a fiscal year, as technical problems came up, even more scheduled work had to be deferred. This resulted in continual planning adjustments that precluded establishment of a stable baseline and led to program inefficiency. (Example: subcontractor work increased or decreased repeatedly as funding changed in critical areas such as tile manufacturing. Program changes and associated up-and-down expenditure rates had led to termination of experienced contractor and subcontractor personnel, who became unavailable later because of aerospace industry demand. The subsequent employment of inexperienced personnel reduced overall efficiency. The report called this a major cause for concern, especially in the production phase of the program, also, costs due to delays in solving technical problems had increased.) 4)	Long-range planning and status reporting were lacking: emphasis was on the current fiscal year with only secondary attention to work remaining to be done. Near-term planning took so much attention that long-term impact of deferred work was not integrated into the budgets. (Effective long-range planning requires clear understanding of what has been accomplished, plus accurate prediction of remaining work. Shuttle management faced budgets showing unrealistic costs of its goals, with no effective status-reporting system. Most program planning consisted of constant near-term replanning to count up expenditures in a timely manner, although measuring the work achieved through these expenditures and estimating work still needed were weak. Management tools lacking in some major Shuttle contracts, such as cost reporting integrated with work measurement, were useful but did not provide an automatic solution. (The only available means of assessing even the partial funding requirements of the Shuttle was an agencywide budget plan called POP [program operating plan] inadequate for program control: it appeared only twice a year and contained little pertinent data between July and March. NASA needed a reliable way—lending itself to independent evaluation—to know program baseline and status, with realistic cost and schedule projections. Management must overcome the cumulative impact of previous constraints and pressures, while making allowance for the need to rely on contractor input.) 5)	The Shuttle organization functioned well from a technical standpoint but not in the areas of schedule and budget. Organization needed strengthening, and two-way communications needed improvement. (The original concept of Shuttle organization was a Level 1 program director at NASA Headquarters, a Level 2 [integration] program manager at JSC, and Level 3 separate program offices at the various centers: JSC for the orbiter; MSFC for the main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster; and KSC for checkout and launch. Prime contractor support to project offices would be Level 4. Time had altered the concept: the Headquarters Level 1 associate administrator had become the de facto program director, who required the directors of JSC, MSFC, and KSC to take more part in activities reporting to them; responsibility for funding shifted from Level 2 to Level 1. This seemed a feasible arrangement, but the report said “none of the management levels in Rockwell and NASA had a good grasp” of undone work and other items needing completion before shipping Columbia to KSC. Investigators said Level 1 “broad and detailed involvement” with technicalities meant less time for cost and schedule. NASA needed cost awareness “independent of contractor input” and sensitivity to “lower-level cost trends.”) 6)	Schedule changes were no longer a valid way to cope with reduced program or funds; fixed delivery schedules and milestones in the initial operating program not yet achieved required a new management approach. (Work schedules and budgets must allow for modifications required after the first few Shuttle flights. Users must recognize that initial operations would include development; NASA should make Shuttle users aware of realistic performance and schedule commitments, with priority to successful completion of development.) 7)	Transition to the operational phase remained to be worked out; management should ensure that current organization alignments for Shuttle operations are appropriate. The NASA/DOD interface needed clarification. (NASA Headquarters managed program operations, with operations offices at JSC, MSFC, and KSC; cooperation between the operations and program offices was evident, but transition from development to operations would need work. Since needs and plans of the DOD user community would affect NASA planning and budget, management to forestall problems should maintain “high-level near-term understanding” of DOD plans.) 8)	The potential was high for unexpected technical problems, schedule slips, and cost growth. All program planning should include appropriate reserves. (Although the report noted that some parts of a total management-control and information system were in place and functioning well, significant potential for problems would remain until deficiencies cited in the report were corrected.) (Shuttle Program Management Assessment rept, Sept 12/79 [issued to press Oct 18/79], HistOfc fls; NASA note to editors NE79-20; JSC Roundup, Sept 21/79, 1)
At a press conference on NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1980 (FY80), Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said the 1980 budget year would not “go down in history as my favorite.” The request NASA submitted to Congress was just over $4.7 billion, an increase of about $160 million over the FY79 budget, counting in the latter a $185 million supplemental NASA had asked for. The FY80 request would amount to slightly less than the rate of inflation, Dr. Frosch said; not counting the $185 million supplemental in the FY79 budget, the 1980 request would be “about equal to inflation.” Whereas funding sought for space science and applications was up about 20% and the total amount included support for all ongoing programs, it contained no money for “new flight project starts of any major kind” in space sciences or applications. The budget did contain “some increases in aeronautics, where it is more difficult to identity a major new start in any case.” “Current best estimate” for the first Space Shuttle flight was November 9, postponed from September 28, and NASA’s schedule had been adjusted accordingly. Money requested for space science had increased $100 million, about 20% over FY79; this covered major projects and research and development now under way, such as Space Telescope, Galileo (the Jupiter-orbiter probe), the high-energy astronomical observatory, Spacelab, the solar polar mission, infrared astronomy satellite, and solar maximum mission. Applications funding included money for joint multiagency research in crop monitoring and commodity projection by NASA, together with the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior and the Agency for International Development (AID). Funds for aeronautics would increase 14% to cover current research and technology and to continue the aircraft energy efficiency program, with research on reduction of noise and pollution. In manpower, NASA would lose 674 permanent Civil Service positions over FY79 and FY80, part of this the agency’s share of a government-wide 2 % cut in personnel. Frosch summarized the budget as one that “in key program areas continues momentum. . .while it’s tight, we think we can make a good transition to the Shuttle era and we can keep going on the science, the applications, and the aeronautics.. (Text; W Star, Jan 22/79, A-10)
NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, which arrived at KSC April 10-after a piggyback flight from MSFC, would be rolled out to Launch Complex 39 on May 1 as part of an exercise to clear the way for launch of its sister ship, Columbia, which had arrived at KSC March 24 for checkout and final installation of thermal tiles. This would be the first time a complete Space Shuttle configuration had been put together in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) and moved to the launch pad; use of the Enterprise would confirm compatibility of assembly and launch facilities and ground support equipment with elements of the Shuttle and would rehearse KSC staff in Shuttle handling operations. On April 17, a 15-story external tank was mated with two inert solid-fuel rocket boosters on a mobile launcher platform in high bay 3; more than 75,000 visitors to the center viewed the assembly moving down the 2-mile towway to the VAB, into which Enterprise was moved April 18. The delta-wing orbiter would be mated with the external tank in a 19-hour operation before its 3.5-mile ride to Pad A, former site of Apollo lunar launches modified for Shuttle operations, where it would remain until the first week of June. (NASA Release 79-50)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
Gen. Lew Allen, Jr., U.S. Air Force chief of staff, told the annual meeting of the Military Operations Research Society that the priority of the Space Shuttle program had “shifted to matters of national defense,” the Santa Barbara News Press reported [see October 30]. Whatever else the Shuttle does and whatever other purposes it will have, “the priority, the emphasis, and the driving momentum now has to be those satellite systems which are important to national security,” said Allen, a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Emphasizing the “change from what had been true a year or so ago,” Allen said the change was “apparent and accepted now, and it’s a change which will, if there are additional technical difficulties..., become more and more significant.” The Shuttle, he said, was “quite critical for concerns of national defense and for.. .verification of treaties.. .Confidence in the Shuttle and its reliability must be sufficiently high for us to place what is a substantial amount of the security of the nation on the performance of that system.” (Santa Barbara News Press, Dec 6/79, 14)
MSFC said a long-duration test firing of the Shuttle main propulsion system scheduled June 12 was successful, even though a glitch in the automatic-cutoff instrumentation had terminated the test about 50 seconds into the 520 second program. Frank Stewart, test manager for MSFC’s Shuttle projects office, said that the test was successful “in the sense that the system performed as predicted and yielded a great deal of valuable data” needed before the first Shuttle flight. Stewart said the firing sequence was excellent. For the first time in test firing of three flight engines, the rated power level was attained, and the test produced pogo pulsing (a deliberate oscillation from very low to very high frequencies generated by a piston in the liquid-oxygen manifold, to show if vibrations in flight would constitute resonance dangerous to structures). This first long-duration firing of the clustered flight-type engines and propulsion system had already been delayed by malfunction of a development engine during single-engine tests. Inspection after the failure revealed a crack in the coolant pipe, requiring removal of the engine nozzle. Engineers modified a spare nozzle for installation in the test article. Stewart said the event should not delay the total test schedule, which included extra time for unforeseen difficulties. System verification should be complete “in ample time for the first Shuttle flight,” he said. (MSFC Release 79-58)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with Rockwell International Corporation’s space systems group to build two Space Shuttle orbiters (OV-103 and OV-104), convert a ground-test orbiter (OV-99), and modify the first orbiter (OV-102); this would give NASA four orbiters for Shuttle operations. JSC would administer the $1.9-billion contract at Rockwell’s California facilities and at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. (NASA Release 79-15; JSC Release 79-07)
JSC announced that all Space Shuttle orbiters would have an optical landing aid presently used by pilots of more than 20 U.S. and foreign commercial and military aircraft. Rockwell International, prime contractor for the Shuttle, would provide for the commander and pilot of all orbiters a “head up” system to project instantaneous displays of spacecraft speed, rate of descent, altitude, and other critical flight factors on a transparent viewing glass located above the cockpit window to be pulled down like the sun visor of an automobile. The system would be placed on Columbia in time for the first operational flight, expected early in 1981 after completion of the flight-test program, and in JSC simulators and trainers. (JSC Release 79-64)
NASA announced that MSFC had appointed a board to investigate the automatic cutoff of a test firing July 2 at NSTL of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article (three main engines mounted in an orbiter aft section and attached to an external tank). A liquid-hydrogen leak from a main fuel valve caused the cutoff after 18.5 seconds; no explosion occurred, and the gaseous nitrogen and water fire-control systems put out an external fire resulting from hydrogen accumulation around the test article’s aft area. Inspection revealed damage to the aft heat shield and charring of external-tank insulation, but the engines appeared generally in good condition. (NASA Release 79-92) 570 million miles a flood of scientific data and “stunning photographs of the planet and some of its moons,” as the New York Times described them. Scientists at the JPL, control center for the mission, said that the flight was continuing to provide them with “new surprises.” They had modified observing sequences on Voyager 2 to benefit from discoveries by Voyager 1 on its encounter in March. Changes included more darkside images of the planet to measure lightning and aurora; images of Jupiter’s ring, taken away from the equatorial plane; and about nine hours of continuous imaging of Io for volcanic activity. Voyager 2’s inward track past three of the four “Galilean” satellites had let it see regions not viewed by Voyager 1; its path was “more conservative,” as it passed 10 Jupiter radii above the visible clouds compared to Voyager i’s 4.9 radii, for “complementary observations.” Voyager 2 studies began April 25 and would continue for a seven month look compared to Voyager Ts three month look. Voyager 2 had been launched August 20, 1977; Voyager 1, launched September 5, 1977, on a faster and shorter course, had overtaken its sister ship before the end of the year. Scientists found that Jupiter and its moons did not resemble planets or satellites nearer the Sun, nor one another. Surprises in the findings were due, they said, to real differences between the outer and inner solar system and lack of previous knowledge, a result of the distance separating Earth from Jupiter. Before Voyager 1, “we thought we had some idea of what planets were like,” said Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey after seeing Europa images from Voyager 2. Instead of a sphere heavily pocked such as Earth’s moon and Mars from meteor impacts, Voyager 2 images showed Europa “as smooth as a billiard ball,” with hardly any craters on a surface covered by a mantle of slushy snow and ice up to 60 miles deep, with far-reaching shallow marks like cracks in an eggshell. The spacecraft passed Callisto and Ganymede on its way toward Europa and, after its encounter with Jupiter, had begun a 10-hour watch for Io, where it photographed six volcanoes erupting. On its approach to Jupiter, Voyager 2 had encountered radiation so intense that JPL had turned off a sensitive ultraviolet (UV) detector six hours earlier than planned; however, project director Ray Heacock declared “no problems and no failures in any of our instruments.” (JPL Release 901; NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, June 26/79; NY Times, July 10/79, C-l; W Post, July 10/79, A-10; W Star July 11/79, A-4; July 13/79, A-10) The PRC news service told of the difficulties encountered by Skylab and the U.S. government’s offers of assistance and compensation in case of damage or injury, noting that some airlines had suspended flights during the critical period. Tass said that western Australia authorities had “warned the population that some parts of Skylab might be radioactive and urged. .. caution in approaching them.” At a NASA press conference a few days earlier, a reporter asked how NASA could tell if someone brought in a piece of debris claiming falsely that it was part of Skylab. Richard G. Smith, deputy associate administrator, space transportation systems, who had been “actively in charge of Skylab activities for NASA,” replied that “it is very easy to identify an object that’s been in space. The high-energy particles that penetrate it in orbit give an extremely low-level but characteristic radiation background—no radiation for anybody to be worried about.. .But it’s very easy to determine that.” United Press International (UPI) reported July 13 that the Kalgoorlie town hall had squeezed into its lobby the biggest fragment recovered so far, a 6.5-foot by 3.25-foot cylindrical piece of metal bearing a stamped number 102: “very good for the tourist industry,” said Mayor Ray Finlayson. (NASA press conf July 6/79; coord ctr bltns July 9, 10, 11/79; NASA Dly Actv Rept July 12/79; W Star, July 12/79, A-l; UPI, July 14/79, A-7; FBIS, Xinhua in Chinese, July 12/79; Tass in English, July 13/79; AvWk, July 16/79, 22)
NASA announced that JPL had selected TRW’s Space Systems Division, Redondo Beach, Calif., to negotiate a contract estimated at $80 million for designing, building, and testing one of two spacecraft to explore the Sun’s polar regions in the 1980s. A second spacecraft would be developed by ESA. The solar-polar mission sponsored jointly by NASA and ESA would study the Sun, cosmic rays, and magnetic fields in uncharted areas of the solar system. The four-year mission would begin with launch of both spacecraft by the Space Shuttle in 1983; a gravity-assist flyby of Jupiter in 1986 would put the craft over the solar poles in 1986 and again in 1987. This would be the first mission using spacecraft out of the plane in which Earth and other planets orbit the Sun. JPL would manage the project for NASA’s Office of Space Science. The TRW contract covered the spacecraft system and ground-support equipment, integration of the science payload, tests and launch preparation, and spacecraft-system support during the mission. (NASA Release 79-100)
NASA reported it would speed up development of the MMU to be built by Martin Marietta for astronaut use in inspecting and repairing Space Shuttle insulating tiles while in orbit. The MMU, an improved version of a gas-jet backpack tested inside the orbiting Skylab in 1973-1974, should be fully developed by next August for the second Shuttle flight in October 1980. NASA would not consider further an alternate method of tile inspection (an extendable platform on a boom with a television camera). (NASA Release 79-125)
JSC reported on trials of a Buck Rogers-style maneuvering unit designed for moving about and working outside the Space Shuttle. Officially named Manned Maneuvering Unit (MMU), the device worn on the back of a spacesuited astronaut would allow movement in the weightlessness of space using nitrogen gas jets to control direction. Martin Marietta, the manufacturer, had submitted a prototype the previous week for three months of testing on different-sized astronauts (including female candidates) for fit and mechanical performance in use. Astronaut Dr. Bruce McCandless had successfully checked out the unit’s compatibility with the self-contained portable life-support system, wearing a spacesuit and backing into the maneuvering unit as it would be located in the orbiter cargo bay, “like backing into a phone booth with a large knapsack on your back,” KSC would get the first flight unit early in 1980. (JSC Release 79-55)
The New York Times said that Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, had told a House subcommittee that problems with the Space Shuttle would delay flight of the Galileo mission for two years. NASA now planned to launch the mission in 1984 in two parts: one Shuttle flight would take a Galileo orbiter into Earth orbit for launch toward Jupiter, and another Shuttle flight would take another spacecraft for launch into the atmosphere of Jupiter carrying instruments to record its composition. Earlier mission plans were for a 1982 Shuttle launch carrying a single Galileo package including orbiter and Jupiter probe; the change would add more than $184 million to the cost of the project, previously estimated at about $450 million. NASA had had problems not only with the Shuttle insulating tiles but also with the rocket engines. An improved engine was to be standard after the first test flights. Angelo Guastaferro, NASA’s head of planetary programs, said that the 4,600-pound Galileo spacecraft would be too heavy for the Shuttle to carry into Earth orbit without the improved engines. (NY Times, Oct 18/79, A-15)
MSFC announced that NASA would buy from Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International, 12 more main engines for the Space Shuttle under a $365.7 million amendment of the original 1972 contract that would bring its value to $1,263,215,058. The original contract was for purchase of 27 engines; the amendment would bring the total ordered to 19. The amendment also called for overhaul and test of 10 engines to 109% of rated power level, plus a second overhaul and flight test of the 3 engines being used for propulsion testing. Rocketdyne had delivered the engines for the first Shuttle flight, three ground-test engines, and a spare flight engine under the original 1972 contract. The three flight engines delivered to KSC had been installed on Columbia for next year’s first spaceflight. (MSFC Release 79-117)
NASA said that it would stop acquiring Goes 3 data after February 1980; on July 1 it had shut down the altimeter, primary experiment device. DOD would use the C-band transponders to calibrate tracking and would monitor and control Goes 3 after March 1, 1980. (NASA MOR E-855-75-01 [postlaunch] Dec 27/79) During December: The AFSC Newsreview reported completion of the first phase of construction at Vandenberg Air Force Base’s Space Shuttle facility. Launch eomplex 6, built in the 1960s for the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program, had never been used (the MOL program was canceled in 1969) and was available to WSMC as a Shuttle launch site, Phase 1, carried out by Morrison-Knudsen, Inc., under a $3.9 million Army Corps of Engineers contract, had moved 680,000 cubic yards of earth and 10,000 cubic yards of reinforced concrete and had dismantled 2,400 tons of steel. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 79, 6)
NASA announced that it would accept on an annual basis applications to become Space Shuttle astronauts; the 1979 time for civilian applications would begin October 1 and end December 1. Successful applicants would report to JSC for a year’s astronaut training, after which NASA would choose pilot and mission-specialist candidates to be assigned by the Astronaut Office to jobs that would continue to train them in their scientific or technical field. NASA now had 27 selectees, including 11 scientists, available as Shuttle crew; 35 more candidates were in training to qualify for selection. The number of candidates to be selected in 1980 would depend on mission requirements. (NASA Release 79-101; JSC Release 79-50)
KSC reported another step toward Space Shuttle launch: mating of the first two segments of the solid-fuel rocket motors to aft skirt assemblies. The first major element of the system, the orbiter, was in the KSC processing facility being prepared for launch: the three main engines had been installed, and work was in progress on other items, especially installation of the thermal protection tiles. The second major element, the huge external tank, had been delivered to KSC for checkout before being mated to the rest of the system. The third major element, the two solid-fuel rocket motors that would fire in parallel with the orbiter engines at liftoff, had been built in sections to be assembled at KSC and were designed for reuse after cleaning, refurbishing, and reloading. Before the first test flight in 1980, the remaining tiles would be installed; orbiter systems checked out; remaining motor segments delivered and stacked; major elements mated on the mobile launch platform; assembly rolled out to the launch pad; and three main engines actually test-fired, in a final systems checkout. (KSC Release 174-79)
NASA reported that a scheduled 510-second firing of the main Shuttle propulsion system test article’s three-engine cluster at the National Space Technology Laboratories had failed November 4 when a sensor detected excessive pressure in the oxygen pump of the No. 3 engine and shut the test down after 9 seconds. The No. 1 engine was damaged during the cutoff sequence, when a hydrogen line ruptured near the base of the engine nozzle. Extent of the damage was unknown; the engine would be sent to Rockwell’s California plant for inspection and repair. MSFC and the contractor were investigating the failure and the possibility of replacing the damaged article in the test stand. Impact on Shuttle schedules had not been assessed. Meanwhile, the orbiter Columbia had successfully passed a series of “ hot fire” tests at KSC of the auxiliary power units to steer main-engine nozzles during launch and to drive control surfaces during atmospheric flight. The tests simulated ascent and descent phases of a Shuttle mission. Next milestone for Columbia would be an integrated test of all systems. (NASA Release 79-146; MSFC Release 79-122)
The Washington Star reported that faulty aluminum might have been built into the Space Shuttle and newly constructed military and civilian aircraft. A German aircraft firm, Fokker, had discovered the problem in May; Reynolds Aluminum Company, the manufacturer, told a high-level team of officials from NASA, DOD, and FAA that the plates might have “soft spots” because they were not cooled properly during fabrication. Walter Williams, NASA chief engineer, said that, until records of the disposition of the faulty aluminum were located, “we have to worry about everything.” The agency suspected that the large external tank (which would carry the Shuttle during blastoff) might contain some of the metal, as might the Shuttle itself, as well as its solid-fuel rocket engines. External-tank strength was crucial because it bore the weight of the liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen fuel under high pressure, as well as the solid-fuel rockets during liftoff. Spokesmen for Reynolds and the Pentagon were “vague about the amount of aluminum involved,” the Star said, but an internal NASA memo said it was about 15 million pounds of aluminum plates. {W Star Aug 7/79, 1)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle flights through early 1984 were almost completely booked up for payloads, with firm commitments for the first 37 operational flights beginning in 1981. The 47 payloads scheduled for those flights belonged to 14 government, commercial, and foreign users and ranged from launches of ESA’s Spacelab to navigation, communications, and weather satellites. NASA payloads would account for 32% of the number; DOD, about 15%; and all other users, about 53%. Payloads normally received assignments on a first-come first-served basis, but missions affecting national security would get priority, as would missions with time-critical launch windows or prime scientific or technical objectives. Flights for which NASA would be fully reimbursed would take precedence over routine scientific or technical launches. Services available to Shuttle users would include a basic launch with support and options (available at extra cost) such as special hardware, tests, and analysis; use of KSC services and facilities; or special operations such as extravehicular activity or longer duration. In addition to the 47 large payloads designed for the cargo bay, more than 200 organizations and persons had reserved (at a cost of $3 thousand to S10 thousand) space for up to 300 small self-contained payloads called getaway specials (GAS), research-and-development packages weighing 200 pounds or less. (NASA Release 79-142)
NASA announced that it had named the first four Space Shuttle orbiters that would operate in space to honor U.S. explorer ships. The first orbiter (102) scheduled for launch later in 1979 was named for the Columbia, which located the Columbia River in 1792; Captain Robert Gray named the river for his sloop. Challenger (orbiter 099) was named for the ship that gathered data December 1872-May 1876, filling 50 volumes on Earth’s oceans. Discovery (orbiter 103) was the ship looking in 1610-1611 for a northwest passage from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean by exploring Hudson’s Bay. Atlantis (orbiter 104) was the first U.S.-operated vessel designed for ocean research, a two-masted ketch that logged half a million miles between 1930 and 1966. Enterprise, the first orbiter built, was named for a vessel exploring the Arctic from 1851 to 1854, as well as for the flagship in television’s Star Trek; as the test orbiter, it was not intended for use in space. (NASA Release 79-10; Washington Post, Jan 26/79, C-2; WSJ, Jan 26/79, 1).
Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle orbiter built, began its last trek across the United States from KSC to DFRC, where “its flight log books will be closed,” said the Marshall Star. DFRC said the craft, which served as prototype in all Shuttle tests to date, would be trucked to Rockwell’s Palmdale facility, where parts would be removed for additional testing and possibly used in constructing future orbiters. Enterprise had made eight captive and five free-flight approach-and-landing tests at DFRC in 1977; it then was ferried to MSFC for ground vibration tests, then to KSC in April this year to check out facilities for handling Columbia, first Shuttle scheduled for launch. JSC Roundup later reported that 750,000 people had crowded airports during the return to California and that Enterprise was a two-day front-page story in area papers at each of the six stopovers and a lead story on television and radio. Donald “Deke” Slayton, now program manager for Shuttle flight-test operations, piloted the T-38 chase plane flying with Enterprise and was spokesman for the Shuttle program during press briefings. (DFRC Release 29-79; Marshall Star Aug 8/79, 1; JSC Roundup, Aug 24/79, 1)
NASA reported that 35 candidates for Space Shuttle astronaut had completed classroom instruction and moved into engineering assignments at JSC. The courses had begun in July 1978, and the successful candidates would become astronauts in July 1980. NASA had brought in personnel from other NASA centers and from universities to conduct courses on subjects such as space physics, ascent and reentry aerodynamics, spaceflight physiology, and tracking techniques; veteran astronauts had lectured on the budget process, people, and requirements in the space program and on being a CAPCOM (capsule communicator). Videotapes of the classes would be available to all employees at JSC. The first crews selected for Shuttle flights had begun lessons in the mission simulator, and the astronaut candidates would be observers. Lessons would include tests of every sort of emergency the crews might encounter during a mission, supervised by instructors who had spent six months learning how to harass the astronauts in their simulator exercises. The lesson plan, scheduled to take nine months “not counting. . .problems,” would prepare the crews for nearly any emergency, NASA said. (NASA Release 79-34; JSC Release 79-20)
The $220 million requested by the President as an amendment to NASA’s Space Shuttle program was “essential to allow the... program to proceed in a reasonable manner,” Dr. William J. Perry, undersecretary of defense for research and engineering, told the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space. Noting that NASA’s launch predictions were based on the supplemental funding, Perry said DOD was concerned about the adequacy of the Shuttle fleet to meet traffic demands sure to build rapidly “once the Shuttle is operational.” DOD planned to transfer “several programs important to our national security” to Shuttle launch by 1983, and delays in orbiter delivery would mean further use of expendable launch vehicles, with “adverse operational and economic impact.” A House appropriations subcommittee PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED had dropped $70 million for construction of Shuttle facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base from FY80 budget requests, and the full committee was not likely to ignore the subcommittee’s recommendation. (Text, June 4/79; Today, June 6/79, 1A)
MSFC announced that on June 13 it would begin flight-qualification testing of a Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster at the Thiokol range near Promontory Point, Utah, to demonstrate the production, assembly, and firing cycle for a full series of Shuttle flights. Assembled from four segments, the 35-meter-long motor would first be static-fired to demonstrate “ablative safety factors” of the motor nozzle, which would be gimbaled to simulate control during a launch. Designed to move 8° in any direction, the nozzle would be part of the Shuttle guidance system. Insulation and ablative materials would protect the motor from heat during firing. (MSFC Release 79-54) The first flight-qualification firing of a Shuttle motor was “quite satisfactory,” said George Hardy, manager of the booster project at MSFC. After witnessing the firing in the Utah desert, Hardy said that the amount of thrust developed and the performance of the steering nozzles was “well within specifications.” The motor and igniter had been modified as a result of test firings of four development motors during the past two years. Static tests of the flight-configured solid-fuel rocket booster that each Shuttle mission would use in pairs would complete qualification testing. (MSFC Release 79-60)
JSC reported that it had amended its contract with Rockwell International Corporation to cover 56 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter. The first amendment, covering 32 changes, would cost $14,338,000; the second, covering 24 changes plus testing, repairs, and spares, would cost $2,869,833. The control value was now about $3.43 billion. (JSC Release
NASA reported that arrangements for press coverage of the overland trek of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia from Rockwell’s plant at Palmdale, Calif., to Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and the flight from there to KSC, would begin March 7 for DFRC and March 5-9 at KSC. The trip by truck would precede the mating of Columbia to its Boeing 747 carrier, the brief flight test March 9 of ferry preparations and tile status, and the departure soon after for KSC. The Shuttle would be off-loaded and moved into the orbiter processing facility March 10-11. (NASA Release NE79-2)
ESA reported that the West German firm, Dornier System, leader of the STAR industrial consortium, would be prime contractor for a European spacecraft to participate in the international solar-polar mission (ISPM), a cooperative ESA-NASA project. The contract would cover design, development, manufacture, and testing, at a cost of more than 47MAU (million accounting units, worth U.S. $1.2 in 1979). The ISPM would make measurements outside the ecliptic plane and observations of the Sun using two spacecraft, one each from ESA and NASA, to be launched in February 1983 on the U.S. Space Shuttle. (ESA Release 25)
The Washington Post said NASA’s inspector general and the DOD were investigating charges that Rockwell International’s Space System Group beginning in 1977 had hidden cost overruns by charging expenses to the wrong projects. Work on the USAF’s Navstar satellite was charged to NASA’s Space Shuttle contract, employees alleged, and current costs of Shuttle development were charged to future operations, in violation of government budget rules. Present and former Rockwell employees had provided company documents to back up their statements. Ray Sena, an employee who had complained to higher management and to NASA officials, was formally suspended by Rockwell. Company officials admitted an investigation was in progress but refused comment. Although NASA learned of the situation in 1977, it only recently admitted that the Shuttle was at least $500 million over budget. (W Post, Nov 5/79, A-2)
MSFC reported that a delegation from the People’s Republic of China (PRC) visiting the United States since November would arrive at MSFC January 5 to investigate peaceful uses of space technology. Following up a visit to the PRC last July by Presidential Science Advisor Dr. Frank Press, the Chinese delegation, accompanied by NASA representatives, had visited several NASA centers and U.S. aerospace industry establishments. Among items of interest to the visitors at MSFC would be the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, currently undergoing tests. The PRC representatives were to be in the United States until mid-January and had concluded an informal agreement on developing a civilian communications system for the PRC and on buying equipment to receive Earth resources data from Landsat remote-sensing satellites. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch headed the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Jen Xin-min, director of the PRC’s Academy of Space Technology, headed the PRC delegation. (MSFC Release 79-2)
MSFC reported completion of flight-certification test firings of the Space Shuttle main engines June 27, with a simulated abort mission requiring the engine to fire 823 seconds. To detect potential weaknesses in systems or hardware, engineers would remove selected components and inspect them for wear and tear; after inspection and analysis of test data, the same test series would be repeated on the same engine to simulate typical mission profiles. J.R. Thompson, MSFC’s main-engine project manager, said that engine performance and operation during the test series was very satisfactory. Rockwell conducted the tests at NSTL. (MSFC Release 79-69)
NASA reported successful completion December 17 at NSTL in Mississippi of a full-duration 9-minute 10-second run of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article, a time longer than that needed to launch an actual Shuttle into orbit. This was the first time the whole system was operated for full duration. No problems occurred, and MSFC test managers said that all goals were achieved. The test article consisted of a cluster of three main engines mounted in a simulated orbiter aft section, drawing propellants from a flight-type external tank. The three engines were throttled back from 100% rated power level to 90%, 80%, and 70%; engine gimbaling and pulsing were successful. To check out two-engine performance, one engine was cut off early as planned, and the remaining two were operated at 70% rated power level for the last 5 seconds of testing. (NASA Release 79-178; MSFC Release 79-133)
Wire services reported that an explosion that damaged a Space Shuttle engine during test firing at Bay St. Louis, Miss., on December 27 might delay the first Shuttle launch, now scheduled for the end of September. Further tests would await determining the cause of the accident—apparently failure of a valve in a high-pressure pump feeding oxygen to a combustion chamber. The engine had completed 255 seconds of a 52-second test firing when the pump exploded, damaging the engine, and NASA would also need 3 to 4 weeks to repair damage to the test stand. Last September, when NASA announced delay of the first launch, originally scheduled for March, Associate Administrator John F. Yardley warned of further delays “if unforeseen problems arise or the tests are not entirely successful.” {NY Times, Jan 2/79 [UPI], A-13; W Post, Jan 4/79 [AP], A-2)
MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon carrying a Space Shuttle external tank and other components had begun an 11-day trip to KSC by way of the Tennessee River and the Gulf of Mexico. KSC would use the items to check out assembly and movement of the components in the vehicle assembly building and to train personnel in stacking the Shuttle on its mobile launch platform. MSFC said the waterways to the Gulf, swollen by recent rains, had receded enough to permit a normal trip to KSC. (MSFC Release
The Washington Star reported that NASA had reestablished radio contact with Voyager 1 speeding toward Saturn after the spacecraft apparently became disoriented December 13 during a commanded course correction and aimed its antenna in the wrong direction. JPL controllers had managed to make it “reorient itself and aim its antenna directly at earth.” (W Star, Dec 17/79, A-4) The press reported that a 14-hour dry-run test of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia got under way at Cape Canaveral December 16 after a day’s delay for routine checks. The orbiter integrated test would check out Columbia’s systems using equipment and engineering teams in control centers at the Cape and JSC. (NY Times, Dec 17/79, D-15; W Star, Dec 17/79, A-2; W Post, Dec 17/79, A-28) Dr. Paul MacCready, builder of the lightweight Gossamer Albatross that made the world’s first manpowered flight across die English Channel in June this year, saw his creation go on display in Philadelphia’s Franklin Institute, the Washington Star reported. MacCready was now planning a solar-powered Albatross, the paper said. {W Star, Dec 17/79, A-2)
In a move “necessary and proper to achieve the objective of national technical superiority through joint action with U.S. domestic concerns,” NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced that the agency would offer industry “equity partnership ventures” in use of the Space Shuttle, NASA technical advice, data, equipment, and facilities for commercial purposes. NASA had set up guidelines to ease U.S. industry entry into an area that, because of high technology and high economic risk, had traditionally been left to the federal government. Such a government-industry relationship would combine industry’s risk capital and experience with NASA’s resources to ensure U.S. leadership in space processing of materials. Areas of potential commercial interest included semiconductors, infrared and nuclear detectors, metallurgy, microwave devices, and medicine. (NASA Release 79-119)
MSFC reported the successful conclusion October 26 of three separate static-firing tests of the Space Shuttle main engine. The three test engines had completed a scheduled total of 1245 seconds of firing time in less than 12 hours; two engines were tested at NSTL in Mississippi; the other, in California. One of the pair tested in Mississippi fired for 520 seconds, the running time needed for Shuttle launch; the other fired for 665 seconds, the time required for a mission abort. Both these tests were part of a preliminary flight certification series. NASA had postponed a 510-second static test scheduled for October 24 [see October 25] because of a faulty sensor that indicated a hydrogen leak. (MSFC Release 79-119)
NASA announced that JSC was studying two ways to repair Space Shuttle tiles in orbit, both requiring crew members to go outside the Shuttle. JSC director Christopher Kraft called it “prudent” to be ready for in-orbit repairs, in case the tiles did not come up to specifications in actual fight: the thousands of heat-resistant blocks covering the underparts and sides of the orbiter might be damaged at launch and need patching before reentry. The first idea, using an extendable boom carrying television cameras and a platform, would relay images of a damaged area into the cockpit and sustain a spacesuited astronaut making external repairs. The other concept would use a jet backpack to maneuver an astronaut around the orbiter to inspect it and make repairs wherever necessary. JSC had three studies under way by General Electric, Martin Marietta, and McDonnell Douglas on repair materials and tools suitable for outer space. (NASA Release 79-120; JSC Release 79-58)
MFSC reported that the first Space Shuttle engine tested for flight acceptance had “passed with flying colors” a 520-second endurance test May 12 that simulated launch conditions. Scheduled for use on Columbia, this engine would undergo electrical and mechanical checkout before formal acceptance. The tests began April 25 with 1.5-second ignition-test firing, followed by a 100-second calibration-test firing May 2. After formal acceptance, the engine would go by truck to KSC for installation. The other two of the cluster of three Rockwell-built engines to be used on Columbia were at Space Technology Laboratories for the same series of tests. (MSFC Release 79-45; NASA Release 79-68)
MSFC reported that it had delivered most of the hardware that would be needed by the first Shuttle mission: main engines, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters. All three main engines had arrived at KSC; two had been installed, and the third was scheduled for next week. The first external propellant tank had been barged to KSC and installed in the VAB to await arrival of Columbia from the processing facility nearby. Flight hardware for two solid-fuel rocket boosters, except for the loaded motor segments, had been delivered to KSC, and the loaded parts were to arrive about September 20. (MSFC Release 79-82)
Today reported that Rockwell International, prime Space Shuttle contractor, had made “key management changes and major organizational realignments.. .similar to ones made within the space agency recently.” The paper said NASA now hoped to launch the Shuttle in September, two years behind schedule. {Today, Jan 4/80, 12A)
NASA announced selection of two firms, McDonnell Douglas and TRW, to receive parallel $1 million one-year contracts for design-definition studies of 25-kilowatt power systems for the STS. The power systems, using solar energy to support large payloads left in orbit, would be placed in a fixed orbit by the Space Shuttle to provide electric power, heat rejection, attitude control, communications, and data handling for a variety of payloads freeing the Shuttle from extended time in orbit and reducing payload cost per day in orbit. MSFC would manage the study contracts and any follow-on development flight system. (NASA Release 80-63)
NASA reported selection of Hughes Aircraft’s space and communications group for negotiation of a $40 million contract to be managed by ARC for a carrier spacecraft to transport the Galileo probe to Jupiter. Launched from the Space Shuttle in March 1984, the probe would reach the planet by July 1987, separate from the carrier, and enter the atmosphere to measure it for about one hour down to a level where pressure would be 10 times that of Earth’s. The carrier would be powered by two radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs); solar energy at Jupiter’s distance would be too weak to furnish power to the carrier, which would maintain contact with Earth during the entire mission, returning data both in real time and for playback on tape recorders. The carrier would receive data from the probe during its entry and descent into Jupiter’s atmosphere, transmitting it to Earth stations. Data on Jupiter’s atmosphere, believed to consist of the original material that formed the stars, would give scientists better understanding of Jupiter’s and Earth’s weather mechanisms. (NASA Release 80-171; ARC Release 80-79)
NASA had no plans to carry tourists into outer space, the Washington Star said, even though its offices around the United Slates had floods of requests for rides since the Space Shuttle project was unveiled in 1977. At least 15,000 people had tried to book seats, and 1,200 new requests arrived each week. “Non-astronauts may be aboard some missions to conduct experiments,” said Chester M. Lee, NASA’s director of space transportation systems, “but we’re not ready to book tourists. There is absolutely no provision or thought for non-working passengers.” (W Star, July 8/80, A-2)
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) reported that a team of its scientists was working on a solar-ultraviolet (UV) spectral irradiance monitor (SUSIM) for use on the Space Shuttle to study long-term variations in solar flux for more accurate monitoring of UV radiation from the solar chromosphere and corona. Solar radiation in the wavelengths under study control many photochemical processes in Earth’s atmosphere at altitudes below 100 kilometers; variations in the radiation may alter the composition of the lower atmosphere, affecting the lifetime of pollutants and ion density in the D region. The Navy also considered the D region of the atmosphere important because of its direct effect on communications systems. The principal investigator, Dr. Guenter E. Brueckner, said that measurements by conventional methods in the 120- to 400-nanometer wavelength range were not accurate enough for scientists to define values for solar-flux variations over time. The monitor would travel as a solar sensor on an early orbiter flight; the spacecraft pilot would use its real-time data to point directly at the Sun in order to monitor the entire solar disk and measure variation of its intensity with solar activity. Brueckneir’s team consisted of three scientists—Michael E. VanHoosier, Dr. Dianne K. Prinz, and Dr. John-David F.	Bartoe—developing and testing the SUSIM for Shuttle flight. Both Prinz and Bartoe had passed mental and physical tests for astronaut-scientists and had been chosen to make a Shuttle flight; one of them might obtain firsthand data on solar activity by actually using monitor on a Shuttle flight. (NRL Release 20-5-80C)
NASA announced that MSFC had awarded a $230 million cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace for full-scale production of Space Shuttle external tanks, the only part of the: Shuttle not recovered for reuse. Martin Marietta had an earlier contract for design, development, and delivery of nine tanks—three test articles and six flight articles—for Shuttle test flights. The new contract, for delivery of 7 flight tanks to support Shuttle operating missions, included long lead-time procurement of components and subassemblies for 5 additional tanks and raw material for 24 other additional tanks. Manufacturing of the external tanks would take place at NASA’s Michoud assembly facility. (NASA Release 80-100; MSFC Release 80-90) —MSFC announced that it planned to reduce the weight of the Shuttle external tank by 6,000 pounds, a change that could increase the Shuttle’s payload-carrying capability by about the same amount. The center amended its tank design and development contract with Martin Marietta, adding more than $42.9 million to cover the weight-reduction effort and modify tools used in future production. The change would affect tanks built under a new contract for full-scale tank production to support operational Shuttle launches. The first lightweight external tank would be delivered in the summer of 1982. (MSFC Release 80-93; NASA Release 80-102)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA scientists and engineers were “concerned that political maneuvering, as opposed to thoughtful planning, was playing too strong a part” in FY81 budget cuts affecting NASA science and applications programs. Delay in bringing NASA’s program before a House appropriations subcommittee scheduled to meet March 25 could force the agency off the hearing schedule for weeks, further endangering approval of the $300 million Space Shuttle supplemental for FY80. NASA and congressional observers feared administration efforts to delay announcement of federal program cuts until after primary elections set for the coming week. {AvWk, Mar 24/80, 21)
OMB told Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, that President Carter concurred with NASA’s request for a 1986 mission to make a detailed examination of the surface of Venus. Previously, both U.S. and Soviet probes had penetrated the planet’s cloud cover to send data over a few minutes to several hours; Pioneer Venus returned data on the atmosphere, but none had given an idea of the surface. The President would request the necessary funds in his FY82 budget. The Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) spacecraft, managed by JPL, weighing about 5,000 kilograms (11,000 pounds) at launch, and costing $500 to $600 million, would carry a synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) and other scientific instruments. Lanched from the Space Shuttle in May or August of 1986, it would arrive at Venus in December 1986 and circle it for seven months in a 300-kilometer (180-mile) near-polar orbit, taking radar pictures and measuring atmosphere as well as surface. VOIR images should disclose the presence of continents, ocean basins, mountain chains, rift valleys, fault belts, or volcanoes, as well as nature and timing of plate-tectonic activity (continental drift) or the size and frequency of occurrence of impact craters. (NASA Release 80-166)
JSC reported that parts of the remote-manipulator system (the robot crane that would handle inflight transfer of Space Shuttle cargo) were being tested in its Shuttle avionics integration laboratory. The system would be used on the Shuttle beginning with the second flight to place or retrieve satellites in space, to assemble structures or components, or if necessary to rescue crews by transferring them to another vehicle. The manipulator was a 50-foot arm with movable joints at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist; associated motors, gears,and sensors; and an end-effector serving as an ingenious hand. The test parts were a display and control panel, rotational and translational hand controllers, and an interface unit for manipulator control belonging to the electrical subsystem. The arm and its movement would be simulated by computers in the lab. In the tests, engineers and technicians from NASA and the contractor Space Aerospace, astronauts, and representatives of the Canadian Research Council would try to duplicate events to be encountered while operating the space crane in orbit. Astronauts Drs. Sally Ride, Judy Resnick, Norm Thagard, and Story Musgrave would controls arm movement by using the hand controllers in a mockup of the orbiter’s aft station. System operators would watch a computer-generated television scene duplicating the view the crew would have out of the cockpit aft window. The difficulty would come in operating the arm with the dynamics induced by arm movement: in the weightlessness of space, once a mass (the arm and its load) were moved, it would keep going until stopped by an equal and opposite force. When a command moved the arm, the control system had to be ready to command a counteracting move. Also, the orbiter would move in response to the arm, and vice versa. Interaction between arm and orbiter controls must be explored before flight; the simulations in this investigation were among the most sophisticated ever attempted at JSC. (JSC Release 80-034)
JSC described a simulated Shuttle mission ending in a return-to-launch-site abort, as one of a series run in the Shuttle avionics integration laboratory (SAIL) in preparation for launch later this year. The SAIL resembled a full-size orbiter stripped of its skin, with wires and connectors bared, configured with the same flight-qualifiable hardware and electrical systems being used on the real orbiter at KSC. SAIL employees would run test sequences on a 24-hour basis to check' out the complex Shuttle avionics system; a typical test would begin with a nominal phase (all systems operating normally), then engineers would inject failures to see if the flight system could cope. The Shuttle dynamic simulator would feed equations for aerodynamics, environment, and motion of the orbiter, solid-fuel rocket booster, and external tank into the test system. More than 300 mock missions would fly in the JSC lab before the projected November launch. (JSC Release 80-016)
NASA announced that it and the ESA had selected 37 scientific experiments for the first flight of Spacelab, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 1982. The experiments were in five categories: atmospheric physics and Earth observation; space plasma physics; material sciences and technology; astronomy and solar physics; and life science. NASA would sponsor 13 of the 37; ESA (a consortium of 11 nations), the others. Deferred for assignment to later flights were three NASA experiments and a major ESA facility; the factor preventing selection of all the experiments was mass. Each agency would be allowed to fly 1,392 kilograms (3,062 pounds) of equipment on the mission. Unlike Skylab, Spacelab would not be left unattended in space; it would remain in the Shuttle and be returned to Earth for use in another mission. (NASA Release 80-62; MSFC Release 80-66; ESA Info 9)
MSFC announced that NASA had signed a $183,960,000 contract with ESA for a second Spacelab to be delivered in 1984. Like the first, the new Spacelab would be built by ERNO of West Germany, prime ESA contractor, with at least 26 subcontractors in ESA nations as well as the United States to make components and subassemblies. MSFC was responsible for technical support; JSC would handle operations; Kennedy Space Center (KSC) would be responsible for integrating Spacelab with the Space Shuttle and for launch. (MSFC Release 80-11)
The Space Shuttle Columbia, OV-102, rolled out of KSC’s orbiter-processing facility at 6:01 p.m. and moved to the VAB for mating to its external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters. Next rollout, from VAB to launch pad, would occur late in December. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt Nov 26/80; NASA anno Nov 24/80)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Rocketdyne officials had decided that widespread modification of Space Shuttle flight-engine welds made with welding rods from a suspect lot would not be necessary. Last month the company reported that it might have to straighten a large number of welds, but it had now decided to limit the modifications to an area of hydrogen line located near the base of the engine nozzles. The modified engines would be reinstalled on Orbiter 102 by mid-March, the magazine said. (AvWk, Jan 14/80, 21)
NASA announced award of its largest contract so far to a small business firm. KSC entered a fixed-price contract of $6,689,666 to W&J Construction Company of Cocoa, Fla., for work on Pad B of Launch Complex 39 where the Space Shuttle would be launched in 1982 when it became operational. W&J would put in long-run pipes and cables to pump and monitor fuels, coolant, nitrogen and gaseous helium, compressed air, and hydraulic fluids, from storage areas to the fixed and the rotating service structures. Connections to the Space Shuttle would be from the two service towers. The contract would be completed in 20 months. (NASA Release 80-152) •
NASA announced that, contrary to recently published reports, it was not taking reservations for travel on Space Shuttle missions. Recent articles on NASA plans to carry small experimental payloads on the Shuttle had mentioned a deposit of $500 to reserve payload space; the reference to a reservation had been taken to imply passenger space. NASA said that it would not offer seats on Shuttle flights to paying passengers. (NASA Release 80-2)
MSFC said that the Michoud facility near New Orleans had begun assembling the lightweight external-propellant tank for the Space Shuttle. Built by Martin Marietta Aerospace, the modified tank would weigh 6,000 pounds less than its predecessor, increasing Shuttle payload capacity by about that amount. Recent structural tests showed that reducing thickness of skin panels would not affect tank integrity; changing materials of some components would also take advantage of recent research. The external tank (actually two tanks connected by a collar-like intertank) would contain liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants for the three Shuttle main engines and would be the only major element not recovered for reuse. First of the lightweight tanks should be ready for delivery in the summer of 1982 for the fifth Shuttle launch. (MSFC Release 80-155)
NASA reported “highly successful” completion of a third static test on a Space Shuttle main engine at NSTL April 19, last of a series simulating power levels necessary to abort at full power in a Shuttle launch. Previous tests were on March 31 and April 14. The engine used (2004) was fired for 10 minutes, 10 seconds with 6 minutes at the 109% power level; this engine had a total firing time of 12,911 seconds (3.58 hours), equivalent to about 25 Shuttle flights. It would now undergo preliminary flight certification tests, 13 static firings at 102% of rated power level. (NASA Release 80-55; MSFC Release 80-58)
NASA reported that a final test firing of the Shuttle solid-fuel booster motor February 13 in the Utah desert was successful, and the motor would be ready for flight as soon as test-data results were available. Tests of this motor had begun in July 1977 with static firing of the first of four prototypes; three more development tests followed, the last Februaiy 17, 1979. A series of test firings of flight-type motors began June 13, 1979, to qualify them for manned flight; the test just concluded was the third and final firing of that series. Robert E. Lindstrom, manager of the Shuttle projects office of MSFC, said completion of the tests meant that the solid-fuel booster motors would perform successfully in flight. After propellant burnout, the boosters would separate and plunge into the ocean for retrieval and reuse. Two of the solid-fuel boosters were already on the launcher at KSC awaiting integration with other components (external tank and the orbiter itself) in preparation for the first Shuttle flight later this year. The assembled motor, major component of the booster, was more than 35 meters (115 feet) long and 3.5	meters (12 feet) in diameter, largest rocket motor of its type developed for space flight and the first built for manned spacecraft; it would generate 3 million pounds of thrust. (MSFC Release 80-18; NASA Release 80-25)
INTELSAT announced that Guinea became the 105th member in a ceremony at the U.S. State Department when Ambassador Mamady Lamine Conde signed the operating agreement. Guinea planned to operate a ground station using the Intelsat spacecraft located over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-15-1) July 15.'The Wall Street Journal said that ESA would go ahead with a $125 million probe of Halley’s comet because original plans for a $370-$470 million joint mission with NASA had become impossible due to U.S. budget cuts. The original plan called for launch of a Space Shuttle that would have sent a satellite to Halley’s as well as to Tempel 2, a comet much farther out in space. NASA had to scrub the two-comet mission because it couldn’t get the money for a new kind of space engine to make the flight; the Wall Street Journal said that it was still studying a stopgap plan to use an old-fashioned rocket to shoot a spacecraft past Halley’s when it approached Earth. ESA now planned to put up a 750-pound satellite, Giotto [see July 10], from Kourou in July 1985 to rendezvous with Halley’s in March 1986. (IKS'/, July 15/80, 30) July i7.The Washington Star reported that discovery of a “serious potential safety defect” in the nation’s most widely used jet engine had led the FAA to order mandatory inspections for two-thirds of the short- and medium-range commercial jetliners in the United States. The engine was standard on three major planes: the medium-range Boeing 727, with three engines, and two short-range planes with two engines each, the Boeing 737 and the McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Each FAA-ordered inspection on a Pratt & Whitney JT8D engine would take 170 hours to disassemble it to the point where it could be checked. Some of the engines were nearly new; others had been serving for several years: a JT8D would normally be retired after 20,000 cycles in service. When a Hawaiian Airline DC-9 blew up on takeoff at Honolulu June 15, FAA inspection revealed that a portion of the engine was subject to metal fatigue and failure because of the factory machining of the metal. No serious injuries occurred in the Hawaii incident. However, random FAA checking showed that other planes equipped with JT8D engines had cracks in the same engine spot as the Hawaii plane. The potential flaw in the engines was the eighth compressor hub, a 591-pound wheel with an array of blades located in the middle of the 3,000- to 4,000 pound engine. Each engine had 13 compressor hubs, each with a successively smaller set of fans to collect air and force it through smaller areas into the fuel-combustion chamber. Machining of a flange on the eighth compressor hub was ground against the grain of the metal, putting unusual strain on that part. FAA spokesman Dennis Feldman could not estimate the cost of the inspection programs, thought to be in tens of millions of dollars; nor could he give any definitive answer as to whether the manufacturer or the airline would have to cover the cost. (W Star, July 17/80, A-l)
NASA announced that it would maintain an expendable launch-vehicle capability at the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) in Florida as a backup to the Space Shuttle during transition to Space Transportation System (STS) operation. It would use the standard Delta launch vehicle, capable of putting spacecraft weighing up to 1,100 kilograms (2,400 pounds) into orbit. NASA would charge commercial Delta users $22 million per launch at the outset. (NASA Release 80-22)
Newspapers reported NASA’s selection of 19 astronaut candidates for Space Shuttle training, the second group of pilots and scientists specifically picked for that purpose. Those chosen in the 1978 group of 35, including the first women and blacks among civilian astronauts, received astronaut wings at JSC in August 1979. In the new group was Dr. William F. Fisher, husband of Dr. Anna Fisher, who was selected two years ago; the Seabrook, Tex., physicians were the first married couple chosen by the United States. The 8 new pilot candidates (one black) and 11 mission specialists (two women and one Hispanic) would, if successful, join the 62 astronauts now on duty with NASA. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly 30 or 40 missions a year with up to seven astronauts on a mission. Pilot selections were Lt. Col. John E. Blaha, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Charles F.	Bolden, Jr., U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Col. Roy D. Bridges, Jr., U.S. Air Force; Maj. Guy S. Gardner, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Ronald J. Grabe, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Brian D. O’Connor, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. Richard N. Richards, U.S. Navy; and Lt. Cdr. Michael J. Smith, U.S. Navy. Mission-specialist selections besides Dr. William Fisher were Dr. James P. Baglan, anesthesiologist; Dr. Franklin R. Chang, physicist; Dr. Mary L. Cleave, research engineer; Bonnie J. Dunbar, JSC flight controller; Capt. David C. Hilmers, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. David C. Leestma, U.S. Navy; John M. Lounge, JSC flight controller; Capt. Jerry L. Ross, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Sherwood C. Spring, U.S. Army; and Maj. Robert C. Springer, U.S. Marine Corps. (NY Times, May 30/80, A-ll; W Post, May 30/80, A-8; NASA Release 80-78; JSC Release 80-038)
NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
Eighteen years after he blasted away from a launch pad at Complex 14, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, to become the first American to orbit the Earth, Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio) returned to dedicate a marble memorial of his flight and those of Mercury astronauts Scott Carpenter, Walter Schirra, and Gordon Cooper, donated in 1978 by the American Monument Association but held back for dedication until gantries at the site were removed and sold for scrap. The Washington Star said the site was now desolate, “surrounded by palmettos and visited only by an occasional alligator or rattlesnake.” About 600 persons at the ceremony heard Glenn describe the new U.S. goal of routine and economical access to space with the Space Shuttle. {W Star, Feb 21/80, A-2; Today, Feb. 12/80, 1QA; NASA Actv, May 80, 19)
NASA reported a major milestone for a Shuttle main engine February 8, with completion of a second series of flight certification tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) near Bay St. Louis, Miss. In the two series of tests (mostly run for 520 seconds at 100% of rated power level), the engine accumulated more than 10,000 seconds of firing time, equivalent to that required for 19 Shuttle flights; in one test, the engine ran at 102% of rated power, and in another it ran for 823 seconds to simulate an aborted mission. The first series of tests last year began March 27 and ended June 27. (MSFC Release 80-19; NASA Release 80-26)
JSC announced NASA selection of two California aerospace firms to negotiate contracts for production of solar cells as a supplemental power source for the Space Shuttle orbiter. Applied Solar Energy Corporation and Spectrolab would each receive a $300,000 contract to develop a large-area low-cost solar cell for NASA’s proposed power-extension package, to be produced at the rate of 144,000 space-qualified solar cells per year, reducing the cost to $30 per watt. (Solar cells now cost from $80 to $120 per watt.) The power-extension item would be a 2,000-pound package folded into the orbiter cargo bay; in orbit, the item would be moved out by a remote mechanical arm, the 177-foot wings unfolding to supply the Shuttle with 26 kilowatts of electric power. (JSC Release 80-032)
NASA reported that MSFC had chosen Ball Aerospace Division to negotiate a $9.5 million contract for design, development, and manufacture of a chemical release module for use in the first large-scale controlled investigations of dynamic phenomena outside Earth’s atmosphere. Information on such processes in Earth’s magnetosphere, ionosphere, and upper atmosphere was hard to obtain because the areas were so enormous and the dynamic activity was invisible. Scheduled for mid-1983 launch on the Space Shuttle, the self-contained free-flying module would release in space chemical elements that would absorb sunlight and reflect distinctive colors; other chemicals would glow when reacting with oxygen particles in the upper atmosphere. Motion of atoms and ions colored in this way could be tracked. During the module’s six-month lifetime, it would make 20 to 30 chemical releases for visual, camera, and radar observation. (NASA Release 80-99; MSFC Release 80-89)
MSFC reported the first sustained operation of the Space Shuttle main engine at full power level, 109% of rated power for 6 minutes, in static firing tests March 31 at NSTL. The engine ran for 10 minutes, 10 seconds, reaching the objectives attempted in an aborted run the previous week. (MSFC Release 80-47; NASA Release 80-42)
NASA announced selection of Ford Aerospace to negotiate a contract for overall system-design engineering on preliminary operations requirements and test-support system for the Space Telescope. Work under the $9.2 million contract should be done by December 1983, to support the space-telescope mission. Ford Aerospace would run the system for six months before turning it over to NASA. The system located at GSFC would control telescope attitude, point it, and monitor the on-board systems 24 hours a day, 7 days per week. Besides engineering design, hardware and software, and support for facility construction, the contract covered design of the project operations-control center plus required software and hardware. Ford Aerospace would provide testing, integration, installation, maintenance, documentation, training, and operating services for the system, including launch on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 80-80)
MSFC noted the arrival of the age of automation in its Materials and Processes Laboratory, where industrial robots were improving manufacturing techniques in Space Shuttle hardware production. Robotics, integrated into totally computer-controlled systems, would help meet high launch-rate fabrication and between-flight refurbishment requirements of reusable Shuttle items. One of the two MSFC robots was helping spray foam insulation for thermal protection on booster structures such as forward and aft skirts or nosecones. The second, currently used for advanced welding, would serve in a thermal protection process for the external tank. A third robot to arrive in December would run a high-pressure water blaster to strip insulation from reusable Shuttle hardware. (MSFC Release 80-138)
JSC reported that its television engineers were working on modifications of a U.S. Air Force camera for live television broadcast by crew members on spacewalks outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA would buy three systems for flight, training, and qualifications at a cost (including integration, testing, and mission planning) of about $750,000. The camera (which would include a battery pack, FM transmitter, antenna, and a receiver inside the orbiter, with other support hardware), located on an astronaut’s visor assembly, as miners’ lights are mounted on their foreheads, would see what the astronaut saw and send black-and-white pictures to a television monitor watched by crew members on the spacecraft. A wide-angle lens would give a 19.7-mm focal length with a 32° horizontal field-of-view; lens range would be present to focus from about 15 inches to the distance needed. The inside crew members could see hardware or spacewalk activity in real time, helping make joint decisions on repair. (JSC Release 80-052)
MSFC reported successful completion March 13 of the first full-power test (10% of rated power level) of the Space Shuttle main engine. The test consisted of a 125-second run on a single engine, 10 seconds at 109%; a total of 26 seconds ran above normal rated power. This major step toward certification of the engine for full-power abort capability envisioned possible malfunction of a single engine, requiring thrust in excess of rated power from the other two engines to ensure achievement of orbit or return for safe landing. Rockwell International, prime Shuttle contractor, conducted the tests at NSTL in Mississippi. (MSFC Release 80-36; NASA Release 80-36)
Changes made during the past year to the three main engines designated for the first flight of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia had led NASA to set up further tests, the agency announced. Modifications included high-piessure turbopumps, valves, and nozzles. Acceptance-tested between April and July 1979, the engines would be shipped from KSC to NSTL in Mississippi for reacceptance firing and return to KSC. The two- to three-month testing would not affect the timing of the first flight, now scheduled for a date between November 1980 and March 1981. About 6 weeks before the planned launch, the engines would be fired again for 20 seconds on the launch pad. (NASA Release 80-60; JSC Release 80-030)
NASA announced a student involvement project, a joint activity with the NSTA. Up to 200 semifinalists in a competition to develop experiments for flight on the Shuttle and their teachers would attend preliminary conferences in 10 regions to discuss the proposals with other students as well as NASA and industry scientists; many of the regional conferences would be at NASA centers. NASA awarded the science teachers’ group a contract to conduct the competition and select the winners. From the 200, 10 would be selected whose concepts would best use the capabilities of the Shuttle. The 10 national winners would attend a special conference at KSC late in 1981; all entrants would receive a certificate of participation. Shuttle flights should begin in March 1981; the winning experiments might go on flights in 1981 or 1982. (NASA Release 80-132)
MSFC reported successful firing of three Space Shuttle main engines mounted in a test article for 535 seconds in the eighth test of the main propulsion system. A similar firing for 555 seconds occurred 3 weeks ago. In the latest test, engineers for the first time gimbaled the engines while including a “pogo” effect (a phenomenon of cyclic pressures in the propellant system that had occurred in earlier launch vehicles) to demonstrate the engine accumulator’s ability to prevent pogo during flight. Another successful first was the simulation of failure in thrust-vector control to see whether redundant systems would perform properly. The test had been planned for early morning so that engineers could observe ice and frost conditions on the external tank when it was filled with supercold propellants during nighttime hours, in the absence of heat from the Sun. Rockwell International’s space systems group conducted the main propulsion-system testing for MSFC at NSTL. (MSFC Release 80-41)
In the last of a series on “Life Aboard the Space Shuttle,” KSC’s Spaceport News described the unisex space suits provided for the pilot and the ranking mission specialist on each flight. No longer tailor-made for an astronaut, the Shuttle space suit would come in small, medium, and large sizes to be worn by men or women. It consisted of an upper and a lower section snapping together with sealing rings, with a life-support system in the upper half. In an emergency, each of the other crew members would use a “personal rescue enclosure,” a 34-inch-diameter ball fitted with life-support and communications gear for one person. Nonsuited crew would climb into the enclosures, and the suited astronauts would transfer them from a disabled vessel to a rescue ship by carrying them, by attaching them to the remote-manipulator arm used for deploying payloads, or by using a pulley line between the two spacecraft. (Spaceport News, Aug 29/80, 4) During August: NASA distributed its Program Plan, Fiscal Years 1981 through 1985, containing “initial guidance for NASA’s activities over the short-term and, to some extent, the long-term future.” The introduction noted the current drive to curb inflation and resulting cuts in the federal budget—‘including NASA’s”—but called for a perception of the work the agency was technologically ready to undertake “and should undertake in the interest of the Nation.” Citing problems raised by “absence of major new initiatives,” the introduction called for “sound, logical, technological progression toward achievement” of U.S. goals in aeronautics and space. Major goals to be met by the plan’s 46 “major initiatives” were: —to fill the transportation and orbital operations needs of science and applications space missions and most transportation needs of national security space missions; —to apply space technology in remote sensing, communications, materials processing, and technology transfer that “hold promise for immediate or potential benefits to humanity”; —to continue developing aeronautical technology; —to improve “by a factor of 10 to 100” NASA’s ability to acquire, transmit, and process data; —to advance knowledge of how energy is transported from the Sun and through the interplanetary medium and how that energy effects Earth; —to ensure good health and performance of humans in space and to study the effects of gravity on living systems; —to understand the origin and distribution of life in the universe and the relationship between life and its habitat. Major initiatives in the field of aeronautics numbered 6; in space science, 8; in space and terrestrial applications, 20; and in space transportation systems, 12, for a total of 46. Half the initiatives listed in a similar program plan (for FY80-FY84) had been postponed: Of the 23 missions, 11 were previously scheduled for 1981; 7 for 1982; 4 for 1983; and 1 for 1984. Of the 11 previously scheduled for 1981, 9 were now postponed to 1982; and 1 each, to 1983 and 1984. Of the 7 missions previously scheduled for 1982, 5 were postponed to 1983; 1, to 1984; and 1, to a time “to be determined.” Of the 4 missions previously scheduled for 1983, 1 was scheduled for 1984; and 3, for 1985. The sole mission previously scheduled for 1984 had been postponed to 1985. International programs in which NASA would tie concerned during the next fiscal years would include cooperative activities (Space Shuttle and Spacelab; space applications such as remote sensing, geodynamics, materials processing, and communications; space science such as astrophysics, planetary research, solar-terrestrial relationships, and solar energy; exchanges of experiments with the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union); reimbursable launches; and foreign competition in remote sensing, communications, spacecraft launching, and aircraft development. The volume included probable schedules for NASA missions and tables of funding and development needed to carry out the program. Space transportation funding, for instance, showed increases in FY81 and FY82, then leveled off. Funding for applications showed rapid increase; that for aeronautics, space technology, and space science would also increase but at a slower rate. The 235-page program plan contained detailed lists of activities in each program area, with graphs and tables showing schedules and funding for that area. The book concluded with an index and a list of the abbreviations and acronyms used in NASAs programs. (Text, NASA Hq Mgmt Sppt Ofc, distributed Aug 80)
JSC reported signing of a letter contract with Martin Marietta Aerospace for development and production of an in-orbit tile-repair kit to be used on llie Space Shuttle. The letter preceded an official award of contract and aulliorized llie firm to go ahead willi design and development of llie kit. Estimated value of llie contract was $2.1 million. (JSC Release 80-004)
The Washington Star quoted Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s statement before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation that NASA’s Space Shuttle program was “critical” to defense planning. The committee was considering the FY81 budget requests of NASA and DOD. (WStar, Feb 8/80, A-5)
ESA reported that European and U.S. astronauts scheduled to fly with the first Spacelab on the ninth Shuttle flight would attend a training session May 27-30 on using an infrared-grill spectrometer to check the composition of the stratosphere to monitor the effect of human activity on its evolution. Besides a commander and copilot of the Shuttle, the Spacelab crew would include two payload specialists (one each from ESA. and the United States) and two mission specialists in charge of the interface between the Shuttle and Spacelab. Two of the five payload specialists attending the training session would be selected six months before flight: physicist Ulf Merbold of West Germany; astronomer Claude Nicollier of Switzerland; physicist Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands; physicist Michael Lampton, University of California at Berkeley; and biomedical engineer Byron Lichtenberg, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NASA mission specialists attending the training session would be atmospheric physicist Owen Garriott and astronomer Robert Parker. (ESA Info 13)
MSFC reported that July 21 had marked the end of an era: Gustav A. Kroll, last of the original 118-man “von Braun team” to leave the center, retired just six weeks short of having 35 years of U.S. government service. He had headed the structures division of MSFC’s Structures and Propulsion Laboratory. Kroll arrived in the United States in 1945 in Operation Paperclip and worked at Ft. Bliss, Tex., with the von Braun team, which transferred to Huntsville in 1950. Kroll became a U.S. citizen in 1954. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1976 for “guiding the overall structural design of the solid rocket boosters,” two of which would be used in the first two minutes of flight on each Space Shuttle launch, recovered, and refurbished for reuse. He had worked in structures throughout his career: “all of them—every one of Marshall’s projects—Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn, Shuttle—all of them,” he said. Looking back, “there are no favorites, but the highlight would have to be the Saturn V flight and landing on the moon.” (MSFC Release 80-101)
NASA held a press briefing on the solar maximum mission slated for launch February 14. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said that exploration of Earth’s nearest star was significant both scientifically and technologically. Dr. Harold Glaser of NASA’s solar terrestrial division noted that the Sun, dominant energy source for the Earth, was a variable star in that its energy output varied in periods running from 10 minutes to ll years (the so-called solar cycle) as well as over periods of centuries. The solar variations causes variations on Earth; for instance, the solar flares known to have a periodicity of 11 years. In short time periods, a flare is the most energetic manifestation of solar changes, with significant effects: Earth suffers communications problems along with atmospheric heating and other phenomena, and the trillion kilotons spewed into the solar system would affect almost all the planets. The focus of the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) would be to understand more about solar flares in order to predict their occurrence. The magnetic field of the Sun had also been found to vary with a 22-year periodicity, strongly correlated with drought in the U.S. western plains. During the 17th century, solar activity apparently ceased for about 80 years, a period called the Maunder Minimum which featured a “mini-ice Age” documented in northern Europe. This seems to have happened more frequentBLANK NOT FILMED ly than previously realized. Space research during the last 20 years had produced these data, Glaser said, including evidence that the Sun might be changing sides, with a corresponding increase of luminosity or incident radiation. Also, the Sun appeared to oscillate rather like a fluid, probably because of interior activity whose nature was as yet unknown. Joseph Purcell of GSFC, standing in for project manager Peter Burr who was ill, described the spacecraft and its planned retrieval by the Space Shuttle, and the modular design that would allow it to be serviced in orbit if necessary. The SMM would be the first NASA satellite designed for retrieval and first to include the tracking and data-relay satellite capability; at 5,000 pounds, it would also be the heaviest payload launched by a Delta. Purcell explained the 24-hour computer watch on the SMM, calling it an operation with “very intense man-machine relationships.” Kenneth J. Frost, also of GSFC as SMM project scientist, described the payload as essentially one experiment to determine the nature of solar flares, using seven instruments and a “very detailed scientific game plan.” Investigators needed a 24-hour watch to evaluate the plan’s progress and to react to targets of opportunity on the Sun. For instance:, a flare on the Sun’s west limb would be observed on Earth and by a series of spacecraft in orbit around the Earth, so that the quality and completeness of the observations would “far outstrip anything we’ve ever had before.” The SMM spacecraft would have a productive lifetime of about two years, Frost said, and the scientific group at GSFC would consist of investigators prepared to spend that much time away from their home institutions. In response to a question, he pointed out that the broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum to be investigated by SMM could not penetrate Earth’s atmosphere. (Text, Feb 8/80; NASA Release
MSFC reported that it had shipped two segments of a Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor, used during 1979 in mated vertical ground vibration tests, to Thiokol’s Wasatch division in Utah to be refurbished and loaded with propellant for use as a flight motor after being combined with other segments shipped earlier in January. (MSFC Release 80P-12)
Aviation Week & Space Technology said that cuts in NASA’s FY81 budget would delay the international solar polar mission to 1985, although $135 million in contracts had already been awarded in the United States and Europe. Delay would force “major restructuring of the contracts’—$80 million to TRW for the U.S. spacecraft and $55.8 million to Dornier as prime contractor for the European spacecraft—and would give ESA additional problems with its budget, although NASA expressed hope last week that ESA would remain a part of the project. A split mission with the U.S. and European spacecraft on separate launches would increase costs substantially. Aviation Week & Space Technology said that NASA was “unable to discuss this situation before Congress last week” because of an administration embargo on new budget projections. Although NASA could testify on the Space Shuttle need for a $300 million FY80 supplemental appropriation, the embargo had forced the House appropriations subcommittee to cancel two days of NASA hearings on FY81 space science and applications. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch said that, unless the supplement was passed, contractors would lay off up to 20,000 skilled workers, and the overall cost of the Shuttle program could increase by $600 to $900 million. The combined impact on NASA and DOD could go as high as $1.1 billion, according to subcommittee members. {AvWk, Mar 31/80, 27)
JSC reported that it would conduct a 30-hour mock mission of Space Shuttle Columbia beginning at 8 a.m. Wednesday, January 23, running through orbital operations to landing. Flight directors and their teams of controllers would monitor system performance, carry out navigation and targeting, and watch support-crew adherence to mission timelines. Simulation specialists would spring problems on the controllers and on the orbiter crews going through routine duties in the Shuttle simulator and another orbiter mockup. About 500 persons would participate in the “flight,” including prime crew John Young and Robert Crippen and backup crew Joe Engle and Dick Truly. Flight directors would be Neil Hutchinson for the launch team, Chuck Lewis for the orbit team, and Don Puddy for the landing team. This simulation would check out operational procedures over an extended period; previous simulations had not lasted as long. More 30-hour practice flights would occur every six weeks to two months in preparation for the real thing. (JSC Release
Ground testing of Space Shuttle engines suffered another setback, the New York Times reported, when three engines shut down prematurely during a static test firing in Mississippi. The engines, identical to three now on the Columbia at Cape Canaveral, were supposed to fire for 9 minutes, 41 seconds, the time it would take to put a Shuttle into orbit. NASA said that instruments indicated overheating in part of a turbopump. This 11th firing of the three engines in the test series would have been the 5th for the full time needed to launch a Shuttle. Columbia was scheduled for its maiden launch in March 1981. (NY Times, Nov 4/80, C-3)
NASA reported successful testing April 14 of a Space Shuttle main engine at 109% of rated power for six minutes, in the second such test in two weeks conducted by Rockwell International at NSTL. The 10-minute, 10-second test met all objectives; NASA said that it planned at least one more firing in this series on this engine, which had accumulated 183 minutes of firing time in two series of preliminary flight-certification tests. (NASA Release 80-49; MSFC Release 80-55)
NASA reported award to United Space Boosters, Inc., subsidiary of United Technologies Corporation, of a contract for a two-ship recovery force to retrieve used Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters from the Atlantic Ocean. This supplemented a contract under which the firm assembled and processed solid-fuel rocket boosters for flight. The ships would locate and retrieve expended booster casings, parachutes, and other equipment from the Atlantic and deliver them to a disassembly facility at Cape: Canaveral Air Force Station. The disassembly facility was on the eastern shore of the Banana River, a shallow area where an endangered species, the sea cow or manatee, made its home. The ships would use a 425-HP waterjet stern thruster instead of propellers that could maim or kill the manatees [see May 29]. The ships, UTC Liberty and UTC Freedom, were being built and would be delivered in October 1980 and January 1981; both would be used on each Shuttle mission, each retrieving one booster and its components. At liftoff, the boosters would bum simultaneously with the three-engine cluster on the Shuttle. After about two minutes they would be jettisoned and land in the Atlantic about 257 kilometers (160 miles) downrange from KSC, their descent being slowed by three parachutes on each casing. Each vessel would carry four parachute-rollers to handle the three main and single drogue parachutes on each booster and cranes to hoist aboard the collateral flight equipment. The ships would carry equipment to plug the nozzles, pump water out of the casings, and ready them for towing to the disassembly facility, where they would be cleaned and taken apart for shipment to Utah and reloading with solid-fuel propellant. Each casing could be used for up to 20 missions, reducing the cost of flight operations. The ships would also have sophisticated electronic communications and navigation gear such as radars, sonars, loran, direction finders, fathometers, and gyrocompasses. (NASA Release 80-89)
LaRC reported on a meeting of representatives from industry and six NASA centers to review the agency’s large space antenna program. Shuttle flights in the mid-1980s would include models of several antenna concepts: the large antennas designed for communications and other Earth-oriented applications, as well as for purely scientific studies of the solar system and the universe, would be transported into space folded into the Shuttle’s cargo bay and deployed in Earth orbit. Previous work concentrated on the structural and material requirements of each concept; the meeting would identify work still needed on system technology, ground testing, and technical resources to complete development. (LaRC Release 81-9) February JO: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) was undertaking the first mass shift of satellites at 22,300 miles altitude in space, moving three meteorological satellites to new areas to improve their product and to prevent possible collision of one of them in its present crowded location, the Department of Commerce (DOC) reported. NOAA would move Goes 4 (the geostationary operational environmental satellite launched in September 1980) from 98°W to 135 °W as backup for failing Goes 3\ NOAA would not move Goes 3 while it continued to function, but would put Goes 4 as near as possible without its interfering with communications. On January 29, NOAA moved a third meteorological satellite, Goes 2, from 105 °W to 109 °W to reduce the danger of collision with other craft or space debris; this satellite served primarily to relay weatherfax charts to ground stations. NOAA had to operate two geostationary satellites at all times: “Goes Fast” for the eastern United States and Canada and for most of the Atlantic, and “Goes West” for the western United States and Canada, for Alaska, and for the Pacific westward to Hawaii. On January 29, NOAA also boosted its 7-year old Sms 1 into a 22,600 mile high orbit, where it would remain indefinitely. After NASA’s launch of a seventh geostationary satellite, planned for March, NOAA would move Sms 2 from its station at 75 °W to a nearby location on standby. (NOAA Release
NASA launched the world’s largest telecommunications satellite, Intelsat V-2, from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur at 6:42 p.m. EDT into a highly elliptical transfer orbit with 35,960-kilometer apogee, 172-kilometer perigee, 633.9-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. Originally scheduled for May 21, the launch was delayed by computer problems in the rocket’s main safety-control system. The huge communications satellite, weighing more than 2 tons, was second in a new series of nine international communications satellites the first having been launched December 9, 1980, as an on-orbit spare for the Atlantic network, which would eventually consist of four satellites. The first five Intelsat Vs would be launched by Atlas Centaur; the next three, by Europe’s Ariane booster. Average estimated cost of an Atlas Centaur launch was $42 million; that of an Ariane launch was $27 million. Overall cost of the Intelsat V program was $680 million, or some $76 million for each mission; estimated average cost of each satellite was $34 million. Intelsat V-2, after coming on station at 355 °E for a month of testing, would be operational by July at 335.5 °E, handling communications between the Americas and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. It could transmit 12,000 telephone calls simultaneously in addition to two television color channels, having twice the capacity of Intelsat IV-As previously launched by NASA for INTELSAT. The 106-nation organization jointly owned and operated 12 satellites over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans in order to handle two-thirds of the world’s overseas communications, from telegrams and telephone calls to television and data. In 1984, INTELSAT would begin a series of three improved Intelsat V-As capable of 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels; 1986 would inaugurate Intelsat Vis, each handling more than 40,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels and designed for launch by either the Ariane or the Space Shuttle. (NASA MOR-491-203-81-02 [prelaunch] May 20/81, [postlaunch] June 17/81; NASA Release 81-60; INTELSAT Release 81-10-1; W Post, May 24/81, A-3, D/SD, May 27/81, 140; A/D, May 28/81, 151; Spacewarn SPX-332, June 30/81)
The Japanese government accepted a U.S. proposal to use the U.S. Air Forces’ Kadena Airbase on Okinawa Island as an emergency landing area for the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia, the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) reported. Tokyo Kyodo said NASA was arranging sites for emergency landings at six airports, three domestic and three abroad. The agreement with Japan covered only four test flights; other flights would need further negotiations. Officials of Japan’s foreign and defense ministries would discuss safety measures because nearby Naha airport was in constant use for both civil and military flights. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Mar 5/81)
NASA officials began a “tanking exercise” of the Shuttle on its KSC launch pad to see if newly installed water-pressure systems would prevent recurrence of shockwaves produced by booster exhaust during the April 12 liftoff. The New York Times quoted officials as saying that shockwave reduction was “mandatory” before Columbia could head for space again. Columbia, already erected on the pad for its second mission, contained a payload of five experiments and a 50-foot mechanical arm put aboard in June when the cargo bay was “closed out,” the New York Times said. NASA might remove a package of scientific experiments rather than risk damaging it during liftoff. (NY Times, Sept 15/81, C-2) —MSFC said September 8 that the Shuttle’s external tank was “successfully filled with liquid propellants” in a cryo-loading test at KSC designed to check out ground and vehicle systems. The success was “a major milestone” toward the second Shuttle flight, now scheduled for October 9. (MSFC Release
Biggest and best customer of the Space Shuttle, developed and operated by a civilian agency, would be the Department of Defense (DOD), said the Washington Star in one of a series of articles on the Shuttle program. At least 21 of 75 spaceflights planned before 1986 would be military missions, and neither NASA nor DOD would say what the flights were for. DOD had contributed millions of dollars to the Shuttle program in hardware and personnel, including a multibillion-dollar facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base for launches into polar orbit. Although the Shuttle would serve both civilian and military purposes, the two sides showed differing degrees of confidence: current boosters had reached orbit only 90% of the time, 10% dumping expensive satellites into the sea. “We have yet to achieve routine access to space,” said Lt. Gen. Richard C. Henry, commander of the U.S. Air Force’s Space Division. Shuttle reliability should be “as close to 100% as you can get.” Most NASA missions slated for the 1980s and beyond could not be flown without the huge cargo bay of the Shuttle. The military, however, would keep its Adas and Titan expendable boosters just in case. Space, said Henry, was the high ground, “crucial for collecting and disseminating information, for reducing the confusion of battle, even for improving combat efficiency. . . . Everything we put up is supportive of our national security, but nothing is combative.” DOD, he added, had “made commitments far in excess of any civil users.” (W Star, Mar 24/81, A-8)
NASA said that the most likely date for ferrying the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia back to KSC would be April 25 for the flight to Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma and April 26 for the flight from Tinker to KSC. Delays in deservicing were “mainly due to first-time-thru problems,” the agency said, referring to the lack of interface between Columbia and the mate/demate device “because of the unavailability of OV-2” which had not been checked out with the new ground-servicing equipment “for form, fit and function.” NASA noted that the three-day stretch in the schedule had covered leaks in quick-disconnect systems, new position of the work stand, the “unexpected OV-102 configuration (engine-bell placement that no longer fitted into the mate/demate device), and changes in operational maintenance instructions. A NASA press release pointed out that deservicing the orbiter involved “removal or containment of hazardous propellants such as toxic hypergolics and cryogenics,” inspecting its systems (including the thermal protection system), and raising the orbiter, with its 17-piece tailcone in place, to a stand where it could be fastened to its 747 carrier. Reviewing events, Aviation Week Space Technology said that ground personnel wearing protective suits had trouble connecting hoses to orbiter interfaces for off-loading propellants and purging systems because of limited space; operations were complicated by wind, rain, and lightning, with a series of four power losses in service facility, each requiring a two-hour minimum to power up again by following a checklist. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 21/81; NASA Release 81-50; DFRC Release 81-18; AvWk, Apr 27/81, 30-31)
Space shuttle Columbia was still awaiting its trip to KSC’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) because of a delay in the orbiter integrated test that had been scheduled for July 23. The test had to wait until technicians finished wiring the remote manipulator’s system for emergency jettison of its $100 million Canada-built “bionic arm.” That system would have to be retested before the major integrated test could begin, probably not before August 9. The delay would not affect launch date of STS-2, NASA said. (MSFC Release 81-90, 81-91; NASA Release 81-109; W Star, July 27/81, A-2)
NASA officials said that the Space Shuttle Columbia was “in excellent condition” after its flight and should be able to make at least 100 round trips into orbit. Technicians were hooking up ground power links and monitoring systems, photographing the tiles, and preparing to purge the fuel tanks and to install a shroud over the tail section for the flight back to Florida. Postflight servicing was running about 12 hours behind schedule. (WStar, Apr 16/81, A-l)
The Soviet Union’s space program must develop a low-cost transport vehicle like the U.S. Space shuttle, according to Konstantin P. Feoktistov, one of the three cosmonauts who orbited the Earth six times in Vostok 1 in 1964. Feoktistov, now a professor of technical sciences doing research for the Soviet space program, did not specifically mention the successful flight of Columbia in April but called for solution of technological problems in space travel such as cheap lightweight batteries. The New York Times quoted from Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, the first official acknowledgment by the Soviet Union that it would like to have a shuttle-like vehicle for manned space flights. Tass said June 19 that Cosmos 1267 had docked with the empty Salyut 6 with the mission of testing systems “of the design of future spacecraft and for training in the methods of assembly of orbital complexes of a big size and weight.” The Washington Post said that the linkup was “the precursor of a very large space complex that U.S. sources expect to have military uses.” (NYTimes, June 11 81, A-18; W Post, June 20/81, A-9; FBIS, Tass in English, June 91/81)
Press reports on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s launch noted the loss of some insulating tiles from engine-pod coverings visible, television viewers from an aft-facing cockpit window when astronaut Robert Crippen opened the payload-bay doors to dissipate heat into space as a way of cooling the orbiter. The areas lacking tiles, nine on the right-hand engine pod and four to six on the left-hand pod, had undergone the greatest stress during blastoff and ascent. Astronaut John Young relayed the view to Earth so flight directors could estimate the damage. The two astronauts evinced so little concern about the missing tiles that, during a six-minute telecast late on Monday, neither mentioned the subject. As flight directors wanted to know whether the underside of the fuselage was intact, Deputy Operations Director Eugene F. Kranz announced that supersecret U.S. Air Force cameras in Hawaii and Florida would photograph the orbiter in an attempt to discover further areas of damage. His statement hinted at the highly classified capability of DOD cameras: photographing areas lacking tiles of a moving craft 170 miles up would be like reading license plates in a Moscow parking lot from orbit, the Washington Post commented. The fuselage’s underside housed Shuttle electronics and hydraulics systems that would navigate the craft on its return; move the elevons, keeping it on course during the last 1,000 miles; and lower the landing gear. Should loss of tiles expose the surface to reentry heat that could burn through the fuselage and the underlying systems, the orbiter without its landing gear lowered would have to crash-land at more than 200 mph. If photography showed underside tiles missing, Kranz said the crew would handle the reentry “to avoid a possible catastrophe,” not specifying the alternatives. Officials said that the areas known to be missing tiles were not critical to reentry; all visible edges of tail and wings appeared intact, suggesting that tiles v/crc lost during the stress of launch only on the engine pods. (W Post, Apr 13/81, A-l, A-20, WSJ, Apr 13/81 3; NYTimes, Apr 13/81, 1; W Star, Apr 13/81, A-l)
Press reports described the rollout of space shuttle Columbia on its eight-tread mobile launching platform from KSC’s VAB to launch pad 39A, a 3.5-mile trip that took about seven hours. New launch date was October 9, only 39 days from rollout; however, Columbia had sat on its pad for 104 days before its first flight, and launch director George F. Page said that all the usual tests should be completed in time. The new schedule allowed for weather delays or new technical problems. The launch pad was modified after last April’s ignition caused shockwaves that buckled struts on the spaceship and endangered other parts; Columbia had “several hundred” of its 31,000 heat-resistant tiles replaced. It would carry a new fuel tank—the only expendable part of the Shuttle assembly—and two new solid-fuel booster rockets to be retrieved from the ocean shortly after liftoff. KSC officials had closed two viewing sites for the next launch because of exhaust fallout. Dr. Albert Koller, chief of environmental management for KSC, said that the fallout problem was a surprise: acid drops in an exhaust cloud produced by STS-l’s boosters had spotted vegetation up to four miles north of the site, but apparently did not harm animals in the area. Hydrochloric acid drops from the cloud might cause reddening and burning of unprotected skin. NASA hoped eventually to send a shuttle back into space within two or three weeks of its previous mission, but Page said “we’re a long way from that ultimate goal.” (NY Times, Sept 1/81, C-3; W Post, Sept 1/81, A-4)
Dr. Alan Lovelace, NASA’s acting administrator, held a briefing on the agency’s FY82 amended budget, which he said “eliminates or defers all FY81 and FY82 new program initiatives in space science, aeronautics, and applications.” At a press conference January 15, he had discussed the budget for NASA proposed by the previous administration, just over $6.7 billion for FY82. The revised budget would reduce NASA funds by $604 million to a new total of $6,122 billion. The revisions preserved Space Shuttle test-flight schedules and research and development; allowed continued production of a four-orbiter fleet on the present schedule, which “meets the critical needs for both civil and military missions”; and kept the option for a fifth orbiter. However, the funding would delete the solar-polar spacecraft; cut space and aeronautical technology development; delete construction-of-facilities projects; and eliminate 840 civil-service positions. It would defer the VOIR and the gamma-ray observatory launch from 1986 to 1988; cancel NOSS, a three-agency project; end the technology transfer program; and cancel funding for energy-technology activities, a geological applications program, and a search-and-rescue mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
NASA announced that it would launch the next Shuttle flight (STS-2) on September 30, if turnaround procedures went smoothly. JSC spokesman Robert Dotts said that the thermal-protection system “exceeded our expectations” and that the amount of repair needed would not affect turnaround time. Only 10 or 12 of the foamed-glass tiles protecting Columbia’s fuselage during reentry would need replacement. Inch-deep gouges all over the surface of the Shuttle mostly occurred during takeoff. NASA cautioned that the orbiter would be undergoing turnaround for the first time, and unforeseen problems could affect the flight schedule. (NASA Release 81-65; MSFC Release 81-61; W Post, May 16/81, A-2)
NASA postponed the second Shuttle launch to November 4 because of tile damage caused by an oxidizer spill September 22. Tile replacement was “proceeding well,” and measures had been taken to prevent further spillage. Science magazine described the “minor problems” causing previous postponements: tests that took longer than expected and various handling mishaps. The Shuttle’s complexity would “resist attempts to operate with aircraft-like efficiency,” the article said. NASA had already decided to trim its Shuttle flights by 30% over the next three years, from 44 missions to 28: it had less money to spend on flying its own satellites and science experiments, as it had to pay for Shuttle modifications and construction of more orbiters. The delicate instruments planned for the second flight had almost been delayed to a later mission by the discovery that pressures from the solid-fuel boosters against the KSC module launch pad could damage the experiments: the shock had been 2.4 pounds per square inch, not the expected 0.6, enough to buckle a strut supporting a fuel tank near the cabin. If the tank had been jarred enough to leak or malfunction, the first-flight crew would not have been able to orient the Shuttle properly for landing. NASA engineers devised a system of nylon water troughs to disperse the shock and redesigned the launch platform to allow jet watersprays to dissipate the pressure. (NASA Release 81-160; W Post, Oct 9/81, A-15; Science, Oct 9/81, 160)
**** - AS i .-INTENftONAUf fiLAIft Aeronautics programs canceled or deferred included efforts in vertical/ sidewise takeoff and landing (V/STOL) systems, supersonic cruise research, the variable-cycle engine, and the proposed numerical aerodynamic simulator. A initiative in large, composite primary aircraft structures was eliminated. Other programs affected were materials processing in space, AgRISTARS, instrumentation for an upper-atmosphere research satellite, and the Spacelab flight schedule. Lovelace said that adjustments in FY81 figures would reflect impact of decisions on the FY82 budget: an increase of $60 million in 1981 Space Shuttle changes and upgrading would “provide added schedule confidence” in Shuttle development and testing and in production of orbiter vehicles. The amended budget reflected NASA’s decision announced in January to discontinue the three-stage version of an inertial upper stage and to modify the Centaur upper stage instead. The modified stage would allow NASA to fly the Galileo mission to Jupiter on a single launch in 1985 and could be used for a restructured solar-polar mission in 1986 and VOIR in 1988. (NASA Text, Mar 10/81) March 12:	The Soviet Union announced the launch of Soyuz T-4 at 10 p.m. Moscow time to link with the orbiting space complex Salyut 6-Progress 12. Salyut 6, in space since September 29, 1977, had docked January 26 with cargo craft Progress 12, which refueled it automatically on ground command and used its engine to raise the orbit. Soyuz T-4 carried as commander Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, veteran of Soyuz 25 that failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and of Soyuz 29, which docked there for 140 days in June 1978. Also on the T-4 flight was Viktor Savinykh as flight engineer. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 12/81) —Tass said March 13 that the Soyuz T-4 had docked with the Salyut 6-Progress 12 complex March 12 at 11:33 p.m. Moscow time and the cosmonauts had transferred into the space station, being the 15th crew to occupy it in the 3Vi years. They would check on-board systems and equipment, do maintenance, and replace instrumentation as necessary. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 13/81)
The external tank (ET) for the third shuttle flight (ETA) left the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans on a NASA barge for KSC. Unlike those used in the first two flights, this tank would be light brown, the natural color of the insulation sprayed on the tank’s exterior. The white paint on the first two tanks weighed about 600 pounds. Since the tank went almost all the way to orbit, elimination of the paint would add nearly 600 pounds payload besides saving several thousand of dollars in handling and would not affect the tank’s fire-retardant or water-repellent qualities. (MSFC Release 81-122)
NASA signed an agreement with the West German firm Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom (MBB) covering the first flight of shuttle-pallet satellite SPAS-01 scheduled for orbit on STS-5, the first operational Shuttle flight, in September 1982. This would be the first payload deployed and retrieved by the Shuttle’s Canadian-built remote-manipulator system (RMS). The 1,814-kilogram (4,000-pound) payload would operate inside the payload bay and would also be a free flyer when deployed, using an on-board stabilization and control system. NASA would use it to test RMS capabilities during the five-day mission, with a 70-mm camera on the payload to record deployment, free flight, retrieval, and reberthing. MBB would conduct materials-processing experiments while the payload was in the shuttle bay. The agreement was signed for NASA by Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, and for MBB by Dr. Johannes Schubert and Dr. Peter C. Bittner, general manager and commercial director of MBB’s space division. The pact would cover KSC and JSC launch services as well as NASA’s use of the payload for RMS testing. (NASA Release 81-80)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
During the early-morning move of space shuttle Columbia from it KSC hangar to the VAB, a forklift “accidentally banged into” the spacecraft, damaging two tiles on the left elevon, according to KSC spokesman Rocky Raab. Engineers and technicians were expected to replace the tiles by nightfall so that raising Columbia and bolting it to its mobile launcher could proceed. The three-times-delayed rollout began at 3:54 a.m EDT and took 26 minutes to cover the quarter-mile distance. (NY Times, Aug 11/81, C-3)
NASA said that astronaut Alan L. Bean, fourth man to set foot on the Moon, would resign effective June 26 to devote full time to his career as a painter. Bean, selected in the third group of astronauts in the fall of 1963, flew on the second moon-landing mission, Apollo 12, in November 1969, exploring the Ocean of Storms with Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., as Richard F. Gordon circled in the command module. He captained the second Skylab mission in July-September 1973 and was backup spacecraft commander for the 1975 U.S.-USSR Apolio-Soyuz mission. He noted that in his 18 years as astronaut he had seen sights no artist had ever viewed firsthand, and he hoped to record his experiences through his art. Bean’s time in space—1,671 hours 45 minutes—made him first among active U.S. astronauts and fourth of all in total spaceflight time. He was currently head of astronaut-candidate operations and training. His resignation would leave in the corps only one of the 12 U.S. astronauts who had walked on the Moon: John Young, chief of the astronaut office and commander of shuttle Columbia’s first flight last April. (NASA Release 81-87)
The Washington Post said that NASA was faced with cutting so much money from its budgets for the next three years that it was considering abandoning the Voyager, now on its way from Saturn to a flyby of Uranus in 1986 and Neptune in 1989. Turning off Voyager’s radios would save S222 million (the amount needed to keep NASA scientists and engineers on the job and to operate the Deep Space Network antennas in California, Australia, and Spain) over the next eight years. OMB had ordered NASA to cut $367 million from its FY82 budget and $1 billion each from FY83 and FY84. As NASA could not take money from the Space Shuttle, it would have to save money in other ways. It had already bowed out of an international mission to Halley’s comet and now must choose from among three other programs: the Galileo mission to Jupiter in 1987, the large Space Telescope to be orbited in 1985, or the Voyager trips to Uranus and Neptune. Killing both Voyager and Galileo would save about $520 million. The only other way for NASA to save a large amount of money would be an indefinite delay in building a fourth shuttle, the Discovery, estimated to cost $1.2 billion and due for delivery in 1985. (WPost, Oct 7/81, A-4)
NASA’s acting administrator, Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, signed a memorandum of understanding with Hans-Hilger Haunschild of the Federal Republic of Germany’s (FRG) ministry for research and technology on FRG use of the STS (Shuttle), with NASA furnishing launch and support services on a reimbursable basis. NASA said that the Federal Republic had “long been a supporter” of STS and had contributed 40% to ESA’s development of Spacelab, soon to be a Shuttle payload with laboratory facilities like those on Earth but adapted for zero gravity. The Federal Republic of Germany had already paid NASA for two reimbursable Spacelab missions: D-1, materials processing and life-sciences experiments, and D-4, astrophysics experiments; it also planned to launch an X-ray satellite (Rosat) from the Shuttle in 1986. In addition, private and scientific organizations in West Germany had reserved 25 small self-contained payloads for eventual shuttle flight on a space-available basis. (NASA Release 81-58)
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting adminsitrator, left the agency July 11 to become corporate vice president for science and engineering at General Dynamics Corporation, St. Louis, Mo., in charge of research, engineering, advanced product and program development, and development and implementation of corporate engineering and research policy. NASA’s new chief, James M.	Beggs, who began his new job July 9, had been executive vice president for aerospace at General Dynamics. Lovelace had been acting administrator of NASA since the departure of Dr. Robert A. Frosch in January 1981; he had actually retired as deputy administrator in December 1980 but at Frosch’s request had agreed to remain through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of a new administrator. Lovelace had entered federal service in 1954 with the U.S. Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, and became director there in 1967. He went to Andrews Air Force Base in 1972 as director of science and technology for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command and in 1973 became acting deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development. He came to NASA in 1974 as associate administrator, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) and was appointed deputy administrator of NASA in June 1976 by President Ford. Lovelace recently received the Presidential Citizens Medal for his work on developing the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, July 2/81; NASA Release 81-88; NYTimes, July 6/81, D-6)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
NASA said that the third shuttle flight, now scheduled after January 1982, would carry the first biology experiment specifically designed for the Shuttle: the effect of gravity on formation in plants of lignin, the woody substance giving plants structural stability. Monitoring growth in the microgravity environment of space should show how wood is formed. The plants should grow upward in response to the presence of artificial sunlight, but root development was unpredictable. (NASA Release 81-166; ARC Release
NASA launched Space Shuttle Columbia, designated STS-1, from pad A of KSC’s launch complex 39 at 3 seconds after 7 a.m. EST. All launch facilities, systems, and support equipment performed as designed; NASA said that damage to the launch pad was less than predicted. The solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRBs) jettisoned after burnout fell within the predicted impact “footprint” in the Atlantic about 14 nautical miles northeast of KSC, splashing down 7 minutes and 100 seconds after liftoff. All the SRB parts were recovered for reuse except two of the six parachutes. The external tank separated at 8 minutes and 58 seconds into the flight and began to break up at about a 280,000,-foot altitude without tumbling as planned. A tumble system built into the tank to prevent skipping during reentry (and keep debris within a preplanned area) did not work. The Indian Ocean tracking ship, USNS Arnold, said that the tank-debris footprint was larger than expected. Orbit-maneuvering system (OMS) firings (OMS-1 and OMS-2) put Columbia into an orbit with 133.7-nautical-mile apogee, 132.7-nautical-mile perigee, and 40.3° inclination. Ascent went as planned, with all events, through payload-bay door opening, occurring normally. (NASA MOR M-989-81-01 [postlaunch] May 12/81)
NASA announced the selection of scientific instruments to be flown on the Gamma-Ray Observatory scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1988. Produced from the most energetic processes in the universe, gamma rays were the most direct source of knowledge about these processes. Gamma rays to be measured by the observatory would begin at 100,000 electron volts (100 Kev) and continue up to several hundred million electron volts (100 Mev or more). The instruments chosen were a transient-event monitor to detect short intense bursts of gamma rays of unknown origin and localize them to determine their distribution in the galaxy; a high-energy gamma-ray telescope that could measure the energy spectra and arrival directions of the highest-energy gamma rays it finds; an imaging Compton telescope to obtain gamma-ray maps of the celestial sphere at medium energies; and a low-energy gamma-ray spectrometer to look for evidence of nucleosynthesis in supernovas. The observatory, with a planned 2-year lifetime would be one of the largest every orbited, weighing 23,000 pounds (10,432-kilograms) and measuring 25 feet (7.6 meters) in length and 12.5 feet (3.8 meters) in diameter. (NASA Release 81-40)
Nine minutes before launch time, NASA grounded the Space Shuttle Columbia until April 12, because one of five computers in its nose was failing to communicate properly with the other four. The decision to scrub the launch came after a three-hour delay from the original 6:50 a.m. liftoff time; a fuelcell warning light showed in the cockpit just 16 minutes beforehand. No sooner was that problem solved than a second one appeared, when the program in the backup computer did not match that of the four primary computers controlling the ship. (W Star, Apr 10/81, A-l)
NASA announced the selection of four of five crew members for the first DOD Shuttle mission, STS-10, scheduled for launch from KSC in the last quarter of 1983. The commander would be Thomas K. Mattingly; pilot, Loren J. Shriver; and mission specialists, Ellison S. Onizuka and James F. Buchli. The fifth crew member, an Air Force manned-spaceflight engineer, would be named later. (NASA Release 82-146; MSFC Release 82-90; NY Times, Oct 7/82, A-18)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC since 1972, said that he would retire from NASA after the fifth (and first operational) Shuttle flight, now scheduled for November. He had begun working at the Langley laboratory of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1945. When NASA was established in 1958, he was selected as an original member of the space task group to manage the Mercury project: that group was the nucleus of NASA’s manned spacecraft center, which became JSC in 1973.	Kraft was flight director of all the Mercury missions and many of the Gemini missions; in 1972 he succeeded Dr. Robert Gilruth, who had been the first director of JSC. Kraft said he had no definite plans for the future. (NASA Release 82-62; NY Times, Apr 15/82, B-4; W Post, Apr 15/82, D-2)
Space Shuttle Columbia began a year-long vacation as the second operational Shuttle, Challenger, began final engine tests at KSC in preparation for a three-day mission in January 1983 with a four-man crew. After its landing at Edwards Air Force Base, Columbia was scheduled to return to KSC for “six dozen minor modifications” after completing its first commercial venture, STS-5. The modifications would prepare it for the December 1983 launch of Spacelab, built for NASA by ESA. NASA spokesman said that the first five flights had proved that the Shuttle could launch satellites into space with “remarkable accuracy”; demonstrated that four men could do high-pressure jobs in a cabin the size of a pickup camper; and showed that the Shuttle, like an airplane, worked better the more it was used. (USA Today, Nov 17/82, 3A) —MSFC said that it had sent NASA’s first inertial upper stage (IUS-1) to Cape Canaveral to ready it for launch in Challenger’s payload bay in January 1983. The first of six to be built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command, IUS-1 was an unmanned system for pushing payloads to high altitudes unreachable by the Shuttle in its 150-mile orbit. The two-stage vehicle, 17 feet long and about 9 feet in diameter, weighed more than 16 tons, had more than 64,000 pounds of thrust, and could carry up to 5,000 pounds of payload to geostationary orbit 22,300 miles up. At KSC, the IUS would be mated to a tracking and data-relay satellite (TDRS), first of four planned for launch to replace present ground stations and improve command and telemetry functions for the growing number of operational satellites. NASA hoped to have the four-craft system in operation late in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-103)
NASA launched the fifth flight (STS-5) of Space Shuttle Columbia on time at 7:19 a.m. EST from KSC with a four-man crew, largest ever to take off from Earth at the same time. Feeling none of the motion sickness suffered by three of the first four Shuttle crews, the astronauts were so busy preparing for deployment from orbit of the first of two communications satellites that they had no time for chitchat with mission control. Astronaut Joseph Allen took off his shoes and socks to work barefooted inside the Shuttle cabin: “it’s like having four hands,” he explained. He and William Lenoir maneuvered the first of twin satellites (one U.S., the other Canadian) into space at 3:17 p.m. EST, while Vance Brand and Robert Overmyer flew the 100-ton Shuttle, positioning Columbia to avoid smearing its windows with exhaust from the satellite engine. The astronauts would use the same procedures November 12 to deploy the Canadian satellite on a similar flight path. The first commercial cargo carried by the Shuttle was a 21-foot-tall cylinder worth almost $50 million, owned by Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a firm begun as a partnership of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of Communications Satellite Corporation—ComSatCorp), and International Business Machines (IBM). Boeing, General Motors, and General Electric were among its more than 300 clients who used SBS satellites to transmit coast-to-coast computer traffic and telephone calls. Transmissions to SPS satellites were at 14GHz, twice as high as frequencies used by other U.S. communications satellites and were relayed at 12GHz to avoid interference. President Reagan held a telephone conversation with the astronauts at 10:26 a.m. November 11, repeating his request to an earlier crew to “pick me up and drop me off in California.” He added that “if more of us could see [the earth] from that angle we might realize that there must be a way to make it as united in reality here on earth as it looks from outer space.” Brand replied, “We’re in total agreement on that one.” (NASA MOR M-989-82-05 [prelaunch] Nov 5/82, [postlaunch] Dec 7/82; USA Today, Nov 12/82, 1A; W Post, Nov 12/82, A-l, D-8)
An analysis of NASA’s 1983 budget for research and development, prepared for Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) by the General Accounting Office (GAO), said that more than 25 % of it was for military programs. The New York Times said that the report would lead to more criticism from Congress that NASA was becoming increasingly militarized, at the expense of civilian science and technology. Proxmire said that he asked for the report to “determine the extent to which NASA was merely acting as an agent” for DOD. As nearly half the Shuttle flights would take military payloads, more than $1 billion of the $3.5 billion requested for the Shuttle in FY83 was considered military: $1.1 billion of an R&D budget of $5.33 billion (20.5%) and $400 million support funds (7.77%) could therefore be military related. NASA’s total 1983 budget request was $6.6 PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED **J^LlNT£NTK)NAUr HO ML w billion; total Pentagon direct spending on space was not known but was probably as much as or more than NASA’s annual budget. Proxmire said that he did not object to use of the Shuttle for military purposes, but paying for DOD activities through the NASA budget was “not the way to ensure that dollars spent on national security are spent with maximum effect.” NASA said that it had been tasked with developing the Shuttle as a national endeavor, and reimbursement by other agencies for use of the Shuttle did not change the cost to the government. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-15)
NASA said that the three main engines that powered Space Shuttle Columbia on its five missions would be modified and retested to certify them for operation on the orbiter Atlantis. Rocketdyne would disassemble, inspect, and reassemble the engines before forwarding them to MSFC’s NSTL for acceptance tests and certification. They would be installed in Atlantis for its first mission in 1985. Columbia would get three new engines for its Spacelab mission in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-104)
The Shuttle imaging radar (SIR) flown on STS-2 in November 1981 had revealed previously unknown river channels, geologic structures, and possible Stone Age occupation sites in the eastern Sahara desert. JPL’s Dr. Charles Flachi, principal investigator for SIR, reported that the radar signal could penetrate the virtually featureless desert surface to show subsurface features nearly as broad as the Nile Valley and up to 50-million years old. Drainage networks detected by radar and confirmed by ground studies would explain the location of present oases in the desert. This new tool could serve in the search for ground water in such arid regions. Dr. Alexander Goetz of JPL said that the multispectral infrared radiometer flown on the same Shuttle mission had made the first detection from orbit of clay and carbonite-bearing minerals, an important step in the use of remote sensing for geological mapping. The device used an area in Egypt of known mineral content as a baseline for analysis; its narrow spectral resolution made it able to map mineral content in the area, using specific substances as a guide for exploration and development, previously possible only through laboratory sampling techniques. Dr. Henry C. Reiche, Jr., of LaRC was the principal investigator for the MAPS (measurement of atmospheric pollution from satellites) experiment flown on STS-2, which proved accurate when compared to ground studies. A gas-filter radiometer, part of the first scientific Shuttle payload, measured carbon monoxide ratios in the lower, upper, and middle troposphere, data to be used in 1984 for seasonal variation studies. Besides the desert features revealed by the Shuttle radar, Flachi reported readings over densely forested areas such as the U.S. Appalachians, the mountains covered by rain forests in western Guyana and Venezuela, and other remote locations not covered by ground survey. Geologic features shown in the radar images would help identify causes of change: erosion, fault lines, or previously unknown fractures of the Earth’s crust. The devices recorded their findings because the Shuttle lacked communications capacity. (NASA Releases 82-174, 82-175, 82-176, 82-177; W Post, Nov 26/82, A-l)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Air Force would have to build a $40 million windscreen around its Space Shuttle launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to protect the orbiter while the external tank was being attached. The Air Force was building a second launch complex in California to put the Shuttle into north-south or polar orbit that, combined with Earth’s rotation, would carry it over the entire surface of the Earth. This would not be possible at Cape Canaveral for reasons of safety; from Vandenberg, however, the orbiter’s route would be over the Pacific ocean. Hans Mark, deputy NASA administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the windscreen would be a huge three-sided sheet of metal around the launch pad to protect the orbiter from gusts while attaching the fuel tank. Winds off the Pacific at that location averaged 9 mph year-round and up to 47 mph from January through March, more than enough to break connections between Shuttle and tank. At the Cape, mating took place inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB); Vandenberg had no such building. (W Post, Feb 10/82, A-5)
NASA investigators of the failure of $2-million space suits on STS-5 issued an interim report blaming two missing parts and a faulty sensor. During the mission on Shuttle Columbia, an oxygen device in astronaut William Lenoir’s suit failed to provide required pressure, and the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit and portable life-support system would not operate. JSC program Operations Manager Richard A. Colonna, who headed the team, said that two vital plastic parts the size of a matchstick, worth less than a nickel apiece, that several to hold a pair of screws against a metal piece in Lenoir’s suit, had been removed for a test last August and were never put back. Documentation indicated that the parts were in place, and during repeated tests, technicians failed to spot their absence. The team said that the fan failed because a tiny magnetic sensor no bigger than a pinhead apparently gave way just after Allen put on his space suit. The motor running the fan and pumping water through the suit used the sensors, instead of the magnetic brushes used in most motors, because of the danger of a spark igniting the pure oxygen circulating inside the spacesuit. Colonna said that the team would continue its investigation. He expected it to recommend further and more frequent testing and quality-control inspections by the manufacturer, Hamilton Standard, during space suit production and at JSC and KSC. (NASA Release 82-181; W Post, Dec 2/82, A-l)
NASA launched STS-4, fourth test flight of space shuttle Columbia, from KSC at 11 a.m. carrying Ken Mattingly as commander and Henry Hartsfield as pilot. This was the first time that the Shuttle had lifted off on schedule, but the chase planes televising separation did not show the opening of parachutes on the two reusable solid-fuel booster rockets, and there was no sign on the ocean surface of any of the six main chutes or either of the boosters, which cost $24 million each. Boosters from earlier launches were towed to KSC for refit. After disassembly and cleaning, the first six motor-igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned to Thiokol’s Utah plant for rebuilding at $7 million each; this procedure had saved NASA $36 million per flight for the first three flights. The launch was imperiled the night before by a one-hour hailstorm with pellets “the size of golf balls” denting about 400 of the black protective tiles on the Shuttle’s undersides. Workmen on hastily erected scaffolds had applied a hardener to strengthen the tiles. Enough water soaked the tiles to make the crew need to bake the underside of the Shuttle in the sunlight for 10 hours to dry it out, so that low temperatures on the night side of the Earth would not freeze and further damage the tiles. Mattingly and Hartsfield had begun to power up the 2,000-pound cargo put in the payload bay by the Air Force as well as four experiments managed by MSFC, including the first use of the Shuttle by a commercial firm. Press reports called it “an open secret” that the U.S. Air Force instruments included an extremely sensitive infrared telescope, an ultraviolet telescope, and a new space sextant designed to navigate spy satellites without ground command. Hartsfield, on his spaceflight, suffered nausea but was later able to eat dinner. Instead of televising a view of the payload bay as other crews had done, or using the camera on the end of the 60-foot robot arm to show the Earth as they saw it from space, the crew merely described the view, expressing surprise at the amount of detail discernible. The seven-day mission would “wring out the wrinkles” in the Shuttle not dealt with on the first three flights. NASA said that it would name a board to review “in excruciating detail” how the boosters could sink in 3,500 feet of water although the drogue parachutes were found floating 150 miles downrange. (NASA Release 82-87; MSFC Release 82-56; NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [prelaunch] June 18/82; W Post, June 28/82, A-l; June 29/82, A-2; Dtln Gd, June 28/82; Marshall Star, June 30/82, 1) During June: NASA announced that Dr. Walter C. Williams, chief engineer since July 1975, would retire in July. Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, would succeed him. Williams began his career with NACA, NASA’s predecessor, in August 1940 and worked during the war to improve U.S. fighter planes. He was founding director of the organization that became NASA’s Dryden facility. He went to Langley Field, Va., in September 1959 as associate director of the new NASA space task group created to carry out Project Mercury and later was director of operations for the project. He then became associate director of NASA’s manned spacecraft center in Houston that later was JSC. He went to NASA Headquarters in January 1963, leaving in April 1964 to work for Aerospace Corporation’s vehicle systems. He became NASA’s first chief engineer in 1975. (NASA anno, June 1/82; NASA Release 82-86) —NASA announced the appointment of George F. Page as deputy director of KSC effective July 5. He had directed Shuttle operations there since 1979 and was launch director for the first three launches of Columbia. From 1964 to 1975 he directed KSC operations planning for 19 Gemini and 25 Apollo spacecraft launches, ending with the lunar landings and the successful ApolloSoyuz project. He directed unmanned launch operations from 1975 to 1979, with more than 54 major launches from both KSC and the Western Test Range (WTR) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA anno June 21/82; NASA Release 82-102)
Marine Col. Jack Lousma and Air Force Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, the astronauts scheduled to fly the third Shuttle mission, told a news conference in Houston that the flight was now set for March 22. A major objective of the mission would be to see how well the Shuttle systems withstood the extreme heat and cold of space. Sections of the ship exposed to the Sun would experience temperatures up to 250°F; sections in shadow, down to -250°F. The Shuttle would also be subjected to slightly higher dynamic pressures during launch and landing, to gain additional knowledge about its flight characteristics and limits. {W Post, Jan 22/81, A-16) During January: NASA named Dr. Burton I. Edelson, a senior vice president of Comsat General Corporation, as its associate administrator for space science and applications, effective February 14. He would succeed Andrew J. Stofan, who had been in an acting capacity and would remain as advisor until NASA appointed him to another management position. Edelson, before joining Comsat, had been an engineering officer in the U.S. Navy with assignments on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council at the White House and the Office of Naval Research. (NASA anno Jan 13/82; NASA Release 82-7)
Cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev made a space walk from the orbiting station Salyut 7 to disassemble and partially replace wornout equipment on the station’s exterior and study opportunities for doing various jobs outside it. After they donned space suits, Lebedev left the station for the “zone” of operations, while Berezovoy remained in the open manhole to film his walk for television. They dismantled and passed into the station a micrometeorite-measuring instrument and some panels with optical and various structural materials that had been outside the station since its launch April 19. They also tested the station after exposure of thermomechanical and threaded connections made of different metals that might be used in assembling future craft in orbit. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 30/82) During July: Press reports said that astronauts Margaret Rhea Seddon and Robert I. Gibson were parents of a baby boy, Paul, born July 26 in Houston. Seddon, 34, and Gibson, 35, joined the astronaut program in January 1978 and were married in May 1981. Also, Dr. Sally K. Ride, selected for the seventh Space Shuttle mission as first female U.S. astronaut, announced her marriage to colleague Steven Hawley at her hometown, Salina, Kans. Hawley, an astronomer, had not yet been selected for a mission. (WPost, July 27/82, C-3; St. L P/Dsp, Aug 15/82)
NASA rolled out the first lightweight external tank for the Space Shuttle at its Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. The tank, structural backbone of the Shuttle launch assembly, included an oxygen tank, a hydrogen tank, and a connecting intertank housing the instrumentation. At 66,824 pounds the new tank was more than 10,000 pounds lighter than the one used for the first Shuttle flight in April 1981; the reduced weight would add payload capability almost pound for pound. The new tank, loaded on a NASA barge for shipment to KSC, would be prepared for the sixth shuttle mission scheduled for January 1983. (MSFC Releases 82-81, 82-83)
MSFC shipped the induced environment-contamination monitor back to Kennedy Space Center (KSC) after servicing it in preparation for the third Shuttle flight. The desk-sized detector consisted of 10 instruments to check the environment in and around the Shuttle cargo bay for contaminants that might damage or interfere with sensitive equipment. The monitor would play a dual role on the next mission: besides carrying out its normal functions, the PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED filAMB 32i 1,000-pound package would serve as a load to exercise the remote-manipulator arm. All instruments on the monitor operated successfully in its first flight on the second Shuttle mission; data collected then were still being analyzed. (MSFC Release 82-7) —A month-long analysis of the data produced by the monitor on the second Shuttle flight clearly identified every contamination-producing activity (such as thrust firings and water dumps). On future missions, the monitor could differentiate contamination from other sources. It recorded low humidity in, and successful sealing of, the cargo bay from engine byproducts during ascent and descent; few particles of matter larger than five micrometers, but a number of smaller particles well above expectations; a 90% reduction of water molecules and other early-mission contaminants after about 35 hours in orbit; and a temporary cloud of particles from using the attitude-control system or from dumping of water. Project scientist Edgar Miller of MSFC said that, when the orbiter flew with the cargo bay pointing ahead, molecular readout was high because orbiter-generated particles were deflected back into the bay; action would be taken to keep this from happening while using sensitive instruments. The third Shuttle flight, planned for seven-days, would test the monitor in high temperatures from the planned solar orientation of the cargo bay, compared to the mild levels produced by the Earth orientation of the second flight. The remote manipulator would move the monitor to selected points for readout during the flight. (MSFC Release 82-14; NASA Release 82-13)
MSFC said that it had selected Martin Marietta Aerospace to negotiate a $l-million contract for a tethered-satellite system concept. A tethered-satellite system would go into orbit on the Space Shuttle in the late 1980s, suspended downward from the cargo bay on a 60-mile-long tether to troll the atmosphere for days as a time to. gather magnetospheric, atmospheric, and gravitational data. It could also be deployed upward to study electrodynamic and other phenomena. The area to be studied was too high for airplanes, too low for satellites to, cover for long, and reachable only for brief periods by instrument-laden rockets. Under a letter of agreement signed in 1981, NASA would join with Italy in developing and launching the system, building the deployment system and managing systems integration and mission operations, while Italy built the satellite itself. (NASA Release 82-169; MSFC Release 82-102)
NASA announced the selection of a West German physicist, Ulf Merbold, and a U.S. biomedical engineer, Byron K. Lichtenberg, as the first nonastronauts to fly on the Space Shuttle. The two would be part of a crew of six on the ninth Shuttle mission, scheduled for September 1983, and would use the Spacelab workshop installed for the first time in the Shuttle cargo bay to operate 38 scientific packages representing more than 70 investigators from Europe, Japan, and the United States. ESA, which for 10 years had planned and built the $1 billion joint U.S.-European Spacelab unit, had agreed with NASA that one European scientist would be on all Shuttle missions carrying a Spacelab. Merbold, trained at Stuttgart University, competed for his Shuttle seat with Dutch physicist Wubbo Ockels, trained at the University of Groningen. Lichtenberg, with a Ph.D. from MIT, competed with Michael Lampton, holding a doctorate in physics from CalTech. Winners were chosen in secret ballot by a panel of 36 U.S. and European scientists. (MSFC Release 82-86; ESA Info 31; W Post, Sept 20/82, A-5)
The Washington Post said that STS-5, the first operational Shuttle mission, would include simulation of a space repair job to practice for the salvaging of an orbiting satellite, Solar Max, in April 1984. The 5,000-pound Solar Max cost $70 million at its launch in February 1980 to study the Sun during maximum sunspot activity. Less than six months later, the devices pointing its instrumentation at the Sun broke down, and the satellite wa practically useless. Congress allowed $18 million to put the Shuttle alongside in a 308-mile-high orbit so that astronauts could ground a dozen cables, cut seals holding them to a panel, and pry the entire group from the panel. The greatest expense was for training the spacesuited crew to use tools and to handle the Solar Max as it orbited at 17,500-miles-per-hour alongside the Shuttle. {W Post, Oct 7/82, A-23)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced a revised policy on Shuttle-mission opportunities for payload specialists, heretofore available only to those buying half or more of a Shuttle mission of flying a unique experiment needing the presence of a particular scientist or engineer. Starting in 1984, NASA would no longer require a minimum payload. Flights for payload specialists would be available on a reimbursable basis to all classes of customer: foreign and domestic commercial firms, international cooperative partners, the scientific and applications community, and DOD. The payload specialists would usually be scientists with special skills who would undergo a brief training for spaceflight. The expanded policy reflected a Shuttle-program goal of sending more people into space on a routine basis. (NASA Release 82-158; MSFC Release 82-97)
George Bush, U.S. vice president, unveiled at KSC the flight version of Spacelab, a reusable scientific-research facility designed to fly on the Shuttle. At the ceremony, Mr. Bush called the Spacelab “an extraordinary engineering achievement. . .the largest cooperative space project ever.” Noting that more than 2,000 persons, from 50 European firms and 10 member nations, helped to build it, he added: “If today can be considered Spacelab’s birthday, then there are a great many proud parents celebrating... Let us continue to be partners,” he concluded, “and let me take this opportunity to assure you that we intend to continue our international cooperative programs, just as President Reagan recently reconfirmed the commitment of the United States to a vigorous space program.” The joint venture of NASA and ESA was a cylindrical module built to fit into the Shuttle cargo bay, where both astronaut mission specialists and civilian scientists (payload specialists) would work in a shirtsleeve environment, with a series of unpressurized pallets to support experiments requiring direct exposure, to space. The first Spacelab flight, planned for a seven-day Shuttle mission in September 1983, would carry out some 70 investigations in 5 different disciplines. About 50 firms in ESA’s participating nations had supplied parts to ERNO, prime contractor in Bremen, West Germany, for assembly and integration. The program, which cost ESA about $1 billion, would provide NASA, at no charge, with one engineering model and one complete flight version of Spacelab with associated ground-support equipment and some computer software. NASA was buying, for about $300 million, a second flight-model Spacelab to be delivered in mid-1982. MSFC would manage the first mission with ESA and had been in charge of U.S. development of flight-hardware items, such as the transfer tunnel and other operating equipment. MSFC would manage the second and third (NASA-only) missions alone. (Ofc of VP anno, Feb 5/82; NASA Release 82-14; MSFC Release 82-15; ESA Info 6, Feb 2/82, Feb 3/82)
A formal ceremony in Washington, D.C., marked the acceptance of the Canadian-built remote-manipulator system as “ready for operational use” on the Space Shuttle. NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and Dr. Larkin Kerwin, head of Canada’s National Research Council (NRC), signed an agreement declaring the device (already successfully used on STS-2, STS-3, and STS-4) operational. Although NRC thus fulfilled its obligations under a 1975 memorandum of understanding, it would continue to monitor the arm system on future missions. Next use of the arm would be on STS-7 in April 1983. (NASA Release 82-168)
NASA successfully completed a 30 second flight-readiness firing of the new higher power space shuttle main engines at KSC. The test was to verify llight readiness of the three new engines and demonstrate in a launch-day environment the proper integration of all elements before the STS-6 mission. The successful test was a major step in preparation for STS-6, scheduled for launch in January 1983. Pre- and post-test activities included personnel from KSC, JSC, and MSFC. This was the second time in history for static-firing the primary propulsion system of a manned spacecraft on the launch pad. A similar test of Columbia’s three main engines occurred Febraury 20, 1981, before the first Shuttle launch. Challenger’s more powerful engines, each generating 390,000 pound of thrust at sea level, had been fired individually at NSTL but were fired for the first time today in a flight configuration. The most significant problem was a high level of gaseous hydrogen in the aft compartment. NASA said that so much work remained in the crew compartment that Rockwell employees at KSC were scheduled to work in that area over the holidays. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 21/82; NASA Release 82-187; MSFC Release 82-111)
MSFC said that it had shipped the external tank for the fourth Shuttle mission from Michoud Assembly Facility on the NASA barge Orion for a five-day trip to KSC. The fourth launch was set for mid-1982. (MSFC Release 82-12) —MSFC reported shipment of the monodisperse latex reactor, an experiment “with major medical and industrial applications,” to KSC for flight on the third Shuttle mission. Dale Kornfeld of MSFC’s space sciences laboratory said that the instrument would produce identical-sized microspheres of polystyrene latex, resembling tiny beads, to measure the size of intestinal pores for cancer research and of pores in the eye for glaucoma research and to act as a carrier of drugs and radioactive isotopes for treatment of cancerous tumors. On Earth, the beads could be produced only up to about 3 microns in size; the low gravity of space would permit them to “grow” up to 20 microns while remaining identical. The National Bureau of Standards had indicated interest in using the beads to calibrate medical and scientific equipment. (MSFC Release 82-9)
NASA announced the crews for the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shuttle flights. On STS A, Thomas K. Mattingly would be commander, and Henry W. Hartsfield, pilot. Scheduled for launch early in July, the seven day STS-4 would be the last of four orbital flight tests to verify Shuttle hardware and software. Mattingly, 47, orbited the Moon 10 years ago on Apollo 16: Hartsfield, 48, was a rookie. STS-5, a five-day mission planned for mid-November to deploy commercial communications satellites, would be the first to use mission-specialist astronauts. Vance D. Brand, 50, who was command-module pilot on 1975’s Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, would be mission commander. This would be the first spaceflight for Robert F. Overmyer, 45, the pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. Joseph P. Allen and Dr. William B. Lenoir. Columbia would be the spacecraft for both STS-4 and STS-5. STS-6, planned for January 1983, would be the first flight of the orbiter Challenger, a two-day mission to deploy NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), one of an eventual two-satellite system providing comprehensive voice and data coverage between orbiting shuttles and the ground. Commander would be Paul J. Weitz, 49, who was pilot on Skylab /; copilot would be U.S. Air Force Col. Karol J. Bobko, 44, another rookie. Donald H. Peterson and Dr. Story Musgrave would fly as mission specialists. NASA would no longer assign Shuttle backup crews; its pool of experienced pilots at JSC would readily permit interchange of crewmen. (NASA Release 82-33; JSC Release 82-012; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-9)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles. Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
MSFC reported a joint-endeavor agreement signed by NASA’s Office of Space Sciences and GTI Corporation of San Diego that might lead to flight of a GTI materials-processing device on four future Shuttle flights. The agreement was a new NASA approach to government-industry partnerships in developing future applications or technologies for space-flown devices. The agreement would have three phases: design by GTI of a low-cost multichamber alloy-solidification furnace operable in low-gravity space; development, testing, and integrating the GTI furnace into the Shuttle; and flight on the Shuttle. GTI’s interest was in the manufacturing in microgravity of space alloys that would not be immiscible on Earth, where many theoretical alloys were not possible because of the density variations of the elements and the effect of gravity on the heavier elements. GTI would fund development and testing; NASA, the integration and flight. (MSFC Release 82-13; NASA Release
NASA announced that Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, 58, last of the Mercury Seven astronauts selected in 1958, would leave after 23 years with the space agency. He had retired from NASA in February 1981 but had worked since that time on a temporary basis as a retired annuitant managing the Space Shuttle orbital flight tests at Johnson Space Center (JSC). He planned to work as a consultant to Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, Calif., and to Space Sciences Inc. of Houston, Tex. Slayton joined the U.S. Air Force in 1942, flying 56 combat missions in Europe and 7 over Japan as a B-25 bomber pilot; he was a test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base when selected as a Mercury astronaut. Grounded in August 1959 because of a suspected heart condition, he was later approved for flight and was part of the U.S. crew in the Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975. (NASA Release 82-23) —The New York Times said that friends and associates “wondered why matters were not handled better”: NASA never responded to a JSC request for another year’s extension of Slayton’s employment. His departure reduced the number of the astronaut corps to 79. Several were doctors or scientists without piloting skills; 6 were women. “Many,” the New York Times added, “are young enough to be Slayton’s children.” There had been 108 U.S. astronauts “but only one Original Seven.” (NY Times, Feb 2/82, A-14; Feb 28/82, 30; W Post, Feb 18/82, A-21)
NASA launched Intelsat 5E F-5 at 7:08 p.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,962-kilometer apogee, 165.7-kilometer perigee, and 24.4° inclination. This craft would carry for the first time a maritime communications package for ship and shore use by INMARSAT. ’An apogee kick motor fired October 1 would start it to geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 82-136; NASA MOR M-491-203-82-05 [prelaunch] Sept 22/82, [postlaunch] Oct 26/82) During September: NASA Headquarters announced the reorganization of its Office of Space Transportation Systems and Office of Space Transportation Operations into a new Office of Space Flight. L. Michael Weeks was named acting deputy associate administrator, with assistant associate administrators for policy, space transportation, and institutions. The new arrangement would stress integrated Shuttle operations planning and direction; STS orientation to customers; a manageable span of control for the associate administrator; maximum delegation of authority to subordinate officials and field organizations; and minimum disruption to existing lines of communication with centers and outside NASA. (SP anno, Sept 1/82) —John J. Quann was appointed deputy director of GSFC, effective September 8. He had been director of GSFC’s mission and data operations directorate since October 1980 and had worked at Goddard since 1963. (NASA anno Sept 1/82; NASA Release 82-131) —NASA named Dr. Frank B. McDonald, chief of GSFC’s laboratory for high-energy physics since 1970, as NASA chief scientist, effective September 20.	In this position he would be the principal adviser to the administrator and other senior officials on scientific aspects of NASA activities. Beginning at GSFC in 1959, McDonald had been project scientist on nine NASA satellite programs and principal investigator for many space experiments. He previously taught physics at the Iowa State University of Science and Technology. (NASA anno, Sept 9/82; NASA Release 82-133) —NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, not slated for flight, was still working for the U.S. space program, helping DFRF engineers to predict and avert structural trouble spots resulting from wear and tear. All preShuttle spacecraft had been one-shot items, so that space fatigue was a new problem. As each Shuttle was meant to fly up to 100 missions, NASA needed a reliable way to foresee difficulties before they developed into problems and to detect potential weakness without damaging the structure. A method called modal analysis measuring structural response to shaker acceleration could track changes from baseline data. Piecemeal testing of parts would not give results valid for the entire structure: Enterprise, built to the same dimensions as the four actual orbiters, was “uniquely qualified for the job,” researchers said. (NASA Release 82-139; DFRF Release 82-13) —MSFC said that Lockheed’s contractor facility had successfully extended and retracted an experimental solar-array wing as tall as a 10-story building, scheduled for flight on the Space Shuttle in 1984. Unlike rigid metal structures used on current long-life spacecraft, the accordion-like array consisting of lightweight flexible plastic contained contact solar cells welded directly to the array like a printed circuit. The wing, measuring 105 feet by 13.5 feet, could fold into a package less than four inches thick and expand in orbit to its full length on a coilable extension mast. It could provide 66 watts per kilogram compared to 20 watts in present systems. (MSFC Release 82-84)
ESA said that it would begin a follow-on program with Spacelab. Financial contributions from member states for this purpose had reached 80% of the goal April 15, permitting work to start immediately. Part of the new program would be development of a European retrievable carrier (EURECA) to be launched and retrieved by the Space Shuttle as well as a core payload for the first mission consisting of microgravity research emphasizing material and life sciences, with first flight scheduled for the end of 1986. Weighing about 1,500 kilograms, EURECA would have a design life of six months or more in orbit, providing services for its payload including electrical power and heat protection. Its low gravity-disturbance level would be essential to microgravity research. After deployment, an on-board propulsion unit would put it in a higher orbit with less drag on its large solar arrays. Once in orbit, its experiments, although highly automated, would be operated by remote control and monitored from the ground. It would reassume low orbit for recovery by the Shuttle and return to Earth for refurbishment. (ESA Info
The Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President released budget figures showing funds for all federal research and development as $43 billion in FY83, $4.2 billion over FY82. NASA’s portion of the research and development (R&D) budget ($6.5 billion for FY83, $672 million over FY82) would “assure timely transition of the space shuttle to an operational system [and] continue the highest priority research and space exploration projects,” namely the Space Telescope, the gamma-ray observatory, and the Galileo mission to Jupiter. (NASA anno, Feb 8/82) —James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, said in a budget message that “given the tightly constrained fiscal environment. . .1 believe we did well.... [T]hough there are no new starts, we are continuing with most of our ongoing activity in what we consider to be a balanced way.” (Text, Feb 8/82)
NASA announced a deal with Orbital Systems Corporation, a private company, to develop and market a $20-million propulsion system for launching satellites from the Space Shuttle. (NY Times, April 19/83, D-1)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
NASA said that TDRS-1 had achieved geosynchronous orbit at 67°W at 12:31 p.m. EDT. By 7:41 p.m. EDT, the communications satellite was stabilized in a normal Earth-oriented mode, with momentum wheels and Earth sensors controlling it for the first time. The White Sands ground station was activating the payload. The press said that NASA’s $100 million rescue mission had put TDRS into proper stationary orbit on the equator over Brazil, two months after the 5,000-pound communications satellite went off course when a second-stage thruster misfired after launch from the Challenger in April. The 39th firing of thruster jets moved TDRS into an orbit parallel to Earth’s rotation and at the same speed, keeping it in the same position above Earth. Saving the satellite meant that Spacelab, due to fly in September on STS-9, could proceed as planned. Also, the Landsat now in orbit could send its images to Earth through TDRS, and all future Shuttle flights could keep in touch with Earth 85% of the time instead of the present 20%. An adjacent story in the Washington Post said that the House had approved and sent to President Reagan for signature a compromise bill authorizing NASA to spend $7.3 billion in FY84, slightly more than the president’s request, but approval was expected. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 1/83; W Post, June 30/83, A-3)
Associated Press (AP) said that ESA launched Ariane 6 at 7:59 a.m. EDT from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites: the first ESA telecommunications craft, the British Aerospace-designed Ecs 1, and a smaller West German satellite to retransmit amateur radio broadcasts. This sixth attempt to get the three-stage Ariane off the ground was considered a “crucial boost” to Europe’s space program as a way to break th superpower monopoly on space. Ariane faced competition from the U.S. Space Shuttle and from private companies planning to buy conventional Thor, Atlas, and Titan vehicles from the U.S. government. ESA was counting on enough business for everyone, but admitted that Ariane would have had trouble getting any if this sixth launch had failed. (ESA Info 21; WPost (AP), June 17/83, A-2) Mission control stated that the group of five was “the largest human payload in the history of the space age.” The Soviet Union had maintained crews of five on its Salyut space station but had never carried that number on a single launch. First deployment of a payload was at 5:02 p.m. EDT when the crew launched from the cargo bay a seven-ton communications satellite, Anik C2, for Telesat (Canada’s governmental telecommunications organization). At 9:36 a.m. EDT the next day the crew launched a $40 million Palapa B communications satellites for the government of Indonesia. Two previous Palapas launched by the United States were providing communications to Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Palapa B, twice the size of the earlier communications satellite could increase television and telephone traffic in the area by 10% to 15% a year. The 147 million Indonesians living on islands extending more than 3,200 miles east to west had only 560,000 telephones: Palapa B could provide service for as many as a million new telephones in the next 10 years. After the second communications satellite was launched, the four rookie astronauts (Ride, Fabian, Hauck, and Thagard) appeared on the television screen assembled in the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white letters reading “TFNG: We Deliver.” TFNG stood for “thirty-five new guys,” the astronaut class, recruited in 1978, to which all four belonged. Crippen stayed out of camera range, but mission control said “That’s all right, Crip. We can tell you’re a steely-eyed veteran from here.” On June 19 mission control said that the families of the four fathers aboard Challenger had gathered “to wish you a happy Father’s Day.” The four male astronauts had a total of 10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and Fabian, 2 each. Major activities for the next three days would be the release of the mechanical arm and rehearsal for deployment and retrieval of the West German pallet. Ride and Fabian would drop the 15-foot, 5,000-pound package off the Shuttle and try to pick it up again. (This would be a first for an exercise that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June 22 the team released and retrieved the package five times, as television cameras on Shuttle and package sent spectacular shots of the procedure with a backdrop of Earth and black space. When the exercise concluded and the arm and the payload were back in the cargo bay, Crippen reminded mission control that some crews had announced “We deliver” (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when they launched two communications satellites from the shuttle last November): “Well, for flight 7, we pick up and deliver.” The USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova, first woman to make a flight in space 20 years ago, wired congratulations to Sally Ride. The telegram expressed pleasure “to know that a third representative of this planet’s women, now from the United States of America, is in outer space today.” Last year the Soviet Union sent a second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into space. Among more than 20 experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay and mid-deck was the colony of 150 carpenter ants sent into space by high-school students from Camden, N.J., to record their reactions to weightlessness. The ants were considered good space subjects, being hardy and naturally social creatures. Marginal weather at KSC raised a question whether Challenger would land near its launch point, as planned. Landing on the Florida runway was a way to reduce time in preparing Challenger for its next flight. STS-7 cbuld be extended, or landing could be shifted to Edwards Air Force Base in California; a shift to California would mean an eight-day delay in bringing Challenger back to KSC for a mid-August mission, adding pressure to the timetable for launching Spacelab between the end of September and mid-October. The next chance for a Florida runway landing would be early in 1985; the two intervening missions would be a night launch and landing and the heavyweight touchdown of the Shuttle carrying Spacelab. Also of concern was the effect of rainstorms on the Shuttle tile covering: planes carrying strips of the insulation had been flown through rainstorms with a uniform result of “significant erosion of the tile surfaces.” Mission control offered three landing times, 6:53 a.m. and 8:29 a.m. EDT at KSC and 9:56 a.m. EDT at Edwards Air Force Base. The crew appeared on television “stowing the cabin” in preparation for landing. A sign “The Doctor Is In” was held up as Thagard showed viewers the experiments he was conducting to find clues for the cause of space sickness. STS-7 had been the first shuttle mission to have no space-sick astronauts. The Challenger landed at Edwards Air Force Base June 24 at 9:57 EDT after a steady downpour began at KSC. In a congratulatory telephone call to the astronauts, President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling of the mechanical arm and said “You were there because you were the best person for the job.” Ride said that the flight was “the most fun I’ll ever have in my life.” When the astronauts attended a brief homecoming ceremony at Johnson Space Center June 24, Ride refused to accept a bouquet of flowers from a NASA official; she had said before the mission that she wanted to be treated no differently from her four male crewmates. Wives of the male astronauts each received a red rose; Ride’s husband, astronaut Dr. Steven Hawley, did not. (NASA MOR E-420-07-83-04 [prelaunch] June 9; NASA MOR M-989-83-07 [prelaunch] June 13/83; NY Times, June 20/83, A-l; June 23/83, A-l; June 25/83, 16; June 26/83, 4-8; WPost, June 17/83, A-2; June 20/83, A-l; June 21/83, A-6; June 22/83, A-3; June 23/83, A-l; June 24/83, A-3, C-4; June 25/83, A-l; June 26/83, A-2)
A team of engineers from NASA and industry celebrated at GSFC their success, after 58 days of maneuvers, in putting the tracking and data-relay satellite into geosynchronous orbit. Using tiny one-pound thrusters with nozzles about the size of a thimble, the team boosted the 5,000-pound TDRS more than 8,600 miles further into space, a feat never before attempted. The TDRS was launched from the Shuttle Challenger during its first mission April 4; after a successful deployment from the Shuttle, some difficulty in the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket threw TDRS into a tumble from which ground control rescued it, stabilizing it far short of the altitude needed for geosynchronous orbit. A joint board representing NASA and the U.S. Air Force said later that the problem was loss of oil pressure in an engine seal, probably caused by excess engine heat. The board had viewed photographs taken by U.S. Air Force camera over New Mexico and had conducted “extensive tests.” Because of the importance of TDRS operation to space communications, NASA and the Air Force had rescheduled two shuttle missions that were to use the IUS. (NASA PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED IMTEflTi0WM.1T mm Releases 83-104, 83-114, 83-116; MSFC Releases 83-49, 83-50; W Post, July 13/83, A-l; July 28/83, A-4) —NASA announced that Charles D. Walker, an engineer at McDonnell Douglas, would be the First payload specialist representing a project designed for commercial purposes. He would fly on the 12th Shuttle mission set for March 1984, operating a materials-processing device developed by McDonnell-Douglas to separate large amounts of biological materials in space for new pharmaceutical uses. As chief engineer responsible for spaceflight tests and evaluation, Walker had worked with project support at KSC and JSC, training NASA astronauts who operated the device for electrophoresis research on earlier Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 83-105)
MSFC announced that it would begin drop tests in cooperation with Dryden Flight Research Facility (DFRF) to try out larger parachutes for Shuttle boosters. The current means of slowing booster descent after launch into the ocean for retrieval and later use consisted of small pilot chutes, a drogue, and three main chutes 115 feet in diameter. The new main chutes being tested would be 13 feet in diameter. Use of larger chutes would slow velocity at impact from 89 feet per second to about 75 feet per second, reducing loads on (and amount of damage to) boosters that had occurred during Shuttle flight tests, officials said. A modified B-52 aircraft from DFRF would fly the test article to about 20,000-feet altitude and release it. Both ground-based and airborne cameras would record the mock booster’s descent to evaluate design, deployment, and parachute performance. (MSFC Release 83-9; DFRF Release 83-1)
The Washington Post said that an experiment on the next U.S. Shuttle flight was canceled because of the shooting down last month of a South Korean airliner by the Soviet Union. The experiment would have made the first mapping photographs from orbit of the entire area of Afghanistan, whose government the Soviet Union supports. Cancellation was a joint decision of NASA and ESA, which built the $1 billion Spacelab scheduled to make its first flight October 28 in the Shuttle Columbia’s cargo bay. This mission would take the Shuttle farther north and south than any previous manned U.S. flight, going 55° from the equator over the end of Argentina as well as the Hudson Bay region of Canada and the upper areas of Scotland. Columbia and Spacelab would also fly over most of the Soviet Union (including Moscow for the first time) but would take no photographs of the Soviet Union. (W Post, Oct 4/83, A-2)
Press reports said that the 10th Shuttle mission originally set for November, first to have a secret mission and first to be flown solely for the U.S. Air Force, was delayed “indefinitely” at the request of the Air Force and that NASA officials had “no idea” when it would be rescheduled. The Air Force confirmed the delay but would not discuss the reasons. NASA and the Air Force had an agreement allowing the service to preempt any scheduled Shuttle mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED jit? liritriHUNAiU Unidentified sources said that the reason was the Boeing-built upper stage that failed when the TDRS was launched from the Shuttle in April. Postponement indicated that the payload scheduled for the Air Force would have used the type of upper stage that malfunctioned. A special board convened to investigate the matter had not issued a report. (NY Times, June 14/83, C—3; W Post, June 14/83, A-7)
MSFC test-fired a high-performance development motor for a Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster, redesigned for more thrust at liftoff and higher payload capability. Successful completion of the test would qualify the motor for flight. First use would be on the eighth Shuttle mission, set for summer 1983. (MSFC Release 83-12)
The Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) landed at 3:47 p.m. PST at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., after 10 days in space and 167 orbits—the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The landing followed a delay necessitating 22 more orbits than planned when Columbia’s computers failed 3 hours and 49 minutes prior to the planned reentry bum. Six hours after the two computers went off line, Columbia also lost one of its three inertial measurement units that provided orbiter orientation information. The orbiter carried five IBM general purpose computers and three inertial measurement units. Today’s reentry was flown with one of each inoperative. A reentry could be flown with only a single computer and single measurement unit. Mission pilots John W. Young and Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., said at the time that they believed that the triggering of an upward firing 870-pound nose reaction control jet, which caused an unusually strong impact to the orbiter, was the likely cause of the computer failures. However, telemetry analysis showed that the thruster activity was coincidental to the computer malfunction. Instead, NASA came to the conclusion that it was a transient hardware internal problem. About 40 minutes after the problems occurred, the crew restored the second computer to operation. On December 5, President Reagan and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in Athens at the time, held a conference call with the five U.S. crew members and one German payload specialist on Columbia. The U.S. Information Agency (USIA) used five satellites and thousands of miles of land lines around the world to bounce the signals among Athens. Washington, and JSC to provide live television coverage of the call to seven European cities and the Cable News Network (CNN). Aside from the computer problems, the ninth Space Shuttle mission was almost flawless and was distinguished by some significant scientific discoveries. One discovery involved the workings of the inner ear, disproving a 77-year-old hypothesis that had won the 1914 Nobel Prize in medicine for Swedish professor, Robert Barany. Barany had said that nystagmus, a flickering of a person’s eyes when cold air is blown into one of his ears and hot air into the other, was caused by convection, the motion of fluids under uneven heating. But in space, the lack of gravity meant that convection did not occur. Nevertheless, the astronauts aboard Columbia showed the characteristic eye movements. The six-man crew completed work on all but one of the 70 scheduled experiments; only a microwave sensing device misfired. Scientists from 14 countries designed the experiments, and the experiments did not end with touchdown. The four scientists were in quarantine, where they would be required to remain motionless so that scientists could observe how their bodies acclimated to gravity. (ESA Release, Dec 9/83; WH annon, Dec 5/83; W Times, Dec 6/83, 3A; WPost, Dec 6/83, A-3, Dec 8/83, A-3, Dec 9/83, A-l; NY Times, Dec 9/83, A-l; P Inq, Dec/83, A-l; AvWk, Dec 12/83, 23)
NASA said that IRAS had completed its primary mission objective at 12:30 p.m. EDT by conducting an all-sky survey and giving an opportunity for double confirmation of sources. Survey data had a few “holes” because of Sun-Earth-Moon observation constraints and an anomaly that occurred early in June. NASA had begun another survey to fill in the gaps and confirm earlier observations; end-of-life would come early in January. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept. 1/83) 17-minute hold because of thunderstorms passing through. “Tropical disturbance” Barry had moved ashore August 26 about 40 miles south of the Cape and could have turned into a hurricane, but it bypassed the launch-pad area. This third flight of Shuttle Challenger was commanded by Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly, who was copilot of the second Shuttle mission two years ago; pilot for STS-8 was Navy Cdr. Daniel C. Brandenstein. Mission specialists were Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner; civilian physician William E. Thornton, oldest American in space; and U.S. Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford II, first black American in space. This was also the first night Shuttle launch. NASA was testing its ability to launch at night from KSC, where weather was often more favorable than in the daytime. The DOD wanted a demonstration of night launch in case of needing the Shuttle for a military-mission on short notice. And Challenger was carrying into orbit a $43 million India satellite to forecast weather and relay radio, television, and phone calls that required a night launch for proper location, NASA’s first manned night launch had been December 7, 1972, when Apollo 17 lifted off at KSC on its way to the Moon; that launch had been visible to people in the Great Smoky Mountains more than 500 miles away. NASA also planned to land STS-8 at night, another first, for the same reasons it launched at night. Landing would be at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave desert of California instead of KSC, because of the longer runway and the greater probability of good weather there in midsummer. This would be the first time the public would not be allowed at the landing; NASA did not want “hundreds or even thousands of moving automobiles with headlights” to confuse Shuttle pilots descending out of total darkness toward the concrete runway. About three hours after reaching orbit, the crew began communicating with mission control through the properly relocated $100 million TDRS launched from STS-6 in April, instead of using ground stations out of reach during most of their orbit. The first major task of the STS-8 mission would be deployment of INSAT-B, and the crew spent most of August 30 checking the performance of the 50-foot mechanical arm in the Shuttle’s cargo bay that had entitled “a slightly arthritic reaction” in its elbow. The arm would grapple and move a heavy dummy-spacecraft package later in the mission in rehearsal for future release or retrieval of satellites. INSAT-B was launched over the Indian Ocean August 31 at 7:49 GMT and successfully put into transfer orbit, according to the Indian Space Research Organization, which said that all on-board systems were working well and that the solar panel was partly deployed. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Aug 30/83; FBIS, Delhi DomSvc in English, Aug 31/83; NY Times, Aug 3/83, A-10; Aug 31/83, A-l; WPost, Aug 25/83, A-8; Aug 26/83, A-10; Aug 30/83, A-l; Aug 31/83, A-8; USA Today, Aug 30/83, 1A, 3A; W Times, Aug 30/83, 12A; Aug 30/83, 1A; Intervia, Aug 83, 817) During August: NASA said that it would cease in September to operate Nimbus 6, launched June 12, 1975, for tracking balloons floating around the Earth to gather data on winds in the tropical and mid-latitudes. This system was the forerunner in one-way platform-to-satellite data collection that had provided worldwide ocean temperatures from buoys, tracked animal migration on land and sea, and kept in contact with numerous adventures, such as the crew of the Eagle I balloon rescued after it crashed in the Atlantic and a Japanese who crossed the North Pole by dogsled from Canada. Nimbus 6 had lost attitude-control capability in October 1982 when two momentum wheels failed with an accompanying severe power reduction. It would remain in polar orbit at 600 miles altitude, reentering the atmosphere some time after the year 2500, NASA said. (NASA Release 83-126)
NASA launched at 11:00 a.m. EST the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) from KSC. Columbia carried the largest space crew ever, which consisted of John Young, commander; Brewster Shaw, pilot; Dr. Robert Parker and Dr. Owen Garriott, mission specialists; and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold, payload specialists. The crew would operate in two shifts to permit 24-hour operation of experiments. The mission was originally scheduled to get under way September 30 but was delayed to October 28 to give engineers additional time to check out a communications satellite needed to relay data to Earth from Spacelab, carried on Columbia. The flight was postponed again when an examination of the booster rockets used for the Space Shuttle mission in August revealed serious erosion of the insulation lining one of the rocket nozzles. The rocket was replaced. Columbia carried Spacelab, designed and built by ESA, which marked Europe’s first major entry into a manned space program. Other firsts associated with the flight was that it carried the heaviest payload on a Shuttle, the 33,584-pound Spacelab and pallet, and that it would include more experiments and spacecraft maneuvers than did any previous flight. Immediately after liftoff, Columbia rolled over and turned northward to put itself into an orbital path that would range from as far north as Scotland and Leningrad to as far south as Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America in order to take pictures of Europe. The orbit would also take Columbia over Moscow and many militarily sensitive areas of the Soviet Union, the first time a U.S. manned spacecraft had flown over the Soviet Union in daylight. No pictures or other sensing would be taken of the ground while Columbia passed over the Soviet Union. The $l-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long laboratory was sealed and pressurized so that the scientists/astronauts could work in shirtsleeves as they carried out more than 70 experiments on 38 sets of equipment. Operating Spacelab were Merbold and Lichtenberg, a new breed of astronaut—payload specialists—who were not career astronauts but scientists trained to operate the science instruments on the mission. Wired with sensors, the scientists were guinea pigs in a number of experiments designed to explore how the body adapted to space and how it performed in the absence of gravity. Blood samples were taken three times so that scientists could study how the ratio of red to white blood cells changed once the body was weightless. Several experiments were conducted to measure eye movements; in another experiment, Garriott was given mild electric shocks to see how the muscles in his body responded to a sudden jolt that was the bodily equivalent of a sudden movement in weightlessness (doctors believed that one of the causes of space sickness might be abrupt movements that disoriented the inner ear). In another experiment, the crew in shifts pushed two balls identical in shape and size, although of different weights, to determine how quickly humans would distinguish weight from size in weightlessness. Other Spacelab studies were concerned with the growth in space of sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes. Exotic metal mixes were melted, and crystals were grown in three Spacelab furnaces. There were experiments intended to determine the practicality of orbiting factories to produce products not possible in the gravity of Earth. During the flight, two antennas failed on the TDRS-1 that was used to relay data from Spacelab to Earth. The failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold had to share the voice link to Mission Control Center in Houston with the four astronauts in Columbia’s cockpit, and it meant that the two scientists got their instructions from the ground via a teleprinter aboard Spacelab. Columbia landed December 8 at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. (NASA MOR M-977-09-83-01 [prelaunch], Oct 83; NASA Releases 83-163, 83-176; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Nov 29/83; W Post, Nov 22/83, A-8, Nov 28/83, A-l, Nov 29/83, A-l, Nov 30/83, A-l; USA Today, Nov 29/83, 1A; W Times, Nov 22/83, C—1; B Sun, Nov 29/83, A-l)
President Reagan issued a proclamation calling on the nation to observe the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s 25th anniversary with “appropriate ceremonies and activities.” Reviewing the agency’s history and accomplishments, including preeminence of U.S. civil and military aviation, the Apollo program, planetary exploration, and the Space Shuttle, the message stated “The future looks bright, and NASA will be an important part of it.” (Text, pres, doc., Oct 1/83)
MSFC reported successful simulation of Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) spacecraft-repair procedures in its huge neutral-buoyancy tank as rehearsal for the actual task set for 1984 during the 13th shuttle mission. Solar Max, launched February 14, 1980, worked for 10 months until fuses blew on three of its four attitude-control momentum wheels. The repair mission would replace its 500-pound attitude-control subsystem and part of the coronagraph-polarimeter. Three of its seven instruments continued to work despite the malfunction. Dr. George Nelson, lead astronaut for the repair, and STS-13 pilot Francis Scobee wore space suits during the underwater simulation to experience the physical difficulty of working in the space environment. Dr. Nelson and Dr. James D. van Hoften would make the actual repairs. Dr. Ernie Hildner, coinvestigator on the polarimeter and MSFC’s solar physics branch chief, said that watching the simulation made him “more optimistic about the success of the endeavor.” (MSFC Release 83-30) Postponement of TDRS-B would keep the $1 billion Spacelab built by ESA and scheduled to fly in September on STS-9 from carrying out its full mission, as its 40 instruments were designed to work at such high speeds that they needed at least two tracking satellites to operate properly. However, ESA and NASA agreed to launch Spacelab on schedule and get a 60% to 70% return from its experiments. Even this, Aller said, would depend on NASA’s ability to move TDRS-A into a synchronous orbit. Two test firings had raised its perigee 350 miles, and Aller expressed “confidence we will have [TDRS] in geosynchronous orbit sometime in June.” Press reports said that firings May 10 and 11 raised the perigee more than 800 miles, still 7,000 miles short; it would take another three weeks of daily firings to achieve synchronous orbit. On May 27, NASA said that it removed TDRS-B from the cargo manifest for STS-8 and substituted the test article. By that time it had moved TDRS-A within 3,675 miles (5,915 kilometers) of proper perigee. {W Post, May 7/83, A-3, May 11/83, A-9; May 12/83; NASA Release 83-86; MSFC Release 83-38)
A colony of carpenter ants flown on the shuttle Challenger in June had apparently not survived the trip. Press reports said that no signs of life were seen through the clear plastic top of the casing housing the 151 ants. The sponsors, students from two New Jersey high schools who flew to Cape Canaveral with a teacher to recover the experiment, checked heat and light supply to the canister, as well as the cameras—one making periodic exposures and the other recording on television tape—that monitored the ants in flight. Everything worked. RCA Corporation had supported the experiment with a $10,000 grant. Press reports noted that the ants had been inside Challenger’s cargo bay almost two months before launch and might have died before the flight; however, two control colonies in New Jersey had survived under the same conditions. The canister would be opened in New Jersey in the presence of two biology professors from Temple University who were advisers to the students. (IV Post, July 7/83, A-2) The incident had “amazingly coincided” with a preplanned exercise in “urgent escape from the station.” Journalists “could not help asking” how long it would take for the crew to abandon station. Deputy flight director Victor Blagov said that the “minimum required time is 15 minutes, but we consider 90 minutes—that is, one orbit—to be standard time” during which the crew could take all steps needed for an emergency mothballing of the station and enter the return module. The cosmonauts could “spend several days [there] in absolute safety,” Blagov added, but if necessary they could “splash down in the reentry vehicle in the ocean, or touch down in one of the reserve landing ranges in the USA, France, and other countries. There is an international convention on that score.” (FBIS, Tass in English, July 15, 22 , 27/83)
An Office of Technology Assessment study released today said that the Soviet Union was nearing construction of a permanent space base that would serve as an eventual springboard for Soviet settlements on Mars and the Moon. “The Soviet space station program is the cornerstone of an official policy which looks not only toward a permanent Soviet human presence in low-Earth orbit but also toward permanent Soviet settlement of their people on the Moon and Mars,” the report said. “The Soviets take quite seriously the possibility that large numbers of their citizens will one day live in space.” The report pointed out that the United States was still debating NASA’s request for as much as S200 million in FY85 to begin development of a U.S. space station. However, the Soviets had committed to a permanent space base. The report pointed out that, while the United States “seems to have gained a substantial lead over the Soviet Union” in space science and communications, the picture in human spaceflight was “less clear.” The report noted that Soviets had flown six models of the Salyut space station in the last 12 years; their cosmonauts had flown more than three times as many hours in space as U.S. astronauts and had accumulated extensive experience “in flight operation, experimentation, and earth observation on trips that last for months.” However, U.S. space experts had long criticized the Soviets for sticking with what they believed was essentially outdated technology in the Salyut. It could not fly back to Earth, deploy other satellites, or carry as many people as the Space Shuttle. But the report pointed out that “Salyut may be the penultimate step leading to a permanent, large-scale presence in space.” As evidence that the Salyut represented only a stepping stone to larger ventures in space, the report said that there is “unclassified photographic evidence” that the Soviets were developing a small space plane and a larger “heavy-lift” shuttle that would carry “more massive payloads into low-earth orbit” than the U.S. Space Shuttle could lift. (WPost, Dec 22/83, A-l; Salyut, Soviet Steps Toward Permanent Human Presence in Space, A Technical Memorandum, OTA, Washington, D.C., Dec 83)
NASA published in the Federal Register a proposal on how it would select passengers to ride on the Space Shuttle, possibly as early as 1985. NASA emphasized in the proposal that it was not accepting applications. It had already received more than 2,000 written requests for rides since the 1960s, and it had received so many telephone calls about riding the Space Shuttle that it had to attach a recorded message to its telephone line to request that potential astronauts have patience. All requests that had been received by NASA would be disregarded, said NASA’s Sara Keegan. The proposed selection plan would use a multitiered process to choose Shuttle passengers. All requests would be screened by an outside review panel appointed separately by NASA for each flight and then reviewed by a panel of seven top space agency officials before NASA’s administrator made the final selection. Several months before liftoff of a flight, the agency would announce when it would accept applications and disclose specific requirements for the flight. Such requirements could change according to the Space Shuttle’s mission. There were, however, broad requirements for all passengers. Citizen observers/participants would have to be in good health and condition, pass a detailed background investigation, and be willing to undergo rigorous training. NASA was accepting comments from the public on its proposed selection process until mid-February. (NASA Release 83-190; Federal Register, Dec 23/83, Vol. 48 No. 248, pages 56770-71. Published in final form in Federal Register, Apr 25/84, Vol. 49 No. 81; NY Times, Dec 16/83, A-ll; WPost, Dec 23/83, A-3) During December: The large number of malfunctions that struck the Space Shuttle Columbia in its final hours of flight during STS-9 forced engineers to inaugurate the most extensive trouble-shooting operations since the Space Shuttles began flying in April 1981. They were not sure how long the undertaking would last, what they might find, or what effect their findings could have on future flight schedules. NASA officials did not rule out the possibility that the Columbia’s troubles could cause a delay in the next Space Shuttle mission scheduled for January 30, 1984. The malfunctions included two computer failures, a navigation instrument shutdown, and an explosive fire in the rear compartment. Early Space Shuttle flights had had troubles with computers and the heat-shielding tiles, but these were straight forward physical defects that were easily identified. The current problems were more perplexing and came when the Space Shuttle was assumed to be a fully tested, operational vehicle. NASA engineers and other aerospace observers had suggested that the Columbia’s problems stemmed from a phenomenon not uncommon in any new, complex technology : that is after the initial text phase, when extreme care and attention were given to every step in a project, it was human nature to relax a bit, and it was the nature of machines to misbehave occasionally in unexpected ways. International Business Machines (IBM), contractor for the computers, would examine the faulty computers; NASA engineers would closely examine data in search of clues to the cause of the two malfunctions, which did not seem to be related to any fundamental design flaw but could have been caused by loose circuitry resulting from vibrations. NASA would ship the inertial measurement unit to its manufacturer, the Singer Kearfott Company in Little Falls, N.J., for examination. (NY Times, Dec 15/83, A-l) —JPL announced that the IRAS had found a ring of planets being born around Fomalhaut, one of the most studied stars in the southern skies. Earlier in the year, the telescope had discovered a primitive solar system around the star Vega. The discovery that Vega and Fomalhaut appeared to have solar systems was the first evidence supporting the theory that Earth’s solar system was not the only such in existence. Vega and Fomalhaut might be undergoing the same kind of evolution that Earth’s solar system went through three to four billion years ago. “The discovery provides the second direct evidence that solid objects of substantial size exist around a star that is not our sun,” said Dr. Gerry Neugebhuer, IRAS program scientist at JPL. “These objects could be a solar system in a different stage of development and evolution than our own or the one that we found to be circling Vega,” he added. The IRAS detected the two extraterrestrial solar systems by measuring the temperature of the bodies circling the two stars. It found them much cooler than the stars but far too warm and far too large to be rings of interstellar dust. (JPL Release, Dec 16/83; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-3) —Lt. Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr., retired December 31 as deputy director, JPL. Following retirement from the Air Force in 1969, he joined JPL as deputy director, functioning as general manager responsible for the day-to-day management of the laboratory’s resources and the direction and coordination of its technical, administrative, and service activities. General Terhune received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in October 1982. He will be replaced as deputy director by Robert J. Parks, JPL associate director. (JPL Release, Dec 12/83)
LeRC issued a request for proposals to design, build, and launch an ACTS system, including flight spacecraft, ground system, and operations. Launched by the Space Shuttle in 1988, ACTS would serve for two years in communications experiments. (NASA Release 83-28; LeRC Release 83-14)
The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum said that it would build an adjunct facility at Dulles International Airport to house an expanding collection of aircraft, including the Shuttle Enterprise. Estimated to cost $40 million, the facility would replace the restoration site now at Silver Hill, Md., but would not be completed for another 7 to 15 years. Possibilities for Dulles included a group of four buildings to accommodate a Boeing 707, a Boeing B17 bomber, Boeing 727, a Boeing 747, and others; the design and funding were not yet settled. The collection had outgrown the Mall area, said Walter Boyne, director of the museum: “We are going to get the space shuttle and the Concorde,” which it would be physically impossible to move to the Mall area. “They are so complex, you can’t simply take a wing off and move them.” The present museum now has 10 million visitors a year, and Boyne said that people would be as interested in the Shuttle 100 years from now as they were in the Wright Brothers’ plane today. (W Post, Oct 13/83, D-1) A three-inch layer of the carbon-epoxy material was intended to protect the metal nozzles from flaming exhaust by charring, to dissipate heat; about half the layer would normally burn away during the two-minute firing of the booster. On the last mission, one nozzle’s lining came within 0.2 inches of burning away completely. Damage to a metal nozzle could send the Shuttle off course; had the flame burned through part of the engine in flight, “it could have caused a catastrophe,” said the Washington Post. A test firing October 11 at Thiokol’s Utah plant, where the rockets were built, showed that the liner had begun to “delaminate,” which would make the Shuttle aerodynamically unstable after two minutes of flight. If NASA decided to replace one of Columbia’s motors, it would have to move the entire vehicle off the pad. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, head of the Shuttle program, said that chances of staying on schedule for a Spacelab launch between October 28 and November 5 were “diminishing rapidly”; however, he would not set a launch date “with this type of uncertainty.” The next possible launch date after November 5 would be November 27: astronomy experiments to be carried on Spacelab had to orbited while the moon was dark. [Students at Camden, N.J., high schools said that the carpenter ants flown on Challenger in June had died from lack of moisture before leaving Earth.] The New York Times said that NASA might have to delay the next Shuttle mission for one to four months, possibly to next February 6, because of concern about reliability of the nozzles in the Shuttle boosters. Positions of stellar targets would again be favorable for Spacelab observations by next February. ESA and scientists from the United States and Europe were asked to suggest rescheduling that would have the least impact on their experiments. A later report said that engineers who examined one of the engines recovered from the Atlantic after the mission in August found that the three-inch coating inside the rocket nozzle had burned down to 0.2 inches. Astronaut Daniel C. Brandenstein, pilot of that flight, told CBS News that the lowest part of the engine would have burned through if the engines had fired 2.7	seconds more, which would have “spelled curtains for the crew.” A NASA official said that was conjecture, though the agency admitted that a burn-through might have occurred after 20 more seconds. NASA decided October 14 to postpone the first flight of Spacelab for “at least a month” but would announce a new launch date. Gen. Abrahamson said October 16 that the probable date would be late next February, but the decision would be made jointly by NASA and ESA. He said that NASA engineers still did not know what caused the near-failure of the engine on the eighth shuttle flight in August. Two test firings in the last 10 days had produced confusing results: one engine lining had almost burned through, the other less than halfway, as it was meant to do. NASA had changed the manufacturing process not long ago, he noted, and the change might have trapped gases in the lining instead of baking them out. With Columbia waiting for Spacelab, the next Shuttle flight would take place in January as planned. Challenger would deploy two communications satellites, and astronaut Bruce McCandless would demonstrate in space a self-propelled manned maneuvering unit that could go 500 to 600 feet from the Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 13/83, A-15; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 15/83, A-20; Oct 17/83, A-3; NY Times, Oct 13/83, A-16)
Professor Konstantin Feoktistov, a senior Soviet space official, told a news conference that “work was being done” on the Soviet space shuttle project, which he described as being “more complex” and more “expensive” than Moscow’s current orbiting manned-station program, the Washington Post reported. Also at the news conference were cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov, who had just returned from their record-long stay aboard Salyut-7. The two confirmed a series of recent mishaps in the Soviet space program, including a fuel leak in their Salyut 7 orbiting station and a launch pad explosion of a booster rocket September 26 that was to have brought a fresh crew to relieve them. Because of the explosion, the two cosmonauts said that their mission was extended by 50 days. General Vladimir Shatalov, space training chief, told the news conference that there was a leak of toxic propellant on the Salyut 7 space station but denied reports that the craft was so crippled by this as to endanger the crew’s lives. “There was a problem with one of the subsystems and there was a leak of a certain amount of fuel,” he said. “That part of the station was switched off and it continues to be viable today.” That subsystem was used for space/maneuvering, the general added, noting that backup systems were sufficient to deal with the problem. Another senior Soviet space official said privately that the Soviets were working on a space shuttle and that in “general terms we are considering both types of orbital vehicles—single-use and multiple-use,” the Washington Post said. (W Post, Dec 13/83, A-10)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
MSFC said that it had installed the reusable orbital-research Spacelab in the cargo bay of the Shuttle Columbia at KSC. Designed, developed, and funded by ESA, Spacelab had undergone tests for three months in a cargo-integration test equipment (CITE) stand at KSC. Columbia would carry Spacelab and a four-member crew into orbit October 28 to perform more than 70 individual investigations in five research areas during a nine-day mission. (MSFC Release 83-59; ESA Info 36)
NASA announced the selection of crews for STS-13 and Spacelab 3, as well as mission specialists for Spacelab 2. Robert L. Crippen, who piloted STS-1 and was scheduled to command STS-7, would command STS-13 in April 1984 with Francis R. Scobee as pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. George D. Nelson, Terry J. Hart, and Dr. James D. van Hoften. Robert F. Overmyer, who has pilot of STS-5, would command STS-18 (the Spacelab 3 mission, now scheduled for launch ahead of Spacelab 2) with Frederick D. Gregory as pilot. Mission specialists v/ould be Dr. Don L. Lind and physicians Dr. Norman E. Thagard and Dr. William E. Thornton. Both of the latter would be on Shuttle flights before Spacelab 3: Thagard on STS-7, Thornton on STS-8. Payload specialists would be selected later. Mission specialists for STS-24 (Spacelab 2) would be Dr. Anthony W. England and Dr. Karl G. Henize. Spacelab 3 was originally to be the first operational mission; Spacelab 2, which should have preceded Spacelab 3, was delayed for completion of an instrument-pointing system. (NASA Release During February: The Florida Historic Preservation Society charged that NASA had breached a 1974 agreement by arranging for demolition of the last Apollo launch tower at KSC and sale of the metal as scrap. NASA said that it had to award a contract for demolition by February 18 or risk further delay in Shuttle schedules: the tower had to be removed by October so that NASA could begin modifying the mobile launch pad for use by the Shuttle beginning in 1986. NASA had postponed demolition for a week to let the society find a way to preserve the tower but said none of the suggestions was practical. The matter arose when two U.S. Air Force engineers at KSC said that the tower could be a major tourist attraction and started a move to save it. NASA said that it would cost up to $4 million to remove the tower and reassemble it for display. The agency had accepted a bid of $557,000 to remove the tower, and the demolition company would keep the steel, worth about $400,000, as scrap. A coalition of historic preservation groups said that the tower could be removed and rebuilt for $1 million (admittedly only an estimate). NASA had offered free storage and a site for reconstructing it if the coalition would pay a contractor to dismantle and move it. (NASA Release 83-25; W Post, Feb 17/83, A-17)
MFSC said that the Space Telescope, NASA’s future optical orbiting astronomical observatory, had been named the Edwin P. Hubble Space Telescope to honor a foremost U.S. astronomer who had died in 1953. Scientists had differed on the extent and dimensions of the universe: Earth’s solar system was considered part of a larger system of all stars visible to the naked eye. It was not known whether faint spiral nebulae were part of the Milky Way or distant universes, each composed of myriad stars. Hubble, working with the 100-inch telescope at Mt. Wilson, Calif., looked at individual stars in the Andromeda nebula and by the end of 1924 was able to show that Andromeda was many times farther away than any star in the Milky Way system. He later showed that the universe was expanding (evidence of the Big Bang theory), that external galaxies were moving away from earth, and that the more remote the galaxy the faster it was moving. This was called Hubble’s Law; the coefficient relating distance and velocity of the galaxy was called Hubble’s Constant. The newly named Space Telescope was scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1986. (MSFC Release 83-70)
NASA announced that Administrator James M. Beggs and U.R. Rao, chairman of the Indian Space Reseach Organization (ISRO), signed a launch services agreement covering the reimbursable launch of the Indian National Satellite, INSAT 1C, scheduled for mid-1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. INSAT 1C was a multipurpose satellite that would provide communications and meteorological service to India. An ISRO scientist/engineer would serve as a payload specialist aboard the Space Shuttle during the INSAT 1C mission. Discussions were also held concerning experiments the Indian payload specialist would perform during the mission and concerning potential cooperation between NASA and ISRO in the areas of space applications and space science. (NASA Release 84-175)
The Soviet Union launched a scale model of what U.S. experts called a small, reusable, winged spaceplane. It orbited the Earth once, glided back into the atmosphere, and splashed down in the Black Sea. The apparently successful unmanned flight, the fourth in a new shuttle program, was seen.as further evidence of the growing competition among superpower countries to develop advanced instruments for using space for military as well as peaceful operations. U.S. intelligence analysts speculated that the Soviet spaceplanes, when fully developed and flown by pilots, could be used to deliver small payloads or to inspect or attack other satellites in low-Earth orbit. The Soviet Union was also reported to be close to conducting the first tests of a larger, manned space vehicle comparable to the U.S. Space Shuttle. In what had become a characteristic of the space race between the Soviet Union and United States, one nation, the Soviet Union in this case, was trying to catch up with the other in developing the large shuttle but was also trying to move ahead with another technology, the small spaceplane. And equally characteristic, this had apparently prompted the other, in this case the United States, to step up its efforts to design a spaceplane of its own. (NY Times, Dec 19/84, A-l)
MSFC announced that Morton Thiokol’s Wasatch Division near Brigham City, Utah; had successfully static-fired a new, lightweight version of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster at its northern Utah facility. Preliminary results from the two-minute firing indicated that all objectives were met and that the system operated as expected. The case of the new motor was made from a composite material of plastic reinforced with graphite fibers wound into a cylinder. Each of these filament-wound cases weighed about 30,000	pounds less than the current steel case that made up most of the length of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel focket booster. Use of the lighter cases could increase the Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity about 4,600 pounds. Two more of the filament-wound booster motors would be test fired by Motron Thiokol in the spring and summer of 1985. Also in the spring of 1985, flight motor segments containing filament-wound cylinders would be shipped to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for use by NASA and the U.S. Air Force in the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg planned for October The test was conducted under the direction of MSFC, Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 84-86; Marshall Star, Oct 31/84, 1) During October: The astronauts of western Europe formed an Association of European Astronauts (AEA), to which all European astronauts who had flown or been selected to train for a specific mission were eligible to join. The group would hold its first meeting on October 5 and 6. The purpose of the association was to encourage get-togethers for the exchange of views on training experiences and the projects concerned. The AEA had seven members: three ESA astronauts, Claude Nicollier, Ulf Merbold, and Wiibbo Ockels; two French astronauts, Patrick Baudry and Jean-Loup Chretien; and two German astronauts, Reinhard Furrer and Ernst Messerschmid. During meetings they planned to exchange experiences, compare USSR, U.S., and European approaches, and discuss future plans for Europe in manned spaceflight. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84) —Dan Germany, crew systems manager at JSC, observed that, after five years and $12 million, the Space Shuttle toilet still did not work, with failures on 10 out of 11 missions. “It’s very disappointing,” he said. On one mission, Robert Gibson had to use a crowbar to free the toilet mechanism; Sally Ride and Fred Hauck employed a camera bracket. NASA would test a new solution in August 1985 in which a bag would fit inside the commode and be removed after every flight. This reminded observers that NASA once spent $1 million to develop a pen to use in weightlessness. An engineer asked later, “Why didn’t you use a lead pencil?” (SF, Sept/Oct 84) —A commemorative envelope sold in the gift shop at JSC gave details and drawings of a U.S. Navy space program so secret that its name could not be used on the telephone, the Washington Post reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine as saying. The publication said that the envelopes, called postal cover, carried the words “Project Whitecloud,” accurate drawings of a mother satellite, and drawings of three smaller spacecraft. The envelopes said that the satellite disperses the smaller craft to cover more ocean surface and that it used radar-frequency antennae to detect shipboard radar and communications signals. The Navy had no immediate comment. (W Post, Oct 23/84, A-15) It was later revealed that the information had been taken from the May 1976 issue of Aviation Week & Space Technology.
NASA announced that the fifth group of applicants to be interviewed for possible selection as Space Shuttle astronaut candidates, including 15 mission specialists and 7 pilot applicants, reported to JSC today for a week of interviews and medical evaluations. A total of 4,934 men and women had applied for the approximately 12 positions open. The selected candidates would begin in July 1984 a year of training and evaluation at JSC and be selected as astronauts after satisfactory completion of the evaluation period. The selected candidates were: David T. Allen, Ph.D., employed by University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA); Maj. Larry D. Autry, U.S. Air Force; Lt. Commander Dennis N. Bostich, U.S. Navy; Capt. Joseph A. Car-retto, U.S. Air Force; Lt. Commander Keith E. Crawford, U.S. Navy; William M. Decampli, M.D., Ph.D., employed by Stanford Medical Center, Stanford, Calif., Jan D. Dozier, employed at MSFC; Lt. Col. William A. Flanagan, U.S. Air Force; Wendy S. Hale, Ph.D., stationed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.; Rosario M. Izquierdo, employed by National Security Agency (NSA); Lt. Fred D. Knox, Jr., U.S. Navy; G. David Low, employed by JPL; Lt. Commander Michael J. McCulley, U.S. Navy; Kenneth J. Myers, M.D., employed by the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.; William S. O’Keefe, employed by Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Mich.; Donald R. Pettit, Ph.D., employed by Los Alamos National Laboratory; Lt. Commander William F. Readdy, U.S. Navy; Lt. Commander Gregory J. Rose, U.S. Navy; Lonnie Sharpe, Jr., Ph.D., employed by North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro, N.C.; Kathryn C. Thornton, Ph.D., employed by the U.S. Army Foreign Science and Technology Center, Charlottesville, Va.; C. Lacy Veach, employed by JSC; and Lt. Commander James B. Waddell, U.S. Navy. (NASA Release 84-018)
NASA technicians today began preparing the Space Shuttle Discovery for a top-secret DOD flight in January 1985. Discovery was towed into a processing hangar just a few hours after the ship and its crew had recovered two satellites from useless orbits. Jesse Moore, director of the Shuttle program, reported that Discovery “looks like she’s in excellent shape,” and there should be little trouble getting it ready for the next mission scheduled to start January 21 or 22, 1985. The Space Shuttle Challenger was originally scheduled to fly the secret DOD payload on December 8, but that spacecraft was undergoing extensive repairs to thermal tiles damaged in its last mission in October and would not be ready for several weeks. Because of the high priority the Pentagon placed on the mission, it was decided to shift Discovery to the assignment, and the Spacelab flight that Discovery originally had been scheduled to fly in January was being delayed. Moore said that the retrieved satellites, Palapa B2 and Westar VI, would be removed from Discovery’s cargo bay and taken to a nearby facility for servicing. Later in the month they would be flown to Hughes Aircraft Company plant in El Segundo, Calif., for refurbishing. (NY Times, Nov 18/83, A-3)
Addressing a conference on “Space, Our Next Frontier,” sponsored by the Dallas-based think tank National Center for Policy Analysis, retired Lt. Col. Thomas H. Krebs, former chief of the Defense Intelligence Agency’s (DIA) space systems branch, said that the Soviet Union had obtained blueprints for the Space Shuttle and would within a year or two launch an orbiter that was an “identical copy.” He said that U.S. military experts were not sure how the Soviets obtained the plans but were certain that the Soviet vehicle was made within U.S. blueprints. He indicated that it was likely that they had bought a copy of the Space Shuttle plans. “We’ve seen the [Soviet] orbiter, and it’s identical to ours,” Krebs pointed out. “I can’t tell how far along they are, but in a year or two you can expect to see one launched. Krebs said that the Soviets improved on the U.S. design by adding engines to the bottom of the external fuel tank, thereby increasing the tonnage the Shuttle could carry into orbit. “The space shuttle was totally unclassified. Anyone could buy a set of plans. However, no one has been able to find the requisition,” he said. In Washington, DIA sources speaking off the record said that they knew nothing specifically about the Soviets obtaining Shuttle blueprints. {W Post, June 8/84, A-4) It had been the 62nd launch of an Atlas Centaur rocket, but it was the first of the new lengthened model. The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) had paid NASA $60 million to launch the satellite, which had 12,000 voice channels and 2 color television channels and was to have joined 15 other satellites serving the 108-nation organization. (NASA Release 84-62; W Post, June 10/84, A-13, June 11/84, A-4; W Times, June 11/84, 4A)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced today that JSC was named “lead center” for the agency’s Space Station Program. In a letter to center director Gerald D. Griffin, Beggs said that he was requesting the center to form a program office to execute five basic program responsibilities: systems engineering and integration, business management, operations integration, customer integration, and support of NASA Headquarters Space Station Program Office. Beggs noted that he planned to form a new organization at NASA Headquarters to direct the Space Station Program and that he would make assignments to other centers under overall project management of JSC. Terry White, a NASA spokesman in Houston, said that space station work would probably not require a large increase in personnel there because people working on the Space Shuttle program would shift over to the Space Station, the New York Times reported.
NASA announced that it and its Italian counterpart, the National Space Plan office of the Italian National Research Council (PSN/CNR), had asked scientists from around the world to submit their ideas for experiments to be performed on a joint U.S.-Italian program known as the TSS—Satellite that later in the decade could be reeled into and out of the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay on a miles-long tether. NASA and PSN/CNR would evaluate scientists’ proposals and decide what experiments would be performed on the system. NASA planned to carry the system aboard the Space Shuttle by sometime in 1987. On its first flight the satellite, once the Shuttle was in orbit, would be deployed upward about 40 feet by an extendable boom. The satellite would be checked out while at the top of the boom and then released. As it moved upward away from the Shuttle, the reel would unwind until the satellite was at its proper distance for conducting electrodynamic experiments. As the Shuttle passed through the space plasma, the satellite, with its conducting tether, could become a generator, much as a copper coil moving within a magnet on Earth can produce a flow of electricity. By drawing off the energy from the conducting tether and releasing it into space, scientists would be able to study magnetic lines of flux that surround the Earth. (NASA Release 84-54) During April: Science reported that the first commercial product manufactured in space, 15 grams of 10-micrometer polystyrene spheres that were produced on the STS-6 mission, would soon be transferred from NASA to the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) for sale to the public. The spheres could be used for calibration of microscopes, laser light scattering equipment, and particle sizing equipment. The spheres also had potential uses in biomedical sciences, particularly for sizing of pores and membranes. The spheres fit the two key criteria for space manufacturing: they could not be made on Earth, and they were very expensive. NBS would divide the 15 grams of spheres into 1,000 samples, each of which would sell for about $350. Total value of the spheres would thus be about $23,000. (Science, Apr 84, 265)
Speaking to 262 winners of the Secondary School Recognition Program and their teachers, President Reagan said that he had directed NASA to carry an elementary- or secondary-school teacher in orbit aboard the Space Shuttle as the nation’s first space passenger. “When the shuttle lifts off, all of America will be reminded of the crucial role teachers and education play in the life of our nation,” Reagan said in the announcement. This would be the first spaceflight of an American who was neither a scientist nor a trained astronaut. The only physical limitations were that the candidate be free of debilitating disease, have good eyesight, and not have hearing loss or high blood pressure. No age limit was specified. NASA had thought about the possibility of flying private citizens aboard the Space Shuttle more than a decade ago. The idea was a natural outgrowth of its legislative mandate that called for “the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning NASA’s activities and the results thereof. ...” NASA officials told reporters that they would begin a search for the most qualified teacher candidate and described a program in which each of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and Guam would submit the names of two teachers. A peer-review panel would help pare the applicants to 10, to 5, and finally to a prime and backup candidate. “When we decide on our final two candidates, we will give them eight weeks of preflight training at Houston’s Johnson Space Center right along with the astronaut crew they fly with,” said NASA Administrator James M. Beggs. “When the candidate’s flight is over, we will insist that he or she give a year of their time to NASA, visiting schools, talking to workshops, lecturing, and appearing on television and radio,” he said. Beggs said that it was impossible to predict how many civilians would be able to fly on Space Shuttle, noting that it depended on how many Space Shuttle flights NASA could schedule. (NASA Release 84-122; NASA anno Aug 27/84; W Post, Aug 28/84, A-l)
The Washington Post reported that a secret military payload set for launch July 14 on the Space Shuttle had been canceled and that the mission would be scrubbed without it, according to Air Force and NASA officials. A Pentagon spokesman declined to identify the payload or say when it would be flown. Glynn Lunney, Shuttle program manager, said “if they remove the payload, we won’t fly.” The canceled mission left astronauts Thomas Mattingly, Loren Shriver, Ellison Onizuka, and James Buchli without a flight for the second time; they were to have flown the Shuttle in the fall of 1983 on a military mission canceled because of rocket problems. (W Post, Feb 14/84, A-l)
NASA announced the crew assignments for Space Shuttle flights 51-D, scheduled for launch in February 1985, and 61-D, set for January 1986. Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., would command 51-D. Shaw was pilot of the orbiter Columbia on STS-9, the first Spacelab mission flown in November and December 1983. His crew would consist of Bryan D. O’Connor as pilot and mission specialists Mary Cleave, Sherwood C. Spring, and Jerry L. Ross. Mission 51-D would be the 21st Space Shuttle flight and the 9th for the orbiter Challenger. The principal objectives of the six-day flight would be deployment of a SYNCOM communications satellite and retrieval of the free-flying Long Duration Exposure Facility. John M. Fabian, an Air Force pilot with more than 3,500 hours of flying time, would fly as one of the pilots on 61-D. He flew as mission specialist on STS-7 in July 1983 and was scheduled for 51-A in October as a mission specialist. Flight 61-D mission specialists would be James R Bagian, M.D., and Rhea Seddon, M.D., who is also scheduled to fly on mission 41-F in August. Mission 61-D would be the fourth Spacelab flight, focusing on experiments in life sciences during its seven days in space. It would be the ninth flight of the orbiter Columbia. A commander and another pilot for 61-D would be named at a later date. (NASA Release 84-11) —Donald J. Johnston, Canadian Minister of State for Science and Technology, announced that a Canadian would fly as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, set for launch in October, in addition to two earlier Canadians already scheduled for Shuttle flights. NASA offered Canada the opportunity to fly a payload specialist in keeping with President Reagan’s initiative to increase international cooperation. Shuttle flight 51-A would be a six-day flight, carrying Telesat Canada’s ANIK C-l satellite and a Getaway Special experiment designed by two Canadian high school students. The Canadian crew member and backup for the October flight would be announced in March. (NASA Release 84-12) Seven hours after launch, the astronauts pushed Westar VI, Western Union’s $30 million satellite, out of the cargo bay to join two identical satellites already serving North America. However, NASA officials said that the satellite could not be contacted by radio and was considered lost in space. Officials said that the satellite’s on-board rocket engine, which was to propel it into higher orbit, either misfired or never fired. Radars operated by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NAADC) later found the satellite in an erratic orbit above and behind Challenger. The radars found two large pieces in an orbit more than 800 miles high at its peak and just over 200 miles high at its lowest point above Earth. On February 5, a large balloon that the astronauts were to chase through space exploded just after it had begun to inflate. Plans called for the astronauts to back up to 120 miles away from the balloon, then move in over the next eight hours to contact it. Instead, the crew spent 90 minutes tracking pieces of the balloon and never got farther than 20 or 30 miles from the debris. The astronauts tracked the balloon’s largest piece with radar for almost 20 miles and used special binoculars and an optical sextant to follow the same piece more than 20 miles by watching sunlight reflected off the balloon’s aluminum surface. The Indonesian satellite Palapa-B2, launched February 6, went into a useless orbit, believed to be caused by the same technical problem that Westar VI suffered. The NAADC located Palapa-B2 about seven hours after its ejection from the Challenger’s cargo bay, but it was in an orbit so low that it “cannot perform its mission,” said Richard Brandes of Hughes Aircraft Company, builder of the satellite. He added that both satellites’ rocket motors apparently shut down 15 seconds early; they were intended to burn for 80 seconds. On February 7, astronauts Bruce McCandless and Robert Stewart left Challenger and flew unrestrained for the first time, adding another milepost to man’s conquest of space. They unhooked their lifelines and rose up more than 100 yards away from the Space Shuttle. Propelled by $10 million jet-powered backpacks, they traveled at 4.8 miles a second, although they had no sensation of speed. The two reentered Challenger after 5 hours and 55 minutes. The exercise was a rehearsal for the next Shuttle flight, when other astronauts would try to retrieve an ailing satellite, bring it into the cargo bay for repair, and release it to orbit again. On February 9 the two took a second walk in space, which lasted 6 hours and 17 minutes. The Space Shuttle made its first landing at KSC on February 11, when it touched down at 7:16 a.m. EST. The Florida landing had been a Shuttle program goal because it would save money and time by eliminating sending maintenance crews to California to prepare the vehicle for a return flight to Florida on the back of a Boeing 747. It was the first Florida landing in two attempts and the first of six planned for the year. Challenger was in relatively good shape following the landing, although its windshield, fuselage, and landing gear were damaged. The windows were hazed and pitted; and 31 of its 33,000	protective tiles, two brake assemblies, and all four tires on the main landing wheels would have to replaced. Repairs should not slow the preparation of Challenger for its next flight in April. (NASA MOR M-989-41-B [prelaunch] Jan 30/84; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 6/84; WPost, Feb 2/84, A-2, Feb 4/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 8/84, A-l, Feb 9/84, A-12, Feb 11/84, A-2, Feb 12/84, A-l, Feb 13/84, A-3; W Times, Feb 6/84, 2A, Feb 7/84, 1A, Feb 8/84, 1A; USA Today, Feb 6/84, A-l)
NASA announced that a six-member team from GSFC was helping to establish the first satellite data link to the South Pole that would make possible real-time collection of scientific data from the pole, which was not possible in the past. The effort was in support of a joint program with the National Science Foundation; the Applied Research Laboratory of the University of Texas, Austin; NOAA; and a number of other government, private, and education institutions. To establish a real-time communications link by any means other than by satellite would cost as much as $35 million compared with approximately $250,000 via satellite, “The project could revolutionize communications in the region,” said Goddard engineer Michael Comberiate. “Currently, scientific data collected from the Pole during the winter months must be stored and shipped out by aircraft during Astral Summer” (November 1-February 1). The link would use existing polar-orbiting satellites to relay data from the pole to McMurdo Sound, which would retransmit the data to a geostationary satellite that, in turn, would transmit the information to the continental United States. This routing was necessary because signals from the transmitter at the Pole (90°S latitude) were too far below the horizon to be acquired by a geostationary satellite. The McMurdo station, however, was located on the edge of the Antarctic (77 °S) and was barely in view of the geostationary satellite. The link with polar orbiting Ixindsat 4 and Landsat 5, with Dynamics Explorer 1 (DE-1), and with Nimbus 7 would allow reliable transmission of routine, high-volume data from scientific investigations being conducted at the Pole by 20 different institutions. (NASA Release, Dec 21/84) —A Titan 34-D rocket with a top-secret payload was launched at 7:02 p.m. local time from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in what might be the final military space mission of the year. An Air Force statement did not indicate whether the payload reached the planned orbit. The next announced DOD launching was scheduled for January 23, 1985, when the Space Shuttle would carry an intelligence satellite into orbit. (NY Times, Dec 23/84, A-14) During December: NASA announced that a publication of infrared celestial objects, presented in a series of catalogs and maps of 96% of the entire sky, was completed by the international science team of the IRAS. This was a milestone in the history of astronomy and would provide a wealth of new information about the universe in a wavelength region that was nearly impossible to study from the Earth’s surface. The IRAS catalogs printed nearly a quarter-million infrared sources—stars, galaxies, and newly forming stars—in addition to entirely new classes of objects. The catalogs and sky maps would be used for decades by astronomers investigating the nature of celestial objects that emitted much of their energy in infrared wavelengths as well as by astronomers seeking to understand objects at other wavelength regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. The catalog contained roughly 130,000 stars, 20,000 galaxies, 50,000 dense condensations within the infrared cirrus, and 40,000 objects of all types within the plane of the Milky Way galaxy. The catalogs were presented in several formats, including a five-volume book containing 5,000 pages of computer printout information on the location and infrared characteristics of 245,839 individual point sources found by the telescopes. The catalogs were also available on microfiche (24 cards) and magnetic tape comprising 60 megabytes of data. IRAS was a joint project of the space agencies of the United States, United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. The telescope satellite was launched by January 25, 1983, and conducted a 10-month all-sky survey of infrared objects from Earth orbit until its supply of liquid helium coolant was depleted November 23, 1984. (NASA Release 84-169) —Paul F. Holloway would become deputy director of LaRC, effective February 3, 1985, succeeding Richard H. Petersen. Holloway had been director for space at LaRC since May 1975 and had joined NASA in June 1960 as an aerospace research engineer. Since that time he had held various agency positions, including acting deputy associate administrator of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology at NASA Headquarters and chief of the Space Systems Division at Langley. He received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal in 1980 and the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1981. (NASA anno, Dec 10/84; LaRC Release 84-114) —Krafft A. Ehricke, 67, father of the space-launched Centaur interplanetary vehicle and a leading space scientist for more than 40 years, died December 11 in La Jolla, Calif. Born in Berlin, Ehricke was brought to the United States with other members of the German V-2 rocket team after World War II to launch the U.S. space program. Ehricke worked briefly for Bell Aircraft Company in Buffalo, N.Y., after the war and later for Consolidated Vultee Corporation, which had a contract with the Air Force to develop the Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile. Vultee eventually became part of General Dynamics. The Atlas project produced the United State’s first ICMB, and versions of it were still flying as space boosters. (W Times, Dec 13/84, 8C; W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7; NY Times, Dec 13/84, D-30) —Vladimir N. Chelomei, 70, a rocketry expert who designed the Soviet Union’s first jet engine, died December 8 in Moscow. Tass, which carried the news of his death, did not report the cause. His work was closely connected with the Soviet space program and aircraft design, and he is credited by The Great Soviet Encyclopedia with the 1942 design of the Soviet’s first jet engine. He had headed a major scientific research, design, and development organization for 29 years. (W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) spokesman Dave Alter said today that NASA had imposed a $131,250 penalty on contractor Hamilton Standard, Windsor Locks, Conn., for failure of two space suits that it had built for use on the fifth Space Shuttle mission in November 1982. Hamilton Standard was to be paid a $175,000 fee over costs for service from October 1982 through March 1983. However, the failures had prevented space walks by astronauts Joe Allen and Bill Lenoir on November 11-12, 1982. After a lengthy investigation, NASA blamed the contractor for the failure of a fan in Allen’s life support backpack and an oxygen pressure regulator on Lenoir’s suit. {WPost, Jan 28/84, A-7)
NASA announced that larger main parachutes, designed to slow the solid-fuel rocket boosters’ final rate of descent prior to impact into the ocean, would be part of the mission 51-A Space Shuttle flight scheduled for launch November 7 from KSC. The new parachutes would be 136 feet in diameter compared to previously used chutes of 115 feet in diameter. The larger chutes would reduce the velocity of the boosters at water impact from 88 feet per second, or 60 miles per hour, to 75 feet per second, or 51 miles per hour. The reduced velocity would relieve the structural loads on the boosters at impact by about 25 %; thus reducing the amount of impact damage sustained by the boosters. Following launch and separation from the Space Shuttle, the boosters were recovered from the ocean, refurbished, and used on a later flight. According to Keith Henson, booster recovery subsystem manager in the Shuttle Projects Office at MSFC, the larger chutes were tested during mission 41-D in August on the Space Shuttle’s right booster. Beginning with mission 51-B, scheduled for January 1985, all future steel case boosters would have the larger chutes. Smaller main chutes would continue to be used on some Space Shuttle missions, including the 51-C mission in December and on missions where lighter-weight filament-wound booster motor segments were used. First use of those segments was planned for October 1985. Martin Marietta Corporation, Denver, Colo., under the direction of MSFC, designed the booster’s deceleration system. Pioneer Parachute Company, Manchester, Conn., provided the parachutes. (MSFC Release 64-90)
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger today named Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA’s associate director for space flight, to be manager of what the Reagan administration called the strategic defense initiative, a program to explore the feasibility of building a space-based defense against nuclear ballistic missiles. President Reagan had suggested the program the previous year. Abrahamson’s job would be to direct and coordinate several research programs that had been under way for some time at DOD and in the Department of Energy (DOE). These included research on several kinds of laser and particle beam weapons, work on large mirrors needed for some lasers, advances in high-speed data processing, and methods of generating large amounts of electrical power in space. Abrahamson had been at NASA since November 1981 and had directed not only the Space Shuttle operation but also commercial sales of Shuttle services and relations with Congress and the space industry. He would begin his new duties on April 15 after the nation’s 11th Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch on April 6. (NY Times, Mar 28/84, A-19) —NASA announced that Jesse W. Moore would become acting associate administrator for spaceflight on April 15, succeeding Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who would become director of strategic defense at DOD. Moore, who had been Abrahamson’s deputy, had come to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as the deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. He was director of the Spacelab Flight Division until December 1981, when he assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division in the Office of Space Science and Applications. In February 1983 he was appointed to the position of deputy associate administrator for spaceflight. (NASA Release 84-40) —U.S. Ambassador to Portugal Allen Holmes and Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Gama signed today in Lisbon an accord that would provide for a satellite tracking station in Portugal. Under the accord, the United States would provide Portugal with $60 million annually, of which $20 million would be for military aid and $40 million for economic aid. The United States would use the station to track flying military targets; U.S. plans called for five satellite tracking stations in the world, and stations in New Mexico, Hawaii, and South Korea were completed. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua in English, Mar 28/84)	" During March: In an interview following his around-the-world trip to sell the U.S. Space Station idea to U.S. allies, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said, “I thought the trip went well, I thought it went extremely well.” He added that he had proposed that as much as one-fourth of the proposed $8 billion cost of the Space Station be borne by western Europe, Japan, and Canada. “They didn’t exactly stand up and cheer when I said I’d like them to think about contributing a couple of billion dollars, but they didn’t blink at the numbers either,” he said. Beggs said that the countries had about a year to decide if they wanted to join in a partnership with the United States, since NASA planned to begin awarding contracts for the Space Station’s final design in the spring of 1985. He noted that all of the countries had laid down conditions under which they would agree to participate: the station must provide technological challenges to their industries; they must have what Beggs called a “clearly defined role” in the direction of Space Station operations and selection of flight crews; they must have access to the entire station; and their industries must have the same access that U.S. industry had. (W Post, Mar 27/84, A-2)
The New York Times reported that space industry experts and government intelligence officials had said that U.S. Air Force satellite photographs of launching pads in central Asia showed that the Soviet Union was developing a booster rocket for a Soviet version of the Space Shuttle and a new family of big rockets similar to those used by the United States for the Apollo Moon program. A special feature of the new rockets was that they would use liquid hydrogen, a cryogenic (supercooled) type of fuel technology that had eluded Soviet space experts but had been mastered in the United States nearby 20 years ago. The Pentagon had originally described the Soviet development of new booster rockets and a Space Shuttle in April. The new disclosures gave added detail of the Soviet program, including checkouts on the launching pad and the development of cryogenic fuels. “It’s a major step to go to liquid hydrogen,” said James E. Oberg, an expert on Soviet space technology.” They’ve been using the same boosters for 20 years. Now they appear to be trying to build a new family.” The Pentagon’s “Soviet Military Power 1984” had originally suggested the existence of a new family of Soviet booster rockets. The publication asserted that the biggest of the new Soviet rockets could lift payloads of up to 150 tons into low orbits around the Earth, about seven times more than the largest operational Soviet booster and five times more than the biggest U.S. booster, the Space Shuttle. The publication also said the Soviet Union’s space shuttle differed from the U.S. Shuttle only in the respect that the main engines were not on the orbiter. In addition, the publication published pictures of a small Soviet space plane that had undergone flight tests. (NY Times, Aug 30/84, B-13) —NASA, launched at 8:41 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery (STS 41-D) on its maiden voyage after three earlier postponements, another one-day postponement due to computer problems, and a last-minute delay to avoid possible collision with a private line. Discovery carried for mission 41-D a six-member crew of commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnick, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker, a McDonnell Douglas engineer. It also carried the heaviest cargo flown in orbit aboard a Space Shuttle. About eight hours after liftoff, three of the crew members deployed a U.S. communications satellite, SBS-4, which was owned by Satellite Business Systems, McLean, Va., and was designed to relay data, including telephone and television transmissions. About 45 minutes later its on-board engine ignited flawlessly to send it to a position 22,400 miles above the equator just west of South America. The successful launch helped dispel doubts about the solid-fuel rocket motor technology when two satellites last February did not reach orbit. Also planned for launch from the Space Shuttle were the Leasat-2, owned by Hughes Communications Services, Inc., and leased by the U.S. Navy, and the Telestar 3-C of AT&T. On board would be NASA’s Office of Astronautics and Space Technology OASTOl, a collapsible solar array, and the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System (CFES) of McDonnell Douglas. On the same day as the liftoff, President Reagan visited GSFC and addressed several hundred of Goddard’s employees. In his remarks, Reagan said that “there is nothing that the United States of America cannot accomplish. If the doubting Thomases would just stand aside and get out of our way.” He went on to speak of the creation of new jobs, technologies, and medical breakthroughs as a result of the rigors of the space program. (NASA Release 84-112; NASA Press Kit June 84, August 84; WPost, Aug 31/84, A-l; W Times, Aug 31/84, 3A)
NASA named Neil B. Hutchinson manager and John W. Aaron deputy manager of the Space Station Program Office at JSC in Houston, Tex. Hutchinson was serving in a staff assignment to the Johnson director since his return in January 1984 from a one-year assignment at NASA Headquarters, where he was director, Space Shuttle Operations Office in the Office of Space Flight. Aaron had been chief of the Spacecraft Software Division at JSC since 1981. He also had served as avionics flight software project manager for the Shuttle approach and landing test and orbital flight test programs. (NASA Release
NASA signed an agreement with two insurance organizations, Merrett Syndicates Ltd. and International Underwriters (Intec), to retrieve the Palapa B-2 spacecraft February 6, 1984, for the government of Indonesia. However, it did not achieve the proper transfer orbit when the perigee kick motor failed. The agreement called for NASA to retrieve the satellite on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, currently scheduled for launch November 2, 1984. The insurance underwriters would pay NASA for costs, not to exceed to $4.8 million, incurred in preparing for and executing the retrieval. In the near future the parties would sign a standard Space Shuttle launch services agreement, which would contain details of the rescue plan and a commitment to relaunch the satellite in July 1985, should the underwriters request it. (NASA Release 84-116)
NASA announced the delay of the 51-C Space Shuttle mission originally scheduled for launch from KSC on December 8, 1984. The agency had decided to replace up 2,800 thermal protection tiles on the underside of the orbiter Challenger due to the degradation of the bonding material. When Challenger returned from space on its last mission, a black tile from the left wing chine area just behind and below the crew door area was missing. About 100 tiles were removed from Challenger, and it was found that the adhesive substance known as “screed,” used to smooth irregularities in the surface of the orbiter, had softened. Screed was applied directly over the aluminum skin of the orbiter. All other areas were covered with a primer called red RTV-560 (room temperature vulcanizing), which was used as an adhesive for bonding the strain isolation pads (SIP) to the body and the tile to the SIP. The 51-C mission was the first completely dedicated DOD mission. The 51-A mission continued on schedule for launch November 7. (MSFC Release 84-91) During the flight, the crew recovered the satellites Palapa B2 and Westar VI, which had not operated properly following their earlier deployment from the Space Shuttle. The Palapa B2 recovery was the first retrieval ever of a satellite from space, although astronauts previously had caught and repaired the Solar Maximum satellite. Astronauts Allen and Gardner had to move Palapa B2 into the Discovery’s cargo bay themselves when an unforeseen obstacle prevented use of the spacecraft’s mechanical arm. This resulted in some damage to the power-generating solar cells surrounding the seven-footwide satellite, but the damage was not expected to interfere with a successful relaunching of the satellite. Later in the flight the same two astronauts took 5 hours and 42 minutes to retrieve Westar VI, a 2,300-pound communications satellite, and bolt it down next to Palapa B2—possibly the shortest $35 million salvage operation ever undertaken, the Washington Post reported. Insurance companies had to pay the owners of the two satellites, the government of Indonesia (Palapa B2), and Western Union Telegraph Company (Westar VI) $180 million. The insurance brokers paid NASA $5.5 million for the satellites’ retrieval and Hughes Aircraft Company $5 million for technical help in the retrieval operation. Stephen Merrett, chairman of Merrett Syndicates, an affiliate of Lloyds of London, that helped underwrite the insurance on the satellites, said “I’m proud to be a part of the crowd that put this mission together in just six months.” He added, “We expect Palapa to be resold for between $30 and $40 million and Westar for $30 million, and we expect those sales to be concluded very soon.” Merrett declined to identify potential buyers of the two satellites. In interviews later, Allen and Gardner noted that the task of retrieving the satellites was easier than dealing with small items such as tools and the tether wires that tied them to the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay. “As objects get smaller in space, they become more difficult to handle. It’s really extraordinary how much easier it is to move massive objects like satellites.” Allen pointed out that the only trouble they had in retrieving the satellites resulted from their tendency to grip the satellites too hard and move them too quickly in an effort to get them back and secured in the cargo bay in a limited amount of time. “Once you get over that difficult spot where you think you have to have the satellite in a death grip, things are a lot easier,” he said. In addition to the salvage missions, the crew during the flight deployed the Canadian Telesat-H and Hughes Syncom-IV-1 communications satellites. The Radiation Monitor Experiment and the Aggregation of Red Blood Cells experiments were carried out in the orbiter’s middeck. Discovery landed November 16 at 7 a.m. local time at KSC. “Two landings in a row at Kennedy, and this time with a cargo bay as full as it was when it took off,” said Jesse W. Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “It’s hard to believe those two satellites are sitting out there on the runway after being in space for more than eight months.” (NASA MOR EA20-51-A-11 [prelaunch] Nov 8/84; NASA Release 84-144; MSFC Release 84-90; JSC Release 84-051; W Post, Nov 13/84, A—11 and D-1, Nov 14/84, A-l, Nov 17/84, A-10, Nov 18/84, A-19, Nov 28/84, A-18; NY Times, Nov 18/84, 3A; H Chron, Nov 11/84, 24)
The PRC New China News Agency announced that China had launched on April 8 its first permanently orbiting communications satellite, the Washington Post reported. The geosynchronous satellite was positioned over the Moluccan Sea near Indonesia. The news agency reported that all meters and instruments were working normally as the satellite began experiments on telephone communications and radio and television transmissions. Foreign experts said that the launch was a major achievement that could improve communications in all facets of Chinese life, including the far-flung military. It also had vast implications for China’s fledgling nuclear force. The rocketry required to propel the satellite into orbit—a three-stage launcher with a refined guidance system—far exceeded the firing capability of the nation’s best intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs). China also had pending contracts with the United States to launch three larger communications satellites with the Space Shuttle, but no dates were set. (W Post, Apr 19/84, A-31)
NASA announced that it had selected United Space Boosters Inc. (USBI), Huntsville, Ala., to receive a $274 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to manufacture, assemble, and refurbish solid-fuel rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle. The approximately five-year contract would require USBI to manufacture, assemble, check out, and deliver 84 flight sets of solid-fuel rocket boosters and to refurbish them when returned to Earth after each launch. The contract, to be managed by MSFC, also launched two unpriced options, each for the delivery of 60 flight sets, covering a total additional period of performance of about five years. Under a separate contract, USBI would build a new facility at KSC for booster assembly and refurbishment, at a cost of $21 million. In the past, refurbishment had taken place at Kennedy’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB), which was used to assemble the entire configuration of orbiter, boosters, and external tank. (NASA Release 84-118; MSFC Release 84-75)
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) announced that it had launched on January 29 a space satellite that achieved “important results,” and the New York Times reported that Western experts speculated that the launch could be the debut of a more powerful Chinese rocket and the nation’s first communications satellite. They added that the launching could mean that China had joined the United States, the Soviet Union, and the European Space Agency (ESA) in its capability to loft satellites into geostationary orbits 22,300	miles above the Earth, the orbit favored for commercial and military communications satellites. There were no details of the satellite launched; only “Close observation is being undertaken of the satellite’s operations,” from China’s official Xinhua new agency. There had been reports as early as 1980 that China was developing a three-stage rocket for boosting heavy payloads. (NY Times, Jan 31/84, C-8) During January: The Washington Post reported, according to declassified documents, that the $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) that the U.S. Air Force found unusable in April 1983 had lost its bearings and was unable to determine its position. After being launched from the Space Shuttle, the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket veered so far from course that the TDRS ended up in an orbit almost 10,000 miles closer to Earth than was intended. It took NASA and its contractors three months to get the satellite into geosynchronous orbit above the equator. According to the declassified documents, instructions to the gyroscope in the IUS were in error, causing the guidance computer to ignore them just before the rocket misfired. The Air Force said that the software error had been corrected. At the same time, the guidance computer’s memory became confused, rendering it unable to distinguish between right and wrong information about its location in space. Engineers said that they still did not know what caused this failure. Because of the changes that had to be made in the IUS rocket, the flight of a secret Department of Defense (DOD) satellite aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger would be delayed from July 1 until the end of 1984, sources said. (W Post, Jan 31/83, A-2) —NASA announced that John J. Martin was named associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology. Previously, Martin had served as vice president and general manager at Bendix Advanced Technology Center, Columbia, Md.; at the Institute for Defense Analyses; on the staff of the president’s science adviser at the White House; as associate deputy to the director of central intelligence for the intelligence community; as principal deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force; and as assistant secretary of the Air Force for research, development, and logistics. A graduate of the University of Notre Dame and commissioned by the U.S. Navy, Martin is the author of numerous technical papers and reviews and a book on “Atmospheric Reentry,” published in 1966. (NASA anno, Jan 30/84) —NASA announced that C.A. “Sy” Syvertson would retire on January 13 as director of Ames Research Center (ARC). Syvertson had a major part in the first U.S. research in supersonic and hypersonic flight, both in finding new aerodynamic theory and in development of hypersonic wind tunnels. He designed the first lifting body (a vehicle for flight from orbit to airfield landing and the precursor to the Shuttle) and did planning for major NASA missions in both aeronautics and space. During his tenure, ARC merged with NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and continued advances in aircraft research. Syvertson received the Lawrence Sperry Award for “fundamental understanding of hypersonic air flow and its application to efficient aircraft design.” He received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1971 for work as executive director of the joint Department of Transportation (DOT)—NASA Civil Aviation Research and Development (CARD) policy study, which made a series of recommendations for future civil aviation policy. He was named a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1976 and of the American Astronautical Society in 1978 and was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1981. (NASA Release 84-01) Dr. William F. Ballhaus, Jr., director of astronautics at ARC, was named director of the center, succeeding C.A. Syvertson. who retired January 13. Ballhaus is a nationally known expert in computational fluid dynamics—use of supercomputers to stimulate air flow around flight vehicles. As ARC director of astronautics, Ballhaus had been responsible for interplanetary spaceflight projects, operation of a number of airborne observatories used in astronomy and Earth resources research, development of supercomputer systems, research in computational fluid dynamics and computational chemistry, space science, thermophysics, and materials science. Ballhaus came to ARC in 1971, after receiving his doctorate at the University of California at Berkeley (UCB). He joined what is now the Army Aeromechanics Laboratory at ARC and was assigned to the Computational Fluid Dynamics Branch. He has lectured throughout the United States, Europe, and Asia and has published more than 35 technical papers. (NASA Release 84-5) —Jack Lousma, commander of the Space Shuttle Columbia on its third flight, announced at the state capitol in Lansing, Mich., his campaign for the U.S. Senate. He will seek the Republican nomination to run against Democratic Senator Carl Levin. “Twenty-five years ago, I made a commitment to serve my country—a commitment that has led me from Michigan to the Marine Corps to missions in space,” he said. “That same commitment brings me home today.” He spent 59 days in orbit as part of Skylab’s second manned mission in 1973 and was commander of the Shuttle Columbia in 1982. (W Post, Jan 26/84, C-2)
Charles Yost, a member of NASA’s Space Station task force, speaking at the Shuttle/Space Station business opportunities conference in Washington, said “There’s been an overhyping of the commercialization of space idea.” He added that it would take years before investments in many of the space-based opportunities being explored showed a significant return. However, he pointed out, “industry must be willing to risk its money up front,” and said that nine companies had applied for a joint endeavor agreement with the space agency. At the time, only four companies had actually signed with NASA to use the Space Shuttle for business ventures. Space industry analysts said that it would cost “a minimum of few million dollars” to begin exploiting the commercial potential of space. Though satellite communication had proved profitable, most space-based efforts faced an uncertain future. A Reagan administration recommendation to turn the nation’s Landsat remote-sensing and weather satellite systems over to private industry had met resistance in Congress, and some analysts believed there might not be a market for remote-sensing data. Many attendees at the conference questioned whether any company would make money in space manufacturing before 1990. (IV Post, Mar 7/84, D—16)
NASA announced that it had awarded an industry team headed by RCA’s Astro-Electronics Division, Princeton, N.J., a $260.3 million contract for design, development, and fabrication of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS). Other major participants in the team were TRW Electronics Systems Group, Space Communications Division, Redondo Beach, Calif.; Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp), Washington, D.C.; Motorola Inc., Government Electronics Group, Scottsdale, Ariz.; Hughes Aircraft Company’s Electron Dynamics Division, Torrance, Calif.; and Electromagnetic Sciences Inc., Norcross, Ga. One of the primary goals of the ACTS program was to develop advanced satellite communications technologies, including satellite switching and processing techniques and multibeam satellite antennas, using the 20- and 30-gigahertz bands. These technologies would be needed for the increased satellite capacity for the mid-1990s. The ACTS program results would make available to corporations, universities, and government agencies the ACTS spacecraft and ground systems capabilities for experimentation. Organizations that met specified requirements for space communications research would participate in such experiments during the flight phase of the program. NASA had received over 30 expressions of interest in experimental use of the new satellite system. NASA had scheduled ACTS for launch by the Space Shuttle in 1989. (NASA Release 84-113; LeRC Release 84-54)
The Far Eastern Economic Review was quoted as saying that the People’s Republic of China had asked the United States to allow a Chinese astronaut to be included in the Space Shuttle program. The Hong Kong-based weekly magazine also said that Beijing had asked the United States to consider providing a launcher for a Chinese manned space vehicle. It was reported that the Reagan administration was giving both requests “sympathetic” consideration (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Aug 23/84)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and Professor Ernesto Quagliarello, president of the Italian National Research Council (CNR), signed today in Rome two memoranda of understanding; the separate agreements established the development of the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) and the development and launch of Laser Geodynamics Satellite-2 (Lageos-2). The TSS would be a data-gathering satellite that would be carried into orbit by the Space Shuttle and released from payload bay on a tether. It would provide an important new reusable, multidisciplinary facility for conducting space experiments in Earth orbit and open the way to several areas of longterm scientific experimentation not otherwise possible. NASA would develop the TSS deploy, perform the system-level engineering and integration, and launch TSS on the shuttle. CNR would develop the two-module (science and service) TSS satellite and provide system-level support to NASA for technical aspects of the satellite. Eleven countries were conducting laser ranging activities with the passive Laser Geodynamics Satellite-1 (Lageos-I) launched by NASA in 1976. The agreement signed today outlined the terms for the development of Lageos-2, which would significantly enhance study and understanding of the solid earth and its dynamic processes. Lageos-2 would be identical in configuration to Lageos-1 and would be placed in an orbit of similar altitude but with a different inclination (51-53° prograde instead of 70° retrograde). Lageos-2 would contribute to the study of plate tectonics and the accumulation of crustal strain in areas of high seismicity through very accurate measurements of baseline changes resulting from crustal motion. The two satellites, in essentially opposite orbits, would improve the precision of current laser-determined baselines by a factor of two and would make possible achievements of a precision of one centimeter for baselines of several thousand kilometers. CNR would be responsible for the fabrication of the Lageos-2 satellite, integration of the apogee stage and the Italian research interim stage, and delivery to NASA. NASA would provide existing ground support equipment, hardware, and software remaining from the Lageos-1 mission, technical consultation, and launch on the Space Shuttle as a payload of opportunity with a planned launch in 1987. (NASA Release 84-34)
In conjunction with the Council of Chief State School Officers, NASA released the Announcement of Opportunity (AO), specifying the eligibility and requirements for selection of a teacher in NASA’s Space Flight Participation Program. Through the program, NASA would extend Space Shuttle flight opportunities to a wide segment of private citizens with the purpose of communicating the experience of spaceflight to the public through educational and information programs. NASA intended eventually to fly various categories of space flight participants two to three times per year. The AO was open to elementary and secondary level teachers in all public, private, and parochial schools in the United States and U.S. territories; in DOD overseas dependents’ schools; in Department of State overseas schools; and in the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Teachers applying for the flight opportunity would submit an application to illustrate their qualifications and excellence as an educator and demonstrate how they would share the experience with the public. Review panels would select two teachers’ nominees for each of the states and organizations identified above for forwarding to a National Review Panel. This panel would select 10 teachers as semifinalists, who would go to JSC for thorough medical examinations, in-depth briefings, and interviews. NASA would receive the names of five finalists and select the primary and backup candidates to undergo training for spaceflight. NASA’s goal was to fly the first teacher on a mission in early 1986. (NASA Release 84-155)
An Arianespace Ariane I rocket lifted off at 9:33 a.m. EDT to orbit a U.S. communications satellite 22,300 miles above the equator in the world’s first strictly commercial space venture. Virginia-based GTE Spacenet Corporation built the satellite, which was intended to relay thousands of simultaneous television, telephone, and data transmission channels to U.S. domestic subscribers over the next 10 years. The corporation would launch other satellites later in the year and early in 1985. ESA had contracts for 28 launches worth more than $800 million, plus options for another 19. More than 40% of the orders came from outside Europe. (W Post, May 22/84, A-24) During May: NASA and Deere & Company, Moline, 111., signed a memorandum of understanding to cooperate on the design of metallurgical tests to be conducted aboard a future Space Shuttle flight. In 1981, Deere became the first private company to sign a Technical Exchange Agreement with NASA that permitted the company to perform cast iron solidification experiments on board conventional suborbital NASA aircraft, which simulated microgravity for 30 to 60 seconds. Deere was already working on the design of additional metallurgical tests, where engineers used data from the low-gravity tests conducted earlier. Based on this work, Deere and NASA engineers concluded that further experimentation would be productive. The Space Shuttle tests would permit experiments in space for longer periods, which could yield new information to aid in the search for stronger irons. These tests could also provide new data about the process for forming iron molecules, leading to improved foundry efficiencies. (NASA Release 84-56) —NASA announced that astronaut Terry Hart, who had operated the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to retrieve the Solar Maximum Satellite during the April 6-13, 1984, Space Shuttle flight, would leave NASA effective June 15 to work in an engineering management position for the newly formed Military and Government Systems Division of Bell Laboratories in Whippany, N.J. The division would produce large digital communications networks for government applications. Hart was also a member of the astronaut support crews for Shuttle missions 1, 2, 3, and 7, serving as capsule communicators in mission control for those flights. (NASA Release 84-59) —Officials at the U.S. Department of State blocked an offer by the Soviet Union to use its rockets to launch Western satellites, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The Soviets had offered to “sell” their rockets to INMARSAT, the International Maritime Satellite Organization based in London, for launching a new generation of satellites in the 1980s. INMARSAT was running a network of communications satellites that routed telephone calls and data among some 2,300 ships and their shore bases. However, it had not decided on the companies that would supply the new satellites, which could number up to nine and cost up to $500 million. Under the Soviet Union plan, satellites would have to travel to the Soviet rocket site prior to launch into space, and the satellites would undoubtedly contain a large proportion of U.S. parts. Such a transfer would be prohibited under the technology control regulations that sought to stop the channeling to unfriendly countries of hardware that could be used in weaponry. The State Department said that “under no circumstances” would it permit the transfer to the Soviet Union of American-made satellite components. Only two organizations had submitted tenders to INMARSAT to build the satellites: a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Corporation and British Aerospace and a consortium of Marconi of the United Kingdom, Aerospatiale of France, and Ford Aerospace of the United States. The Soviet Union had said that it would make available its Proton rockets for a fee of about $23 million a launch. That was roughly half the comparable charge for a satellite launch by either the Space Shuttle or the Ariane rocket sold by Arianespace, a semipublic company dominated by French interests. U.S. officials feared shipment to the Soviet Union’s main launch site at Baykonur in Central Asia of hardware containing electronic components that could be useful to the Soviet’s military buildup. (CSM, May 3/84, 1) —NASA announced that Dr. Hans M. Mark, deputy administrator of NASA since July 1981, would become chancellor of the University of Texas System, effective September 1, 1984. In announcing the appointment, Texas Board Chairman Jon Newton said of Mark: “With his Air Force and NASA background, he has demonstrated the management ability to administer effectively a complex organizational enterprise such as the U.T. System, which involves 119,000 students, 50,000 faculty and staff, and an operational budget for FY84-85 of $1.8 billion.” Mark was born in Mannheim, Germany, and in February 1969, after receiving his doctorate in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1954, became director of NASA’s ARC. He had also served as a consultant to government, industry, and business, including the Institute for Defense Analyses and the President’s Advisory Group on Science and Technology. (NASA Release 84-65) —Martin A. Knutson was named director of Flight Operations and Ames Dryden Site manager for ARC. In this position, Knutson would be responsible for the operation of more than 40 highly specialized research and support aircraft at ARC and its Ames Dryden Flight Research Center. He also would be responsible for site management of the Mojave Desert facility that conducted NASA’s high-speed flight research and served as one of the prime landing sites for Space Shuttle missions. Knutson joined NASA in 1971 as the ARC’s manager of the Airborne Instrumentation Research Project. He was instrumental in creating the project and in acquiring its U-2 aircraft and was a pilot with over 6,000 hours of flight time. (ARC Release 84-11)
The first Space Shuttle external fuel tank for use at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, arrived there after a 5,000-mile journey, marking a major milestone in activation of the West Coast space launch complex. Plans called for the initial launch from the new complex in October 1985. Most of the major faciliteis at Space Launch Complex-Six were completed, including the facility for storage and preparation of the external tank. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers had been responsible since 1979 for building and facility construction at the launch site, while Martin Marietta Aerospace had responsibility for design, procurement, installation, and checkout of Space Shuttle ground support systems. Space Shuttle missions from Vandenberg would carry both DOD and NASA payloads. At the facility, the tank would undergo a thorough four-week inspection by the Air Force and its Shuttle processing contractors. Early in 1985, it would be mated with two inert solid-fuel rocket boosters and the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise for testing and compatibility between the Space Shuttle and ground facilities. Martin Marietta Aerospace manufactured the tank at MSFC’s Michoud Assembly Facility. (MSFC Release 84-85)
The Washington Post reported that Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator, said that coded software instruction cards on both computers on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s last voyage (STS-9) were contaminated, delaying Columbia’s landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California by eight hours. The instruction cards were shaken from their printed circuits when the Shuttle pitched up and down just before reentry; however the up-and-down maneuvers would not ordinarily loosen the software cards unless there was something wrong with them. Abrahamson said that postflight analysis of the cards at IBM’s Owego, N.Y., plant, where the computers were built, showed that one card was contaminated with solder and the other had a carbon chip coated with gold that should not have been there. Abrahamson pointed out that “the most disturbing thing.. .is that both computers were contaminated. I do not like the idea that we flew 10 days in space with contaminated computer parts.” The six-man crew, commanded by astronaut John W. Young, was able to land the Shuttle and its $1 billion European Spacelab safely by relying for navigation on three standby computers. (W Post, Jan 6/84, A-8)
NASA announced that it had selected a team of scientists to observe Halley’s comet in 1986 using a Space Shuttle-based astronomy observatory called Astro. The scientists were Dr. Michael A’Heam, University of Maryland, College Park, Md.; Drs. John Brandt, Bertram Donn, and Malcom Neidner, GSFC; Dr. Barry Lutz, Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz.; Dr. Chet Opal, University of Texas, Austin; Dr. C. Robert O’Dell, Rice University, Houston; and Dr. Susan Wyckoff, Arizona State University, Tempe. These reseachers, together with a scientist representing each of the three ultraviolet telescope teams, comprised the Astro Halley Science Team that would plan the overall program for observing the comet. Astro consisted of three specially designed ultraviolet telescopes and two wide-field cameras that would be carried as a Spacelab payload in the Space Shuttle cargo bay. The observatory was scheduled for assembly and integration into the Space Shuttle at KSC during 1985 for launch in early March 1986. The first seven-day Astro mission was scheduled at a time when several comet probes would intercept Halley, and it was intended to return important scientific data and photography of the comet. ESA, Japan, and the Soviet Union had each designed probes that would fly by the comet and through its tail in early March 1986. (NASA Release 84-72)
NASA announced that MSFC had awarded contracts to Martin Marietta Aerospace Company Denver, and Boeing Aerospace Company, Seattle, to study a space vehicle to move payloads from low Earth orbits to higher orbits. The “parallel” studies, concurrent but independent studies in the same area of concentration, for an Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) would run for 15 months at about $1 million each. The companies would conduct conceptual studies to examine the possibilities of both space-based and ground-based transfer vehicles. The space-based version would be maintained and refueled at the Space Station; the ground-based vehicle would be carried into space by the Space Shuttle for deployment. The transfer vehicle, as it was conceived by Marshall engineers, would be an unmanned upper-stage in the beginning. The ultimate goal, however, would be to develop a manned vehicle capable of ferrying a crew capsule to geosynchronous orbit. The vehicle would then return the crew and capsule for other missions. (NASA Release 84-90)
USA Today reported that 2,500 teachers had represented to NASA with requests to be the first observer to ride the Space Shuttle in 1985 or 1986—even though the agency was not yet taking applications. NASA would announce its application process shortly. Dale Boatright, a Chicago teacher, was told by the U.S. Department of Education that his request was the first received, nearly a month before. NASA was notifying the teachers that they would receive a formal application when plans were set. (USA Today, Sept 24/84, 1A) —NASA had embarked on a new research program to show that a transport airplane’s metal skin and supporting structure could be replaced with metallic composite material to save weight and manufacturing costs and thereby increase fuel efficiency. Work in the program represented the first application of composite materials in the construction of primary wing and fuselage structures for transport-class aircraft. NASA’s long-range goal was to provide commercial air transport manufacturers with the technology to produce composite structures and apply them on new aircraft, or on derivatives of current aircraft, in substantial amounts by the early 1990s. Researchers at LaRC, where the new composites programs was managed, expected by the mid-1990s to see about 75% of the airframe structure of a transport to be made of composites. (LRC Release 84-69) —Dr. Jerome C. Hunsaker, an aviation pioneer who founded the first college course in aeronautical engineering at MIT and later designed the first aircraft to fly the Atlantic Ocean, died September 8 after a brief illness. He was 98 years old. He had established himself as one of the leading theorists of flight and aircraft design in a career in aviation engineering and air technology that spanned six decades. In addition to designing the flying boat NC-4, which flew from Newfoundland to Portugal and England in the first trans-Atlantic flight in May 1919, Hunsaker supervised the design of the dirigible Shenandoah, the first large rigid airship made in the United States that made its first flight in 1923. (NY Times, Sept 12/84, B-6)
NASA announced the start of the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE), a new astronomy satellite project that would be launched into Earth orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1988. The purpose of the explorer was to make the first all-sky map in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) band of the electromagnetic spectrum, a band between ultraviolet and X-ray light. The EUVE, managed by JPL, with scientific instruments supplied by the University of California, Berkeley, was a true explorer in that it would conduct the first in-depth investigation of that critical band and was expected to discover stars and other celestial objects with unexpected characteristics. The EUVE would orbit Earth at an attitude of 340 statute miles and from that point above the atmosphere would be able to scan the sky for emissions of extreme ultraviolet radiation. EUVE would use four 40-centimeter (15.7-inc.h) ultraviolet telescopes to conduct the all-sky survey and a spectrometer to carry out detailed observations of the new sources and stars expected to be discovered. JPL was responsible for overall EUVE project responsibility. The UCB would supply the 1,100-pound science payload, consisting of the extreme ultraviolet telescopes and the spectrometer; and the university’s Space Sciences Laboratory would design and fabricate the payload. JPL would control flight operations, and the science operations center would be at the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley. (NASA Release 84-125) Discovery was oriented with the port side in direct sunlight, so when the crew awoke the next morning they found about half of the large ice block had melted. Then, astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr., switched on heaters in the pipes leading to the nozzle and fired the orbiter’s thrusters to see if the vibrations would shake the ice free. Next, Hartsfield, assisted by Judith Resnik, took the controls of the mechanical arm and following procedures outlined by Sally K. Ride on the ground knocked off with little difficulty all but about 5 inches of the ice chunk. The remaining ice apparently then melted in the warmth of the sunlight. Discovery landed September 5 at Edwards Air Force Base, completing its six-day maiden flight. During the flight, crew deployed three communications satellites, LEASAT-1 (SYNCOM-1), Telestar-3, and SBS-D in the first three days of the flight; extended an experimental solar-powered array in a test for future Space Station construction; and processed a sample of a hormone that could lead to a commercial pharamaceutical product. Lt. Col. Richard M. Mullane, one of the astronauts on board, said that Discovery “performed superbly,” while NASA officials pointed out that all the mission’s objectives were accomplished. (W Post, Sept 4/84, A-6; NY Times, Sept 3/84, A-l, Sept 4/84, A-l, Sept 5/84, A-l; W Times, Sept 5/84, 4A)
President Reagan, in his State of the Union address, endorsed the development of the U.S.’s first permanently manned space station. “Wc can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic and scientific gain. Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade,” he said. “A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science, communications and in metals and life-saving medicines which can be manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these challenges and share in their benefits. .. .Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today,” he said. NASA presented the agency’s plans to the presidenl on the day that he spoke to astronauts in the Spacelab orbiting in the Space Shuttle in December 1983. NASA Administrator James N. Beggs had sought the space station as a science laboratory, astronomical observatory, space manufacturing center, servicing facility for spacecraft, and an assembly site for larger orbiting structures. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director William J. Casey had opposed any major commitment to space station funding because they feared it could draw money from their own space programs, government officials said. The officials added that military and intelligence agencies were concerned that they would have to share the space station with civilian agencies such as NASA and sometimes with astronauts of other countries. NASA also had found little enthusiasm when it turned for support from other agencies. When the National Academy of Sciences space science board was asked whether basic research in science would “require or be enhanced by the space station,” Thomas M. Donahue, chairman of the space board, said the answer was no. “I don’t think you could ever really justify $20 billion for a space station,” he said. At this early stage, there was no design for the space station, but officials of NASA had previously sketched the broad outlines of the most likely initial design. {Weekly Compilation of the Papers of Ronald Reagan, Jan 25/84, 87ff; NY Times, Jan 26/84, A-l; W Post, Jan 18/84, A-l, Jan 29/84, A-4)
NASA announced that it had selected LTV Aerospace and Defense Company, Dallas, Tex.; Martin Marietta Denver Aerospace, Denver, Colo.; and TRW Inc., Redondo Beach, Calif., for negotations leading to contracts for system definition studies of an Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV) to ferry satellites about in space. MSFC would manage the fixed-price contracts of approximately $5 million each. NASA anticipated that one of the three companies would likely construct the platform upon approval to proceed with the project. The vehicle would supplement the Space Transportation System (STS), having the ability to retrieve satellites from high orbits and bring them to the Space Shuttle for maintenance and repair. The OMV would then place the repaired satellites in their operational orbits. The OMV would also serve as a means of reboosting satellites as their orbits decayed, thereby avoiding costly, dedicated Space Shuttle missions. As envisioned, the OMV would be a remotely piloted, unmanned spacecraft approximately 3 meters (15 feet) in diameter and about 1 meter (3 feet) in length. (NASA Release 84-102)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that engineers had determined the problem with two types of rocket motors that had caused the loss of two $75 million satellites and the near-loss of a third and had led to postponements of two Space Shuttle flights, the Washington Post reported. A report from McDonnell-Douglas said that a team had found a way to determine which rocket nozzle would fail in space and which would work. Such a procedure might have saved the two communications satellites that gone into useless orbits. However, the solution had come too late to put a Canadian communications satellite on the next Space Shuttle flight scheduled for June 19. (W Post, May 4/84, A-2) —In a continuing series of reports on orbiting cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov, who had been in space for 85 days aboard the Salyut-7, Tass said that the crew had completed planned operations with the cargo craft Progess-20, storing supplies and pumping drinking water into the station’s tanks. Kizim and Solovyev then made their fourth walk in open space. The two removed a heat-resistant coating that had been installed during a previous space walk, assembled a second conduit, and checked it for airtightness. The two then reinstalled the heat-resistant coating, put tools into a container, and returned to the station. Their walk lasted 2 hours and 45 minutes, bringing their total time in open space to 14 hours and 45 minutes during 4 walks in 12 days. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 4/84)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
NASA announced that Robert L. Crippen, commander of Space Shuttle mission 41-G earlier in the month, was named deputy director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC, Houston. He would serve as deputy to George W.S. Abbey and remain an active astronaut. Crippen was pilot on STS-1, the first Space Shuttle flight, and commanded STS-7 and 41-C, the Solar Maximum satellite rescue mission. He joined NASA in September 1969 after three-year assignment with the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program. (JSC Release 84-050)
Because of the failure of two telecommunications satellites launched by the Space Shuttle, the insurance industry would receive more than $200 million in claims, and premiums would skyrocket when underwriters resumed writing satellite risk policies, the Washington Post reported. Analysts said that it was too early to determine what impact the satellites’ failures would have on their manufacturer, Hughes Aircraft Company, or McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which built the rocket motors that apparently failed on the two satellites. Western Union, owner of one satellite, was insured for $105 million to cover the cost of the satellite and potential revenue; Indonesia, owner of the other satellite, had $75 million in insurance to cover the cost of building and launching the payload. Robert J. Tirone, vice president of the large insurance broker Alexander & Alexander, said that underwriters would likely hold off issuing any new policies until they found out what went wrong with the two satellites. “Something went wrong,” he said, “and it went wrong twice.” A spokesman for McDonnell Douglas said that the company was puzzled by the apparent failure of the rockets that were supposed to lift both satellites into stationary orbits about 22,300 miles from Earth. The rockets, payload assist modules (PAM), had been successfully used in 16 previous commercial satellite launches—5 from the Space Shuttle and 11 by missiles. At the end of 1983, the insurance industry had collected $205 million in premiums and paid $210 million in claims. As a result of the two recent failures, claims would rise to about $420 million. An insurance broker, who asked not to be identified, said that he expected premiums to quadruple as a result of the loss of the two satellites. (W Post, Feb 8/84, D-2) —The Soviet Union launched today a three-man crew on board the Soyuz T-10 spacecraft, which successfully docked with the Salyut 7 space station on February 9. The crew consisted on Col. Leonid Kizim (commander), Vladimir Solovyev (flight engineer), and Oleg Atkov (cosmonaut-researcher). It appeared that only Kizim had previous space experience, having commanded the Soyuz T-3 in 1980 in the first three-man mission to test and dock the upgraded Soyuz-T and the Salyut 6. Because of the greater amount of instrumentation and power then in place, TASS noted that the current mission “will have broader possibilities for research than any of the previous ones.” Scientific, technical, medical, and biological studies were on the schedule of the current mission, and the cosmonauts were reactivating life support, power supply, and heat control systems and were inspecting on-board equipment as part of their “demothballing” process [See Oct 2/84 for return of crew], (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 14/84; FBIS, USSR Feb 9/84, Ul)
The NASA Army Rotor Systems Research Aircraft (RSRA), a helicopter/airplane testbed in a fixed-wing mode, returned to Ames-Moffett Flight Research Facility following the flight testing of a new helicopter rotor system in a flight environment. The purpose of the flight tests was to demonstrate the fixed-wing capability of the research helicopter/airplane hybrid and to expand its flight envelope in that configuration. The evaluation included taxi tests, acoustic tests, control power/stability tests, and rotor hub drag investigation as well as takeoff and landing technique investigation and envelope development. A total of 13 flights expanded the RSRAs fixed-wing envelope capability to 262 knots (about 300 miles per hour) and its altitude to 10,000 feet. (ARC Release 84-23) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED itN'TNTKIMAUg BLUB 509 C. Leestma; payload specialists Marc Garneau, a Canadian; and oceanographer Paul D. Scully-Power. It was the most crew members to fly on a Space Shuttle mission. During the first day of flight, crew members deployed NASA’s Earth Radiation Budget Satellite (ERBS); however, the two solar panels that supplied electricity to the 5,000-pound satellite refused to unfold. Ride corrected the ERBS problem by using the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to place the satellite’s solar panels in the sunlight to thaw the hinges. It took almost three hours to get the panels warm enough to respond to commands to unlock. The satellite was placed in orbit off the west coast of Mexico, instead of south of Bermuda. While trying to determine the source of the ERBS problem, Kathryn Sullivan deployed the Shuttle Imaging Radar-B (SIR-B), a 35-by-7-foot radar camera, which had difficulty stabilizing when only one of it two “leaves” was erected. The radar antenna would send out thousands of pulses every second, and the large number of echoes the radar antenna received allowed it to draw a photograph-like image of the part of Earth that its beams struck. During the flight, a storm of cosmic rays apparently caused by sunspots knocked out for about 13 hours NASA’s TDRS, which affected the imaging radar system. Among the parts of the world that the radar had planned to map but would probably lose were the entire Amazon River basin, the islands that made up Indonesia, and the seas off the Cape of Good Hope. The radar was also to track the progress of tropical storm Josephine, southeast of Florida in the Atlantic Ocean, which would force Challenger’s landing from Cape Canaveral to Edwards Air Force Base. An ice buildup on the exterior of the Space Shuttle’s water vents forced the crew to alter slightly the use of the ship’s water facilities. The buildup, caused by a slight malfunction of the backup cooling systems, posed only an inconvenience as the astronauts had to heat up the water vents to melt away the small accumulations of ice, raising the temperature inside the cabin to as high as 90°. Crippen corrected the craft’s air-conditioning system, and the temperature inside Challenger neared its norm of about 75 ° On October 11, Sullivan became the first American woman to walk in space when for 3 1/2 hours she performed tasks requiring a kind of patience, dexterity, stamina, and strength originally believed in the space program to be unique to men. She stepped into space at 11:44 a.m. EDT along with Leestma. With each held by a single tether, they worked in daylight and darkness to rehearse a critical fuel transfer, stow a troublesome antenna, and photograph their efforts for ground engineers. Challenger landed at 12:27 p.m. EDT at KSC in the second of four attempts to land there instead of at California’s Edwards Air Base and the first in three missions that Crippen was not waved off a Florida landing by bad weather. Dr. Shelby Tilford, NASA director of space science, said that the mission was successful despite disappointments with the imaging radar. Tilford said that all other Challenger experiments worked perfectly. The space-borne mapping camera, carried on a Space Shuttle flight for the first time, took 2,300 frames of film in mapping parts of every continent. Challenger apparently returned to Earth in good condition, except for minor damage to the two rear engine parts suffered during ascent. (NASA MOR E-420-41-G-09 [prelaunch], Sept 28/84, [postlaunch], Oct 5/84; NASA Release 84-132; NASA Fact Sheet, Sept 84; NASA Press Kit, Oct 84; W Times, Oct 9/84, 2A, Oct 10/84, 5A, Oct 12/84, 3A; WPost, Oct 5/84, A-2, Oct 9/84, A-4, Oct 11/84, A-17, Oct 12/84, A-6, Oct 13/84, A-3, Oct 14/84, A-5; NY Times, Oct 11/84, A-18)
NASA announced that three of its centers would participate with JSC, named earlier in the year to be the lead center, in definition and preliminary design studies of the Space Station. MSFC would be responsible for definition of the pressurized Space Station modules that would be built and equipped with appropriate systems for use as laboratories, the ward room and galley, and logistic transports. Development of this single “common” module design, with provisions for data distribution, power, environmental control, thermal control, and communications systems to be used in all pressurized areas in the station would provide significant savings in the overall program. LeRC would be responsible for the definition of the electrical power generation and conditioning and storage systems. Although most Space Station studies had focused on large solar arrays as the probable power generation system, Lewis would also examine and evaluate a number of alternative systems. GSFC would be responsible for definition of the automated free-flying platforms that would be part of the overall Space Station program and for provisions to service, maintain, and repair these platforms, as well as other free-flying spacecraft. Goddard would also define the provisions for instruments and payloads to be attached externally to the pressurized sections of the Space Station and the pressurized modules as a laboratory. In addition to its lead contractor role, JSC would be responsible for the definition of the structural framework to which the various elements of the Space Station would be attached and for the integration and installation of systems into this structure. The center would oversee the interfaces between the Space Station and the Space Shuttle and be responsible for mechanisms such as the remote manipulator systems. JSC would also manage the attitude control, thermal control, communications, and data management systems and the equipping of a common module for crew use as a ward room and galley. Other NASA centers would support the definition and design activities, particularly in technology areas. KSC would be responsible for preflight and launch operations and be involved in logistic support activities. (NASA Release 84-85) The flight of Discovery was delayed on June 25 for at least 24 hours when its backup navigating computer failed less than 30 minutes before takeoff. Though it was not operational in space, the fifth backup computer was used during ascent to “watchdog” the other computers during the critical first 10 minutes of flight. Four seconds from launch on June 26, the flight of Discovery was automatically aborted by a computer due to malfunctioning of a fuel valve on the rear starboard engine, causing the engine to catch fire. The fire was extinguished after three attempts with heavy sprays of water. NASA placed Hartsfield and his five-member crew on leave for two days after experiencing this first launch abort in 12 Space Shuttle missions and only the second launch abort in American manned spaceflight history. Thomas E. Utsman, Shuttle operations manager at KSC, said that he had no idea when the maiden flight of Discovery could be rescheduled. It depended, he said, on how much damage had been done to the malfunctioning engine that caught fire and to the Space Shuttle’s protective tiles from the high-speed water jets that extinguished the fire on the aft part of the fuselage. Utsman said that the fire may have burned through the heat shield on the engine nozzle, meaning that the entire engine would have to be replaced. NASA announced on June 27 that Discovery’s maiden flight would not be attempted for at least two weeks in order to verify all three main engines. John Talone at KSC said, “I don’t think we’re talking about mid-July before we can get to the point of launching again.” Talone said that the only serious question remaining about the aborted launch was why the valve stayed closed when commanded to start the liftoff firing sequence. When the valve failed to open, a backup actuator automatically started the opening sequence, and the valve opened soon enough for the engine to build full power, although it did not. He said that Discovery probably would have reached orbit, but mission rules said that a Space Shuttle could not lift off without redundant valve, and when the Shuttle’s main computer sensed that one actuator system was out, the computer ordered engine cutoff. Photographic inspection of Discovery showed remarkably little damage from fire that broke out below the main engine nozzles after engine shutdown. The only structural damage to the Space Shuttle’ airframe was the speed brake just below the tail and half of the brake’s protective enamel was scorched off. {W Post, June 23/84, A-3, June 25/84, A-l, June 26/84, A-l, June 27/84, A-3) During June: ARC Director William F. Ballhaus announced that center aircraft and their operation would be transferred to the Ames Flight Operations Directorate. Martin A. Knutson, director of flight operations and site manager of the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, would be responsible for all flight activities at the Ames’s Moffett Field location in northern California and at the Ames Dryden Facility in southern California. The Flight Operations Directorate office would continue to be maintained at the Ames Dryden Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Factors in the management change were continued safety of flight and continuity of aircraft operations to be assured with all flight operations reporting through a single management chain. And the change served to integrate more fully the Ames Dryden Facility into the day-to-day operations of the parent Ames Center. The Ames Research Center and the former Dryden Flight Research Center, now Ames Dryden, were consolidated in 1981, a move that enhanced the capabilities of both organizations. Ames officials said that the latest move was a continuing part of the overall Ames-Dryden consolidation and would centralize all flight operations activities in terms of operations procedures, safety, and management philosophy. There were no plans to move any aircraft or personnel involved from either location. (ARC Release 84-15) Later, NASA announced that it was considering a plan to continue the 12th and 13th Space Shuttle missions as a way to avoid expensive delays that could push at least one mission scheduled for 1984 into 1985. The problem with combining missions was the inability to combine crews. Five crew members from the aborted flight or from the August flight would have to step down and wait for another turn. The possibility of combining missions arose when technicians at NASA’s engine test facility at Bay St. Louis, Miss., were unable to duplicate the failure of Discovery’s starboard engine that had aborted the flight. “No matter what we did, we were unable to duplicate the failure,” a NASA source said. “And until we understand what went wrong, we don’t want to fly.” The failure of a rocket nozzle on a communications satellite during a test in St. Louis then further complicated NASA’s rescheduling decision. A final decision awaited analysis on the test of a Star^f8 solid-fuel rocket nozzle at the Astronautics Division of McDonnell Douglas Corporation in St. Louis. Star-48 rockets were on two communications satellites that would be part of the cargo on a combined mission. On July 12 NASA announced that the next Space Shuttle flight would consist of payloads from flights 41-D and 41-F and would be launched from KSC no earlier than August 24. The mission aboard the orbiter Discovery would retain the designation 41-D. The cargo would remain essentially the same, except that the large format camera and spartan would be replaced with the Satellite Business Systems (SBS) and Telstar payloads then scheduled for launch in the same time frame. The crew for mission 41-D would be the six-member team of Commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnik, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker. The crew of 41-F would be scheduled for a later flight. (NASA Release 84-95; WPost, July 3/84, A-12, July 10/84, A-5, July 11/84, A-6)
The U.S. House Science and Technology Committee approved President Reagan's request for a $7.9 billion NASA budget for FY 86, the Washington Post reported, but allocated the funds differently than he had requested. By a 32-to-9 vote, the panel decided to retain a subcommittee's recommendation to shift $45 million to spare parts procurement for the Space Shuttle in order to keep the Space Shuttle assembly line open and thus increase chances for a fifth orbiter. The administration requested $2.1 billion in FY 86 for 14 Space Shuttle flights and delivery of the fourth orbiter, Atlantis; it sought no funds for a fifth orbiter. (W Post, Apr 1/85, A9)
The military crew of the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51—J deployed today two communications satellites for Department of Defense, the NY Times reported, citing reliable sources. After release from the Space Shuttle, the satellites, known as Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS III) and weighing a ton each and measuring 38 feet long with solar panels extended, rocket engines boosted them to a point 22,300 miles above the earth. According to General Electric Co., which built the satellites but would not confirm their presence on the Space Shuttle, both satellites were strengthened to withstand radiation from distant nuclear blasts and had a device to send emergency action messages from the President to the nation's nuclear forces. The Department of Defense (DOD) scheduled Atlantis to land at Edwards Air Force Base on a date that was classified; NASA and DOD said they would announce the time of landing 24 hours in advance. (NY Times, Oct 5/85, A46)
The expected January 23 flight of the orbiter Discovery would be the first of 15 Space Shuttle flights devoted wholly to military purposes, Science reported, increasing the visibility of the military role in the program. Discovery would carry a reconnaissance satellite designed to intercept a wide variety of electronic communications, radar signals, and telemetry from intercontinental ballistic missile tests. After several orbits, the Space Shuttle would discharge the satellite from its payload bay and a booster rocket would push it to an altitude of about 35,000 km, where it would "park" over the USSR. NASA estimated about 30% of Space Shuttle flights over the next 10 years would be military missions, although NASA's civilian budget had paid almost all basic costs of the Space Shuttle and associated launch and servicing equipment (estimated at more than $15 billion). In addition, military needs had dictated that the Space Shuttle have unusually large wings, rugged thermal protection, an unusually large payload bay, and unusually powerful engines; however, the Pentagon had borne none of these added costs. Although some NASA expenditures were for items serving both military and civilian functions, such as improved engines for both the orbiter and a rocket booster and onboard experiments in flight aerodynamics, plasma physics, astronomy, biology, chemistry, and radiation, NASA paid for all these projects without any Department of Defense assistance. (Science, Jan 18/85, 276)
U.S. Rep. George Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), author of an amendment to prohibit tests of the antisateilite miniature homing vehicle (MHV-ASAT) against objects in space, suggested that in light of the successful ground-based laser test with the orbiting Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation System, Military Applications, June 21], the U.S. should drop the MHV in favor of a laser antisatellite system, Defense Daily reported. Brown said that ". . . This very successful demonstration raises the question of whether the United States should spend several billion dollars on the technologically less-advanced MHV ASAT system, still in the testing stage, when we could have a more technologically advanced, far more versatile system available for deployment in the same timeframe . . . and probably at a lesser cost." Brown emphasized the significance of the laser test, which he noted had hit a target on the Space Shuttle "less than a foot in diameter, much smaller than an ICBM, traveling faster than a missile, and there is no question but that a missile would be just as easy to hit." Although lethality was not demonstrated in the test, the U.S. had "demonstrated lethality more than 10 years ago when we knocked down a drone airplane with a laser, and we have now in the inventory lasers with about a million times the energy of the one that was used" in the Space Shuttle test, Brown added. "There is no question that lethality is achievable with existing technology." (D/D, June 26/85, 318)
Many of the experiments carried in Spacelab D-1 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger on Mission 61-A [see Space Transportation System/ Missions, Oct. 30] achieved more than 100% of mission goals, due in part to the continuous cooperation between experiment teams who coped with hardware problems and changing conditions on board the space laboratory, Aviation Week reported. Peter Sahm, Spacelab D-1 mission scientist, said this coordination allowed a rescheduling of experiment activity during the final mission days, maximizing the overall scientific return in spite of delays caused by hardware problems. In one of the repairs, Spacelab D-1 crew members used a saw to cut off a plastic cap on a valve that fed liquid into the fluid physics module's experiment zones. "The valve had an incorrect setting, which perhaps was made before launch," said Berndt Feuerbacher of West Germany's Deutsche Fors-chungs und Versuchsanstalt fur Luft und Raumfahrt's (DFVLR) Institute for Space Simulation. The DFVLR executed and controlled the mission on behalf of West Germany's BMFT ministry of research and technology. "They tried to reset the valve with a wrench, but they couldn't put the wrench to the nut because there was a plastic cap over it. So they asked for, and received authorization, to cut away the plastic cap, then were able to use the wrench." Feuerbacher said other repair/troubleshooting work by the Spacelab D-1 crew members included West German payload specialist Dr. Ernst Mes-serschmid using a vacuum cleaner to collect debris from a heating facility in the Werkstofflabor material science double rack and writing a software patch on the Werkstofflabor to work around a malfunctioning vacuum sensor that incorrectly indicated a lack of vacuum. NASA mission specialist Dr. Bonnie Dunbar also used the vacuum to clean up metallic dust particles from a sample that broke in the Spacelab D-1 Medea's gradient furnace with quenching device. These corrective actions demonstrated the need for trained crew members in complex spaceflight operations and for positive control from the ground, Wolfgang Finke, head of space program activities at the West German BMFT ministry of research and technology, indicated. "I think it also underscored the good working relationship between the German Space Operations Center here and NASA in the U.S. to overcome problems as they occurred," Finke said. (AvWk, Nov 18/85, 55 and 65)
France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) space agency was planning to select by midyear a prime contractor for the Hermes manned shuttle and would open the program to participation by other European countries before the end of 1985, Aviation Week reported. CNES had established a competition between Aerospatiale and Dassault-Breguet for the Hermes leadership role, and the two companies would make technical presentations in April. After review of the data, CNES would make a selection within several months. Normally the two companies had their separate niches in the aerospace field, but CNES had forced them into head-to-head competition over Hermes. In the competition, Dassault-Breguet would draw on expertise gained from its Mirage, jaguar, and Alpha jet military aircraft and related electronics/ avionics systems; Aerospatiale would emphasize its work on military missiles, reentry vehicles/nuclear warheads, the Ariane launcher, communications satellites, and civil aircraft such as the Concorde and Airbus Industrie A300/A310/A320. CNES Director General Frederic d'Allest said several countries had shown interest in joining the Hermes program following the European Space Agency's (ESA) council meeting at which ministers approved Phase B definition work for the Ariane 5 launcher [see Feb. 4], Ariane 5 would be capable of orbiting Hermes. France planned to retain a 50% share in the Hermes program and open the rest to participation by other European nations. The 1985 and 1986 budgets for Hermes totaled $12 million, followed by about $20 million in study work in 1987. France would supply most of this money in 1985, because other European countries wouldn't be involved until at least October. Hermes would carry two to six crew members and be about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Its approximate length would be 59 ft. and wingspan, about 33 ft. Payload bay volume would be 377 sq. ft.; diameter of the bay, 9.8 ft. A typical mission would carry 7,700 to 9,900 lb. of useful load to a 248.5-mile circular orbit inclined 0-30°. Mission duration with four to six crew members would be eight days, extending to 30 days with a reduced crew. Start of full-scale Hermes development in mid-1988 would permit a first flight in 1997, according to CNES scheduling. (AvWk, Mar 11/85, 19)
NASA Administrator James Beggs stirred up a controversy when he reportedly told a Washington gathering of the American Stock Exchange that the Soviets had "turned us down, flat, with no explanation" on the proposal of a joint space mission, the Washington Times reported. Later NASA spokesman Miles Waggoner said the Soviets had not rejected the idea, but a joint manned space mission was not likely to happen within the next few years. President Reagan had offered the Soviets a chance to participate in a cooperative space venture about a year previously. The Soviets responded that they believed it was not the time to fly that kind of mission. "To us, that means the item is still open," Waggoner said. "This time, though, Mr. Beggs decided to look at it from the other perspective." Other NASA officials, indicating the agency hadn't received any new word from the Soviets about the proposal, speculated Beggs might have said what he did to provoke a reaction from them. Originally, NASA planners envisioned a joint practice rescue mission in which a U.S. astronaut would use a jet backpack called a manned maneuvering unit (MMU) to fly from a Space Shuttle to a Soviet Salyut space station. The astronaut might also use the MMU to push a cosmonaut back to the Space Shuttle for a brief time. (W Times, June 12/85, 4A)
During Space Shuttle mission 51-1 astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher spent seven hours and eight minutes, a new record for a spacewalk, in the first stage of repair of the Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. During the walk, they retrieved the 15,000-lb. satellite, fastened Discovery's mechanical arm onto it, disarmed its Minuteman rocket motor, and exposed its electronic connections. Later Fisher said he could see no evidence of what caused the satellite to go dead after astronauts deployed it in April. "There is no evidence of debris on anything that would cause a problem. It's clean as a whistle," He said. Van Hoften and Fisher were outside the Space Shuttle from about 8:00 a.m. to shortly after 3:00 p.m. EDT, breaking by one minute the spacewalk record set April 1984 by van Hoften and George Nelson when they repaired the scientific satellite Solar Max. Although the astronauts accomplished more than half of what was needed in the salvage mission, they were planning a four-hour spacewalk on September 1 to finish the job. They would put a "space blanket" over the engine bell that served as the Minuteman motor's rocket nozzle to trap more of the sun's heat to warm it, because Leasat-3 had been in the cold of space so long that its rocket motor was too cold to fire correctly. Then the astronauts would install a vertical bar along the 20-foot length of the satellite to serve as a handle for van Hoften to spin the satellite and push it away from Discovery into space. It would then be seven days before the satellite acquired enough power to thaw its liquid-fuel tanks and almost two months before the solid-fuel rocket motor was warm enough for ground controllers to command it to ignite. (W Post, Sept 1/85, A5)
The 3M Corp. and McDonnell Douglas joined as a team to produce and market a proprietary drug that McDonnell Douglas produced on board the Space Shuttle to treat patients who had lost their ability to produce red blood cells, Aviation Week reported. The ability of the drug erythropoietin to stimulate the body to produce red blood cells could benefit persons who were anemic or had a variety of other disorders in which red blood cell levels were a factor. And it had the potential in a number of medical situations to reduce the need for blood transfusions that carried the risk of complications. Erythropoietin was not widely used because current production techniques could not filter out by-products harmful to the body. A batch of the material to be produced in an electrophoresis machine on the next flight of Space Shuttle, mission 61-B, would be given to the first human test patients soon. It was expected the drug could be available for sale in 1988 pending Food and Drug Administration approval. McDonnell Douglas was completing arrangements to bring 3M's Riker Laboratories Div. into the program as the drug company that would market the product in place of Johnson & Johnson's Ortho Pharmaceuticals Div., which recently dropped out of the program in favor of producing the substance through earth-based bioengineering. Ortho believed it would be able to bring the drug to market a year sooner, while McDonnell Douglas believed space processing would be far more efficient and less costly. McDonnell Douglas was also completing arrangements with a French drug company, Roussel Pharmaceuticals of Paris, to begin processing starting the next summer of a French drug on the Space Shuttle as a second commercial space product. The French product would be purified in the same mid-deck unit that brought erythropoietin to the animal and human test phase. NASA and McDonnell Douglas were completing arrangements to keep the middeck system operational for research and to help generate new products under their joint endeavor agreement. (AvWk, Nov 18/85, 16)
The U.S. Air Force announced today that it had selected Air Force Undersecretary Edward "Pete" Aldridge to fly on the first Space Shuttle mission launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Arizona Daily Star reported. The Air Force said Aldridge and Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson would serve as payload specialists with five astronauts named by NASA for the Defense Department's mission set for launch March 20, 1986. Aldridge, 47, who had been Air Force undersecretary since 1981, said in a statement, "I'm thrilled at the opportunity and thrilled at the prospects that I will be able to apply what I have learned to expanding U.S. efforts in space." NASA and the U.S. Air Force were building the Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch facility primarily for military missions. Because the Space Shuttle could be launched from there directly south, it could go into a north-south orbit that covered the entire globe, passing over both poles and allowing Space Shuttle crews to observe Soviet military forces anywhere in the world. Space Shuttles launched from Kennedy Space Center could not go directly north or south because they would fly over inhabited areas during the initial minutes of flight, possibly endangering the population if something went wrong. Those Space Shuttles launched into east-west orbits did not fly any closer than about 2000 miles to the poles. (Ariz. Daily Star, Sept 12/85, A3)
NASA announced it had scheduled the 51-E Space Shuttle mission from KSC for no earlier than March 3, 1985, with landing on March 7, 1985, at KSC. The 7th flight of the orbiter Challenger would include deployment of the 2nd Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and Telesat Canada's Anik Cl communications satellite and the French echocardiograph and postural experiments. Mission 51-E crew would be Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and payload specialists Patrick Baudry and Sen. E. J. "Jake" Garn (R-Utah). Thermal protection system refurbishment [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Launch Schedules, Feb. 6] had necessitated the delay from February 20. NASA had yet to accomplish step measurements, gap filler installation, and tile-bond and quality verifications. NASA said the current 51-E launch date did not affect the planned March 19 launch date of the Space Shuttle 51-D mission. (NASA Release 85-20)
NASA officials said damage sustained by Discovery during mission 51-D [see Apr. 19] could endanger its next mission and the upcoming week's flight of Challenger, the Washington Times reported. "We may have to do a fair amount of tile work on this one," Space Shuttle chief Jesse Moore said. "Fifty tiles has been our standard up until this last one." However, NASA engineers were more concerned about a hole on a control flap, called an eleven, on the ship's left wing. Such damage had not occurred previously. The chief Space Shuttle mechanic said the hole "most likely" developed after a heat-shield tile, jarred loose during Discovery's liftoff, allowed temperatures of more than 1,200° F to penetrate the wing flap during reentry. Also, NASA said it would not approve the Challenger mission or Discovery's next flight, scheduled for June 12, until technicians completed their examination of damage and determined why the brakes locked. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
NASA announced that through a cooperative effort with Satellite Communications for Learning Worldwide (SCOLA), it would televise live via satellite to hundreds of high schools, colleges, and universities across the U.S. all the science events on the Space Shuttle Discovery following its launch no earlier than April 12 from KSC. Two days prior to launch, NASA scientists and engineers would conduct a permission videoconference with the schools to acquaint students and teachers with the planned mission and science experiments. Students from selected schools would ask questions of the NASA briefers. NASA's educational affairs office was providing Discovery mission and educational materials to the participating schools. SCOLA, an association of schools, colleges, and universities based at Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska, was one of the largest voluntary associations of institutional satellite antenna owners in the U.S. (NASA Release 85-51)
NASA indicated it might remove squirrel monkeys from an April 30 Space Shuttle flight because the species carried a herpes virus known to cause cancer in some subhuman primates, the NY Times reported. Research had shown the virus could not survive in high-order primates, including humans, and NASA officials emphasized it was not one of the forms known to cause a variety of ailments in humans. The agency had spent more than a year trying to assess the risk possibilities to astronauts. (NYT, Feb 14/85, B8)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's crew on mission 51-D landed the orbiter at 8:54 a.m. EST April 19 at KSC, a return characterized by the worst damage in 16 Space Shuttle missions—a burn-hole in a wing, two failed brakes, two blown tires, and at least 123 broken heat-shield tiles, the Marshall Space Flight Center's Star and the Washington Post reported. NASA scheduled the mission to last five days, but extended it by two days to give the crew a chance to correct a malfunction in the Hughes Leasat 3 satellite. The damage to Discovery could set back preparation for its next mission scheduled for June 12. NASA would have to replace protective tiles, probably damaged when the Space Shuttle lifted off through the rain [see Apr. 12]. "There's little question that we suffered more severe damage on this landing than on any other so far," Space Shuttle launch director Robert Sieck said. Concerning the brakes, Sieck said, "Brake damage we've seen on previous flights. Brake failure is something we've never seen." NASA had waved off Discovery for a 7:16 a.m. landing because of rain over Cape Canaveral. One orbit later, Discovery headed down to KSC, where NASA told Commander Karol Bobko to land on runway 33 instead of 15 because of sun glare. Bobko landed with no headwind to slow him, touching down at 231 mph, the fastest any Space Shuttle had landed. As Discovery rolled down the three-mile concrete runway, it encountered a nine-knot crosswind and began veering to the right. When Bobko corrected for the wind by braking one side, the strain apparently caused one of the inboard brake assemblies to lock. Moments later the inboard brake assembly on the other side also locked, causing rubber to burn. A burn-hole the size of a dinner plate nearly penetrated through aluminum on the Space Shuttle's left wingtip where a landing flap apparently dislodged several protective tiles. Regarding the Leasat 3, a Hughes representative said initial belief that a lever failed to release was in error [see Apr. 18]. Once Discovery had maneuvered to within 10 feet of the satellite, the crew reported the lever had released. The crew successfully snagged the lever twice to ensure it was fully released, and reported the only change in the satellite's status was a slowing from two to one revolution per minute. The first congressional observer in space, Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), had difficulty negotiating the steps down to the runway and required assistance into the van that took the crew to the dispensary for medical examinations. There had been some controversy over his presence on the flight, including a NY Times editorial that said, "Having pressured NASA to give him his space trip, Mr. Garn is now indebted to the agency. That's a pity for those whom he represents in supervising NASA's budget and its request to build an $8 billion space station." However, Garn commented that "I'm carrying my own weight. I knew I had to prove myself . . . I've dealt with NASA for 10 years. I'm working on the space station right now, setting policy." (Marshall Star, Apr 24/85, 1; W Post, Apr 11/85, B1, Apr 20/85, A1; NYT, Apr 20/85, 22)
NASA announced that a mishap investigation board had completed its report on a March 8 accident in which the Space Shuttle Discovery's payload bay door was damaged and a technician was injured during prelaunch preparations for mission 51-D at KSC [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Launch Schedules, March 8]. In its executive summary, the board reported that "the immediate cause of the mishap was the failure of a master link in one of the two redundant hoist systems that raise and lower the payload bay access platform." The report then noted, "The mishap can be characterized as the culmination of a series of events and conditions that pushed the mechanical components to and beyond their limits." In the accident, a payload bay access platform used to provide access to the orbiter's cargo bay fell from its stowed position on a rolling bridge crane. Tracing the events and conditions that led to the accident, the board noted that "Operators of the payload bay access platforms customarily stowed the platforms by raising them until the telescoping tubes contacted the (single) upper-limit switch that stopped its upward travel. "On March 4, a Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) technician reported a broken upper-limit switch that had caused the telescoping structure to impact the supporting structure. In crane and hoist parlance, this is called 'two-blocking.' The inboard master link failed at this time, and cable overwrap was noted on that portion of the winch. The entire up-down portion of this system was tagged out with a 'Do Not Operate' tag, since only one half of the redundant hoist system remained intact. This tag was placed on the operating controls along with two other similarly appearing tags, both several months old, describing limitations on the operation of the platforms.'' The board's summary then noted the platforms were operated at least twice and stowed at least once between March 4 and the March 8 accident. "During the stowing operation(s), given the fact of a broken upper-limit switch and the standard operating procedure, it is an inescapable conclusion that additional two-blocking occurred. This imparted extremely high loads to the master link in the remaining wire rope assembly, fracturing it almost to the point of sufficient separation for the assembly to fall. When the bridge assembly was moved on the morning of March 8, the resulting jolt was enough to complete the break, and the platform assembly fell." The board recommended that there be a revision of operating procedures and operator training to ensure the upper-limit switches not be used as operational stops, of tagout/lockout procedures to prevent unauthorized use of equipment that had been identified as unsafe, and of the platform preventive maintenance procedures to meet all KSC and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards; a modification of the design of the payload bay access platform to include the addition of an operational stop and 'load sensing device in the wire rope system; and a redesign of the telescoping tubes to facilitate the required inspection of critical linkages. The board estimated damage to Discovery and access platform at $200,000 and noted that the accident delayed rollover to the vehicle assembly building from March 8 until March 23. (NASA Release 85-95) Technology Transfers
NASA announced award of a $2,374,800 fixed-price contract to Stearns Catalytic Corp. to modify a test stand at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), Hancock County, Mississippi, to give NSTL a third test position to static-fire individually Space Shuttle main engines. The structural, mechanical, and electrical modifications would begin no later than March 1985 for completion in a year. Space Shuttle main-engine testing had begun at NSTL in June 1975, using test stands A-1 and A-2 for single-engine testing of flight and nonflight engines. Later NASA used the B-2 test position to certify the main propulsion system in a series of three-engine cluster firings. The additional test position would support projected increases in main-engine test requirements, including increased turbopump production rates. NASA would initially use the new B-2 position to test new and overhauled engine turbopumps using a testbed engine. NASA had originally used the B-2 test stand in the 1960s to flight-certify the Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle's first stage. (NASA Release 85-19)
In reporting on NASA's concerns over the effects of vibrations and noise on the Space Shuttle's passengers and cargo, the Washington Post quoted astronaut Air Force Col. Frederick Gregory saying that after his return from a Space Shuttle mission that "Nothing prepared me for the sensation of those main engines starting and those solids lighting up underneath us. That son-of-a-gun really rattles and rolls when it takes off." Although NASA maintained that the Space Shuttle was no rougher a ride than the Titan launch vehicle, doubts were creeping into the minds of some people planning the Space Shuttle program, the Post said. Troubles arose on Gregory's flight when astronauts discovered the latch that released the airlock holding the Spacelab wide-field camera was badly bent—possibly because of the rough ride. In another Spacelab incident, all pressure was lost after four days in the laser spectrometer at the heart of an experiment to measure molecules of synthetic chemicals that could be attacking the earth's protective ozone layer. Space Shuttle managers were quick to defend the spacecraft, the Post reported. Columbia, Challenger, and Discovery had flown 17 times in four years without a serious incident. At least two of the three satellites that failed in space did so because of onboard rocket engine difficulties, not because the Space Shuttle was too rough. Johnson Space Center Director Gerald Griffin said in an interview with the Post that "occasional" mistakes had led to mishaps, but he insisted that "we are not repeating our mistakes." He used as an example the Syncom (Leasat-3) satellite deployed in April with no power to raise it to a higher orbit. He said that NASA would not have deployed the Syncom without any power if NASA had insisted that Hughes Communications Corp install a device that flashed a warning to the Space Shuttle's cockpit that the satellite had no power. "We've always insisted our customers adhere to our safety standards to protect the crew and the shuttle, but we've never insisted they do anything else," Griffin said. "We don't want to be 'Big Brother' but we're beginning to think that some of the [the customers] design features are not good for us. I'd like to see more data for the crew in the cockpit." (W Post, May 24/85, A1)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced today that the Space Shuttle Atlantis would take off October 3 on its maiden voyage to carry a secret payload into orbit, the Washington Post reported. On board Atlantis, the fourth and final Space Shuttle in NASA's fleet, would be commander Karol Bobko, pilot Ronald Grabe, mission specialists David Hilmers and Robert Stewart, and payload specialist Air Force Maj. William Pailes. Pailes, who has a master's degree in computer science and is an accomplished pilot, would be on board to tend the classified cargo. (WPost, Sept 6/ 85, A12)
Langley Research Center announced that the Space Shuttle Columbia would carry three experiments on mission 61-C developed at the center to measure the spacecraft's aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics. Columbia, the first Space Shuttle orbiter to go into space, was making its first flight in two years after it was pulled from flight service in December 1983 for extensive overhaul, including modification to accommodate the LaRC experiments, which were the Shuttle Entry Air Data System (SEADS), Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing (SILTS) experiment, and Shuttle Upper Atmosphere Mass Spectrometer (SUMS). SEADS would measure the distribution of air pressure around the orbiters nosecap during entry to provide precise determination of the arbiter's attitude relative to the oncoming airstream and the density of the atmosphere through which it had flown. Lack of this air data had hindered engineers from determining aerodynamic flight characteristics of the orbiters. The SUMS experiment complemented the SEADS experiment by gathering atmospheric density information at altitudes above 90 km (56 statute miles). SUMS would sample the gas at Columbia's surface through a small hole located just aft of the nosecap and forward of the nosewheel, with its instrument identifying and measuring the quantities of the various gas species present. Data analysis after the mission would allow determination of atmospheric density. The SILTS experiment would obtain high-spatial-resolution infrared images of the upper (leeside) surfaces of the orbiter^ port wing and fuselage during entry through the atmosphere. These infrared images would provide detailed "maps" of the surface temperatures of leeside thermal protection materials, indicating the amount of aerodynamic heating on the leeside surfaces in flight. (LaRC Release 85-99)
An accident at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) today damaged the Space Shuttle orbiter Discovery and injured a technician, forcing delay in the orbiter's next flight originally scheduled for March 29, the Washington Post reported. The accident occurred about 8 a.m. when the bucket of a "cherry picker" crane hovering over Discovery fell, hitting a Lockheed technician who was on a work platform and then striking Discovery, which was horizontal on the floor of the orbital processing facility. The 2,500-lb. bucket broke the technician's leg and injured his shoulder, then fell onto the closed left-hand cargo bay door, which was so thin and made of such light-weight material that it could not be opened on earth without elaborate supports to keep it in a fixed position. The bucket made two holes about three feet apart in the heat protection tiles insulating the door and damaged the door's structure. A NASA spokesman said an investigating board would determine the cause of the accident, extent of the damage, and impact on the flight schedule. Officials speculated that NASA would have to replace the 2,400-lb. door, which would require shipment of a new door from the manufacturer and as many as three or four days of work to complete installation. (W Post, Mar 9/ 85, A2)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
John Townsend, corporate vice president and president of Fairchild Space Co., said in a January 16 speech to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics' (AIAA) National Capital Section that those planning commercial space ventures must monitor the uncertainty of NASA's Space Shuttle manifest and orbiter fleet's long-term availability, Aerospace Daily reported. "The manifest is at risk," he said and cited difficulties NASA had in "remanifesting" resulting from the orbiter Challenger's thermal-protection tile-adhesion problems. NASA had cut back its planned 13 missions to 12 in 1985, and Townsend expressed concern over the potential problems of a 4-orbiter fleet that could be exacerbated by an accident. Townsend also expressed concern over the Space Shuttle pricing policy, noting NASA's recommendation of a 22% price increase in Space Shuttle flights from $71 million (1982 dollars) per flight to $87 million, and concluding that NASA's "expendable launch vehicle people have Ariane to face." (A/ D, Jan 17/85, 90)
NASA announced it selected Dr. F. Drew Gaffney, an associate professor of medicine and cardiology and director of echocardiology at the University of Texas Health Science Center, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, and Dr. Robert Phillips, a veterinarian and professor of physiology and nutrition at Colorado State University, to serve as payload specialists for the initial Spacelab Life Sciences (SLS-1) flight. NASA also selected Dr. Millie Hughes-Fulford, an associate professor of biochemistry at the University of California Medical Center, San Francisco, and a medical researcher at the Veterans Administration Medical Center, to serve as a payload specialist for SLS-2. Dr. Hughes-Fulford was the first woman to serve as a prime payload specialist for a Space Shuttle flight. The flights were intended to improve significantly knowledge about living beings in the space environment and were a major step in preparing men and women for life aboard the space station scheduled for launch in the early 1990s. NASA would shortly select for the SLS-2 mission a second payload specialist, who would then train with the three already announced. (NASA Release 85-62)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. personnel fitted the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) wide-field/planetary camera (WFPC) into the Hubble Space Telescope, the JPL Universe reported. They then removed and returned it to JPL for modifications and testing. "Everything went fine," Dave Rodgers, JPL's WFPC project manager, said. "There were no problems with any of our equipment." The WFPC consisted of two complete camera systems with different focal lengths. There were four cameras in each system, all sharing the same housing and electronics. The wide-field camera would obtain a wide perspective of a region in the sky, while the planetary camera would make high-resolution studies of individual objects. "It's called a planetary camera, but you can use it for any object that you want to study in detail," Rodgers explained. Besides planets in earth's solar system, the planetary camera would study galaxies and star-like objects such as quasars. Astronomers could also use the camera system to search for clues suggesting the presence of other planets orbiting nearby stars. Because the space telescope would be above the earth's obscuring atmosphere, it would be able to detect objects 100 times dimmer than those visible from earth with about 10 times greater resolution. The orbiting observatory was a major part of NASA's astronomy effort through the end of the century. Space Shuttle crew would service and replace in orbit the space telescope instruments, keeping the telescope operating for at least 15 years. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1)
"The Dream Is Alive," a new IMAX movie that was perhaps the most advanced film of its kind ever made, opened today at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Post reported. The $3.6 million production, narrated by Walter Cronkite, was the first ever shot almost completely on location in space and was an informal sequel to "Hail, Columbia," the story of the U.S.'s first Space Shuttle. Because the film was shot on three of the most dramatic and action-packed Space Shuttle flights of the previous year, it was essentially a video yearbook full of special happenings, the Washington Times reported. The film showed the rescue and repair of the Solar Max satellite, the deployment of the 100-foot-tall solar array that someday could help power the space station, launching of two communications satellites, and the first spacewalk by an American woman. Among what appeared to be special effects produced in Hollywood were the immensity of Hurricane Josephine as seen from 200 miles overhead and the silence of a satellite drifting noiselessly in the blackness of space. The astronauts who shot the footage said the IMAX format came as close to capturing the real view and the true feel of spaceflight as any format ever had. IMAX expert Graeme Ferguson, who produced and directed the film, said the next step was to modify an IMAX camera so it could be taken outside the Space Shuttle. (W Post, June 22/85, D1; W Times, June 20/85, 3B)
The Department of Defense (DOD) placed a satellite on the Space Shuttle Discovery [see STS/Military Applications, Jan. 24], which put it in a radically different orbit from many spy satellites, the NY Times reported. According to figures made public by the Air Force, DOD put the satellite in a highly elliptical orbit at a low angle above the equator; the majority of U.S. spy satellites were in roughly circular orbits that passed across polar regions so that satellites would spend as much time as possible over the USSR. The satellite's, whose United Nations designation was 1985-10B, highest altitude was 34,670 km (21,543 miles); its low point was 341 km (212 miles). This elliptical path was inclined 28.4° to the equator, and the satellite took 10 hours to complete one revolution. In addition to its elliptical orbits, the satellite could maneuver from its initial orbit into another, perhaps more usual, orbit. By international treaty, DOD was required to release to the United Nations a technical description of all its satellites' initial orbits. This recording process, which passed through the State Department and included filing the information with the Library of Congress, often took several months after an object was launched. The DOD released the data in early April to the State Department; the NY Times then requested and received the information. (NYT, Apr 26/85, A19)
Hans Mark, former NASA deputy administrator, Ames Research Center director, and Secretary of the Air Force, on April 9, during part of an MIT dinner lecture series, disparaged government attempts to commercialize space, the Space Commerce Bulletin reported. "Now that I'm out of government, I can say that I found nothing funnier than bureaucrats wringing their hands in town around here about how to commercialize something where most of them, myself included, don't have the slightest idea on how to make investments, how to judge markets, how to do all those things that are important for commercialization," Mark said. He characterized commercial space efforts as being politically popular but backed with little substance, with much of his criticism directed at private sector remote sensing and expendable launch vehicle operations. He said he didn't believe either technology would be a commercial success in the U.S., and he predicted private Space Shuttle operation would never work. Mark considered true commercial space activity to be technology transfer programs and government-industry relations as set up in the 1950s to build hardware for government programs. He added, however, that government couldn't take credit for technology transfer as being space commercialization because that was not what "intellectuals think commercialization means and we need to do other things. So we need to hire 50 people in NASA headquarters to do commercialization." Regarding the impact of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) on commercial space, Mark said, "There's no doubt in my mind that important commercial ventures will follow from SDI simply because of the nature of the contractor systems that we use. We will build high-intensity lasers and the first commercial application of those lasers will surely be in welding or in something like that . . . That's what I like to call the commercialization of space," Mark concluded. (Space Commerce Bulletin, Apr 26/85, 1)
Three quarters of a million gallons of water flooded Space Launch Complex-6 at Vandenberg AFB during a March test to determine whether the system, intended to suppress sound waves from the Space Shuttle during a launch, would operate properly, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sound waves, reflected off the launch mount and flame ducts, could seriously damage the orbiter and its payload. To prevent such damage, nozzles on the mount would begin spraying water into the three pad exhaust ducts seven and a half seconds before the Space Shuttle's main engines ignited. By ignition time, the spray system would reach its full flow rate of 985,000 gallons per minute and maintain that rate for nearly 30 seconds before tapering off after the Space Shuttle left the pad. Although Vandenberg officials had tested the spray system six times previously, the March test was the first time the nonflying prototype orbiter Enterprise, inert solid-fuel rocket boosters, and an external tank were in place on the mount during a test. Remotely controlled by the launch control center, the splash pattern of the gravity-fed water system resulted in no water splashing up into the main engines, where ice might form before ignition. The system sprayed water exactly where it would be needed at launch—down into the flame ducts and out over the concrete pad surface. George O'Gorman, site manager for complex-6, said most of the complex's construction work was complete, although some modifications were scheduled before the orbiter Discovery would arrive in September for launch in January 1986. The Air Force expected to make about four Space Shuttle launches a year by the late 1980s from Vandenberg AFB. The facility could handle as many as ten launches a year. (AFCS Newsreview, Apr 12/85, 3)
Digital computers would serve as the focal point for the Centaur flight-control system, processing data from the other flight boxes including the multiplexer units. They would also provide the hardware capability to interface with the orbiter and ground system^ NASA scheduled the first Centaur launch—the Ulysses mission—for May 15, 1986, from the Space Shuttle payload bay followed on May 21, 1986, by the Galileo mission. (LeRC Release 85-58)
NASA announced it had selected Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Western Development Laboratories, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) that would include three spacecraft (GOES-1, J, and K) and a two spacecraft option (GOES-L and M). The contract had a proposed cost of $221 million and would provide for a series of GOES satellite systems, each with a five-year design life, that would contribute to continuation of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) GOES program in the 1990 to 2000 era. NASA had scheduled a late 1989 launch for the first GOES satellite in this new series. The contract statement of work covered the satellite bus; imaging, sounding, and space-environment monitor instruments; and flight-support equipment and services to accomplish deployment of the spacecraft into geosynchronous orbit from the Space Shuttle. The contract also included operations ground equipment and support to ensure compatibility of the spacecraft systems with established ground systems operated by NOAA. NASA assigned Goddard Space Flight Center responsibility for project management. (NASA Release 85-80)
19 a.m. today a three-stage, Taurus-Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket that left several colored clouds high over the mid-eastern U.S. coastline. The objective of the experiment was to provide baseline data on expected yields, vapor expansion velocities, and other parameters for the chemical release canisters for the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES), scheduled for launch in July 1987 from the Space Shuttle. The 157-lb. payload ejected balls of greenish-white titanium-boron-barium and barium-cupric-oxide at an altitude of 230 statute miles, one as the rocket ascended and one as the payload descended. The barium clouds rapidly expanded, while ejecting barium ions along the earth's magnetic field to form a visible streak more than 62 miles long. Another red titaniumboronlithium cloud released at 325 miles expanded to a diameter of several hundred kilometers in less than a minute. Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Range Control Center received reports of cloud sightings from as far north as Waterville, Maine, as far south as Wilmington, North Carolina, and as far west as South Bend, Indiana. (NASA Release 85-148; GSFC Release 85-39) Upper Atmospheric Research
NASA announced that Sultan Salman Abdelazize Al-Saud, an Arabsat payload specialist scheduled to fly on the 51-G 7-day Space Shuttle mission in June, would conduct 70mm photography over Saudi Arabia, 35mm photography of a fluids experiment, and would participate in the French posture experiment. Al-Saud's flight was part of a reimbursable agreement with the Arab Satellite Communications Organization covering the launch of the Arabsat 1B communications satellite. Al-Saud would use the 70mm camera to take pictures on daylight orbital passes over Saudi Arabia and the 35mm camera to document such phenomena as surface tension effects on mixed fluids in the absence of gravity. His other activities would include photography of the new moon in a lunar crescent observation and assisting the French payload specialist as a test subject in the French experiment. At a May 28 news conference at Johnson Space Center, Al-Saud said his flight was bound to improve diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the Islamic world, the Washington Post reported. "You will have 800 million Moslems and 155 million Arabs glued to their TV sets watching an American spaceship carrying an Arab into space," he commented. NASA selected Al-Saud, nephew of Saudi's King Fahd, from hundreds of Saudi applicants. He had logged more than 1,000 hours in jet aircraft. Other crew for the mission were Daniel Brandenstein, commander; John Creighton, pilot; Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel, mission specialists; and Patrick Baudry, French payload specialist. Backup payload specialist for Arabsat was Abdulmohsen Hamad Al-Bassam. (NASA Release 85-69; WPbst, May 29/85, A12)
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched January 25, 1983, worked almost perfectly for 300 days until it depleted its liquid helium coolant and that it had achieved mission objectives, which were to produce an unbiased all-sky survey using a number of broad infrared photometry channels, to study selected galactic and extragalactic sources, and to map extended sources. For infrared astronomy, IRAS represented as great an improvement over ground-based telescopes as the Palomar 200-in. telescope had over Galileo's telescope. Because fewer than 1,000 infrared sources were cataloged before the IRAS launch, the sensitivity of IRAS produced a survey of a large unexplored area in the electromagnetic spectrum. The IRAS All-Sky Survey catalog contained about 250,000 sources, including some 20,000 new galaxies and 16,000 small extended sources. IRAS surveyed more than 96% of the sky, 16% more than was required for mission success. Information in the IRAS databased revolutionized the infrared study of the sky and provided a rich data source to observers in other wavebands. The IRAS program resulted from a cooperative effort among the U.S., The Netherlands, and the United Kingdom in the areas of operations, spacecraft design, infrared technology, and scientific collaboration. During the next four years, scientists would continue to examine and analyze the more than 200 billion data bits in the IRAS database and, by developing specialized processing techniques, possibly increase the sensitivity of the survey. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [postlaunch] Oct 28/85) During October: NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSRC) awarded a 14-month $140,000 contract to Perkin-Elmer Corp. to study concepts and technologies needed fora next generation telescope with ten times the capability of the Hubble Space Telescope. This study, the first step toward preparing to launch a space telescope array in the first decade of the next century, would define a technology development plan for the array and provide NASA with cost and schedule data. Perkin-Elmer would initially examine the probable science such a telescope would perform as well as the concept of an array of telescopes working together as one. Perkin-Elmer said it would develop two telescope concepts based on the best use of the proposed space station and technology advancements needed to implement them. The first would emphasize assembly and optical alignment in orbit using the space station as an assembly base. The second concept would focus on modularization, ground assembly and checkout, and minimal on-orbit assembly. The study would also explore the possibilities of adapting, for visible light purposes, interferometer techniques used by radio astronomers to obtain high-resolution maps of deep space objects. In addition, Perkin-Elmer would define and recommend technologies needed for maximum use of the space station for assembling, testing, and servicing the next generation facility for optical astronomy. Perkin-Elmer built the Hubble Space Telescope scheduled for launch August 1986 on Space Shuttle flight 61-J. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 14)
Americans on board were commander Henry Hartsfield, Jr.; Air Force Lt. Col. Steven Nagel, pilot; and mission specialists Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, a biomedical engineer, Marine Corps Col. James Buchli, and Air Force Col. Guion Bluford, Jr., who had a doctorate in aerospace engineering. The two West Germans in the crew were Dr. Ernst Messerschmid and Mr. Reinhard Furrer, both physicists. The eighth crew member, Dr. Wubbo Ockels, a physicist from the Netherlands, represented the European Space Agency (ESA), which provided several scientific instruments in the Spacelab. The Europeans had prime responsibility for conducting the experiments; Bluford and Dunbar would assist them. Spacelab D-1, designed, built, and checked out in Europe, was flown to KSC for installation in Challenger's cargo bay. The V\fest German space agency's center in Oberphaffenhofen, near Munich, controlled scientific operations during the flight; ground control for flying the Space Shuttle was in Houston, as usual. Spacelab D-1 carried 76 experiments on racks that lined its walls. German researchers designed most of the experiments, which were for German and other foreign universities, research institutes, and industrial enterprises as well as ESA and NASA; other experiments were from France, Spain, Italy, Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, and the U.S. All experiments were intended to take advantage of the weightlessness of space to study various processes that were normally affected by gravity. The Washington Post reported that West German officials said Spacelab was a major step toward what they hoped would be a larger laboratory module attached to the permanently manned space station that NASA envisioned for the 1990s. Most experiments were in materials processing. Along two sides of the Spacelab, the experiments were in racks containing small furnaces for heating metals and making alloys that were lighter and stronger than anything produced in full gravity of earth. Other materials processing experiments would study the flow of liquids in weightlessness; yet others would grow very pure and large crystals that could lead to improvements in electronic semiconductors. In a variety of life sciences experiments, the crew would study the growth of plants (corn and lentils) under microgravity conditions. Other studies were on how embryos of frogs and insects developed in weightlessness. Crew would use tadpoles for tests on how weightlessness might affect the development of vestibular, or balance, organs in vertebrates. ESA's vestibular sled ran down a pair of rails in Spacelab's center aisle. Experimenters would accelerate and tilt crew members riding in the chairlike device to test how the human balance system in the inner ear responded to weightlessness and a moderate gravity force, because it was thought the inner ear, which relied on gravity to function normally, might be the source of astronauts' motion sickness. Crew would use instruments in the cargo bay outside the Spacelab for navigation tests, such as synchronization of atomic clocks in space with those on the ground, checking for any discrepancies caused by weightlessness, and precise distance measurements by radio signals between the Space Shuttle and the ground. To accommodate the crew of eight, NASA installed an extra sleep station, bringing the total to four. Crew would conduct laboratory work in shifts around the clock. Despite early concern over the condition of the Space Shuttle's steering jets, mission control gave the Challenger the go-ahead for orbital operations. Later the mission control flight director said a valve malfunction prevented the flow of fuel through one line to Challenger's steering jets, but NASA considered an alternate line sufficient for regular operation to maneuver Challenger. Flight controllers also reported erratic temperature readings on one of the three fuel cells that generated electricity, but with crew supervision the affected unit was operating at full strength. (NASA Release 85-145; NASA MOR M-989-61-A [prelaunch] Oct 28/85; NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13; W Post, Oct 31/85, A30)
NASA announced that Frederick Hauck would command Space Shuttle flight 61 —F scheduled for no earlier than May 15, 1986, to deploy the Ulysses (International Solar Polar) spacecraft and David Walker would command the Galileo mission 61-G scheduled for no earlier than May 21, 1986. The Galileo spacecraft would explore the environment of Jupiter and its moons. Hauck first flew as pilot on Space Shuttle flight 7 in June 1983 and was commander in November 1984 of mission 51-A, for which Walker was pilot. Other 61-F crew members would be Roy Bridges, pilot, and mission specialists David Hilmers and J. Mike Lounge. Other mission 61-G crew members would be pilot Ronald Grabe and mission specialists John Fabian and James van Hoften. The Ulysses mission would be the first to use the liquid-fueled Centaur upper stage; the Galileo mission would also use the Centaur upper stage. (NASA Release 85-82)
NASA launched at 7:29 p.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B to practice methods for building a space station and to launch three satellites, the Washington Post reported. People more than 400 miles away in South Carolina and Key West, Florida, saw the launch. There had been only two other previous U.S. night launches: in 1972 when the Apollo 17 crew left for the moon in the middle of the night and in 1983 when the Space Shuttle Challenger departed in early morning. Nine minutes after launch, mission control reported Atlantis was in a secure orbit about 200 miles high, and launch director Gene Thomas said the countdown was the smoothest yet in the Space Shuttle program. Crew onboard Atlantis were Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, commander; Lt. Col. Bryan O'Connor, pilot; mission specialists Dr. Mary Cleave, Maj. Jerry Ross, and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring; and payload specialists Rudolfo Neri Vela (Mexico's first astronaut) and McDonnell Douglas engineer Charles Walker. During the mission the crew would launch Mexico's Morelos B satellite, Australia's AUSSAT 2, and RCA's Satcom KU-2. Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring would also take two long spacewalks to assemble 93 aluminum struts into a 45-foot beam and six 12-foot beams into a 64-lb. inverted pyramid to test techniques that might be used to build the proposed permanently manned space station. Following each spacewalk, the mission specialists would disassemble and stow the beams. Cameras would record every move so that later a computer could reduce the photos to a motion study that engineers would use to determine how construction work could best be performed in the zero gravity of outer space. (NASA Release 85-153; W Post, Nov 27/85, A3)
NASA scheduled the Space Shuttle Challenger to take today four high-tech cans each of Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola, the world's two largest-selling soft drinks, into orbit for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Stocking Challenger with both Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola resulted from a compromise reached after weeks of highly sensitive negotiations. NASA had not previously flown carbonated drinks in space because no containers were available to control and dispense carbonated liquids in zero gravity. It took the companies more than two years to develop and test the cans. Pepsi-Cola said its can cost its supplier, Enviro-Spray, $14 million to develop. Pepsi-Cola filled its can with eight ounces of cola and a plastic pouch that expanded when chemicals were mixed inside it to create carbon dioxide gas, which then inflated the pouch and forced the beverage out. Coca-Cola's can was lined with a laminated plastic bag filled with cola that overlaid a second plastic bag containing carbon dioxide under 50 lb. of pressure. The carbon dioxide forced the cola out of the can. A drawback to both cans was that they must be drunk unchilled. NASA retained the legal right to use whichever container worked best, the Washington Times reported, and to fill it with the drink of its choice. (WPost, July 12/85, A3; W Times, July 8/85, 3A)
The Washington Times, in its report on the Space Shuttle 51—E mission delay, said that NASA Administrator James Beggs had indicated the delay might be a week or two. In announcing earlier delays, NASA had said they would not alter the planned March 19 launch of the 51-D Space Shuttle mission, Aerospace Daily reported. However, in announcing the new 51—E launch date, NASA said the current 51-D mission launch would slip three days. (W Times, Feb 27/85, 4A; A/D, Feb 28/85, 1)
During a "Science and Engineering" radio program, Boris Belitskiy responded to a New Zealander's question about the possibility of there someday being a larger Soviet space station, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. "A Soviet orbital station of the next generation will be a larger and more comfortable complex with better facilities for research work, pilot production, cosmonaut exercises, recreation, and everyday life generally," Belitskiy said. When asked whether the Soviets were developing a reusable spacecraft like the U.S. Space Shuttle, Belitskiy responded, "For the present, freighters of the Progress type meet the needs of resupplying Salyut orbital stations. Nevertheless, Soviet space scientists do see a future for reusable transport systems and have been conducting tests in this area. The technological problems involved have, on the whole, been solved, but this cannot be said of the economic problems . . . This being so, Soviet space scientists are interested in quite a few other approaches to the problem as well," In response to a question about a manned mission to Mars, Belitskiy said, "Some day, undoubtedly, there will be such a mission but that's still a long way down the road. And a vast project of this kind, bound to be very expensive, would be greatly facilitated by more cooperation between the major space powers." (FBIS, Moscow World Service in English, July 22/85)
At the third in a series of hearings on assured access to space NASA and Defense Department officials said today before the House Science and Technology space science and applications and Armed Services research and development subcommittees that available data did not support the need for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in the early 1990s. But the officials acknowledged that there could be a period around 1992 and beyond in which unforeseen launch demands would strain capability, Aerospace Daily reported. Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) pointed out that earlier testimony had revealed a launch demand for 26 to 33 Space Shuttle equivalent flights per year in the post-1992 timeframe, and Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, acknowledged that a flight capability of 30 per year would require a fifth orbiter. He said that NASA projected the annual launch capability of a four-orbiter fleet in the 1990s timeframe to be 24 flights, 20 from Kennedy Space Center and four from Vandenberg AFB, with the ability to surge temporarily to 28 flights per year. When asked to factor in potential extended downtime of one orbiter, Moore replied that NASA had not made a projection of lost flights because it would be directly related to the length of the downtime and when it occurred. He added that NASA could probably fly 20 to 24 flights with the three remaining orbiters if one were out of service for periods up to one year; a sustained launch capacity for three orbiters would be in the range of 15 to 20 flights per year, he said. Edward Aldridge, undersecretary of the Air Force, said that, although the Department of Defense (DOD) was committed to at least eight Space Shuttle missions per year, its current known requirements through the mid-1990s averaged 10 launches per year. Including the one-to-five Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year projected through 1995 for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research, he said the total DOD requirement became roughly 11 to 15 Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year. Those numbers excluded any mission supporting potential deployment of SDI-related systems, he added. At the same hearing, Gen. Robert Herres, commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), said he thought the "time had passed" during which the U.S. might have built a fifth orbiter. He pointed out that resources needed for it might better be devoted to new technology and options, "which afford us more flexibility and versatility." Offering an opposing view, Hans Mark, chancellor of the University of Texas System and former NASA deputy administrator, said that the argument for a fifth orbiter could not be based either on currently projected flight rates or on backup requirements. He said only the proposed space station and SDI requirements could increase space operations to the point where a fifth orbiter was necessary. (A/D, July 26/85, 137)
After spending 18 months at the factory in Palmsdale, California, Columbia, the flagship of the Space Shuttle fleet, returned for operational duty to Kennedy Space Center (KSC), the JSC Roundup reported. Columbia had undergone hundreds of modifications to reconfigure the ship from a developmental flight vehicle to a fully operational orbiter. Columbia flew the first five Space Shuttle missions, and NASA modified the spacecraft at KSC for the October 1983 STS-9 Spacelab 1 flight. Following its return to KSC and removal of the Spacelab 1 payload, NASA in late January 1984 ferried Columbia to California atop the 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft. Rockwell International performed five major modifications to the orbiter during its stay at the orbiter production plant. Structural modifications to the wings and midfuselage included strengthening of lower wing surfaces and installation of heavier straps across the orbiter's belly. Rockwell added a heads-up display to the forward flight deck to allow the Space Shuttle commander and pilot to view critical flight information on a see-through panel while they looked through the forward cockpit windows. Production workers removed the commander and pilot ejection seats, which were installed on Columbia for the initial development Space Shuttle flights, and replaced them with standard seats. Overhead blowout panels were also removed. Rockwell modified two orbital maneuvering system pods to make them compatible with the other orbiters in the fleet and replaced the thermal protection tiles on the pods with the advanced reusable surface insulation blankets. Production personnel also installed supplemental instrumentation to gather developmental engineering data. In addition, workers removed and replaced approximately 5000 high-temperature tiles from the orbiter's underside, because engineering analysis indicated several areas where greater heat protection was needed. About half of the wing leading edge panel assemblies was removed and modified to strengthen the supporting structure of the reinforced carbon-carbon panels, an infrared imaging device was installed on the vertical stabilizer to provide a temperature profile of the upper wing surfaces during reentry, and instrumentation was added to the nose cap to provide improved entry air data. During the trip from California to KSC atop the 747 shuttle transport, rain damaged more than 1,000 of its head shield tiles, the Washington Post reported. NASA said that between 200 and 300 of the tiles required replacement. Damaged areas were around the windows and on the forward facing tiles. According to NASA policy, Space Shuttle transports were forbidden to fly through visible rain. However, the shower did not appear on ground radar or on the 747's onboard radar system. NASA had scheduled Columbia to fly next in December on mission 61-C. (JSC Roundup, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 19/85, A17)
NASA announced it had presented at a ceremony at NASA Headquarters its 1984 inventor of the year award to Dale Kornfeld, Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), and John Vanderhoff, Mohammed El-Asser, and For-tunato Micale, all of Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, for their "process for preparation of large-particle size monodisperse latexes." The monodisperse latex reactor processor, an experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle, had produced microspheres in zero gravity in sizes ranging from 5 to 30 micrometers. The maximum size particles produced on earth, with the required standards of quality and uniformity, were about 2 to 3 micrometers. Researchers used microspheres in calibrating sensitive scientific instruments such as microscopes, filters, and particle counters. Medical uses included identification of cancer and glaucoma and the study of the transport of materials inside living organisms. Industrial applications included the production of finely ground products such as paint pigments, inks, toners, explosives, and other powder materials. NASA took an important step toward making the microspheres commercially available when it presented 15 grams of 10-micrometer particles to the Commerce Department's National Bureau of Standards for certification as "standard reference material." (NASA Release 85-44)
Astronauts aboard the orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F released today a six-and-a-half-foot-long drum-shaped satellite, the Plasma Diagnostics Package, from the orbiter's payload bay, shot it with a looping beam from an electron gun, and then retrieved it with the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm, the NY Times reported. One purpose of the demonstration was to study the electrical effects the Space Shuttle had as it moved through the electrically charged gases of the ionosphere, effects which occasionally caused the Space Shuttle to emit a soft golden glow. Researchers considered solving that riddle important to the success of future mission, which would carry sensitive instruments that the aura might disturb. Another goal was to achieve a better understanding of the aurora, known in the northern hemisphere as the northern lights, which was a disturbance in the atmosphere that created bright lights in the night sky over polar regions. The astronauts reported seeing flashes of light as the beam followed natural magnetic lines to the satellite, the Washington Post reported; the newspaper said scientists on the ground called the demonstration "a fabulous success." (NYT, Aug 2/85, D14; W Post, Aug 2/85, A4)
In its recently published "1986 Long-Range Program Plan," NASA outlined plans for an evolutionary, permanently manned space station in low-earth orbit; operation by the year 2000 of man-tended platforms in equatorial, polar, and geosynchronous orbit; and routine manned missions on the moon and later Mars by the early 21st century, Defense Daily reported. The annually updated plan, summarizing the status of NASA planning as of the end of February 1985, also detailed some 120 ongoing and planned NASA space projects and missions for approximately the next ten years, with some out to the year 2000. The plan did not discuss budget figures, but for the near-term assumed budgets with the 1% growth promised annually by President Reagan (which had since disappeared in the deficit battle in Congress). The report did not project a need for more than four Space Shuttle orbiters but did not rule out such a need, while calling for development by 1990 of an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). Beyond 1990, objectives of the NASA spaceflight program included developing an orbital transfer vehicle complementary to the Space Shuttle for transportation of payloads, to, between, and beyond earth orbits; defining, designing, and providing a second-generation space transportation system including unmanned cargo vehicles and second-generation orbiters; developing and operating on a routine basis, beginning in the mid-1990s, geosynchronous orbit space platforms that were unmanned, permanent, and multifunctional; developing and putting into routine operation by the year 2000 geosynchronous orbit facilities that were permanent, multifunction, and able to be periodically manned; developing technology and techniques to construct, deploy, or assemble such facilities in space and to test and service them in orbit; and encouraging and supporting NASA and industry development of technology to improve concepts for space boosters that significantly reduced launch costs. The NASA report noted that "achievements in the early 21st century in science, exploration, earth applications, and commercial uses would depend on two trends: first, the increasing capabilities of space systems with regard to accessibility, payloads, stay times, and variety and sophistication of operations; and second, the increasing capability of instruments with regard to detection, resolution, pointing accuracy, and data collection and management made possible by improvement of their power supplies and cooling mechanisms." In the 21st century, the NASA report said, "automated or human-tended instruments located on the lunar surface will begin complementary observations" with instruments in low-earth orbit and geosynchronous orbit. For manned transportation from the space station, "a cyrogenic version of the orbital transfer vehicle evolutionary family, currently in early stages of preliminary design, is expected to provide by the year 2000 reusability for manned and sortie flights to at least geosynchronous orbit ... It also should be able to provide the basis for transportation for longer flights to establish a lunar base and for planetary missions such as a Mars sample return . . . Routine access to the lunar surface will make possible the first intensive, systematic study of another major celestial body," the report noted. "Extensive sample collection and scientific traverses conducted by humans and long-term instrument networks installed and managed by humans will help determine the details of the moon's structure, composition, and history. They also will make accessible the record of solar and cosmic ray particle fluxes preserved in the lunar soil . . . Similar scientific activities can be carried out on Mars, either by large automated spacecraft or by a manned mission . . ." (D/D, Oct 22/85, 268)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it awarded a three-year, $35,181,700 contract to the Space Transportation Systems Division of Rockwell International for Space Shuttle systems integration work at MSFC, Kennedy Space Center, and Vandenberg Air Force Base. The contract called for provision of management, personnel, equipment, materials, and resources from July 1, 1985 to June 30, 1988. (MSFC Release 85-34)
NASA announced that an eight-member review team at Goddard Space Flight Center concluded that the failure of the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) to deploy from its canister during the April 1985 Space Shuttle 51-B mission was due to the failure of two switches designed to activate bolt cutters on the canister. On June 7 the team would issue a final report along with recommendations for a solution to the problem. The Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) along with GLOMR would be the first satellites successfully deployed from canisters aboard the Space Shuttle. The door of the GLOMR canister opened, indicating normal battery operation, but the bolt cutters would not activate. After a second deployment attempt, NASA decided to return GLOMR to earth for evaluation. (NASA Release 8585)
NASA announced that it had completed with the Italian National Research Council's National Space Plan Office (PSN/CNR) selection of U.S. and Italian principal investigators for the cooperative tethered satellite system (TSS), which NASA had scheduled for a first flight in 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle. The system, using the Space Shuttle as a base of operation, would provide a unique reuseable facility remote from the orbiter for space science investigations in the upper atmosphere and in plasma-electrodynamic interactions. 101 The overall objectives of the TSS program were to demonstrate the successful operation of a tethered satellite, perform the initial electrodynamic science and plasma investigations, and develop a reusable facility capable of supporting a broad range of electrodynamic experiments in the ionosphere. On the first TSS mission, a NASA-supplied deployer mechanism would send the Italian-developed and -built satellite upward from the Space Shuttle orbiter to a distance of as much as 12 miles. The motion of the conducting tether across geomagnetic field lines would generate several thousand volts of energy to provide a broad range of electrical operating conditions. Researchers could also use the overall system to artifically generate and study field-aligned currents and associated plasma effects. On the second TSS mission, the satellite would be at the end of a nonconducting tether at 62 miles in the earth's atmosphere, an area previously explored only sporadically, mainly with sounding rocket payloads. The tethered satellite would permit investigation of the region on a global scale over several days. The TSS-3 mission would be a follow-up to the TSS-1 electrodynamics mission, with deployment from either the Space Shuttle or the proposed space station. A memorandum of understanding signed in 1984 by NASA and PSN/CNR established the TSS program. NASA's Marshall Space flight Center had responsibility for project implementation. NASA's office of space science and applications selected Peter Banks, Stanford University (Shuttle Tether Electrodynamic Tether System); Robert Estes, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation of Electromagnetic Emissions by the Tether); Gordon Gullahorn, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation and Measurement of Dynamic Noise in Tethered Observatory Satellite Systems); Konstantinos Papadopoulos, Science Applications, Inc. (Theory and Modeling of the Tether); and Nobie Stone, Marshall Space Flight Center (Research on Orbital Flight Plasma-Electrodynamics). PSN/CNR selected Silvio Bergemaschi, Instituto Meccanica, Padova University (A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of TSS Dynamics); Marino Dobrowolny, Instituto Fisica Spazio (Research on Electrodynamics Tether Effects); and Franco Mariana, University of Rome (Magnetic Field Experiment for the TSS Missions). (NASA Release 85-115)
NASA Administrator James Beggs confirmed this week that NASA cancelled a mission to send an unmanned spacecraft to comet Wild 2, citing budgetary constraints, the Washington Post reported. "However, the comet rendezvous proposal is a very promising candidate for a new start" in FY 88, Beggs said. NASA had expected the mission from FY 87 to 1992 to cost $400 million, which was within the budgetary limits NASA established in 1981 for new planetary missions. The NASA budget the Reagan Administration was drafting eliminated the mission. Delaying a decision on a comet rendezvous by even one year meant the spacecraft could not fly to Wild 2, the favorite candidate of space scientists because it was a bright, fresh comet. Discovered in 1978, the comet would make its third and fourth appearances in 1990 and 1996. In order to rendezvous with the comet when it passed near the earth, NASA in 1986 would have to begin work on the mission to have the spacecraft ready by 1991 for launch from the Space Shuttle. The announcement followed NASA decisions in 1980 and 1981 not to attempt a mission to fly by Halley's Comet. "Once again, the United States is passing up an opportunity to initiate the exploration of the comets, which contain the most unblemished record of the origins of our solar system," the Postquoted Dr. Laurel Wilkening, dean of the graduate school at the University of Arizona and vice chairman of President Reagan's Commission on Space. "The decision is a major setback for the U.S. planetary exploration program," he concluded. Space scientists were also upset because NASA's science advisory groups recommended that a comet rendezvous be the next new misson in planetary exploration [see Astronomy, Oct. 8], Scientists pushed for a mission to Wild 2 because the spacecraft could travel with the comet for 850 days, observing it before its long dust tail formed and obscured the comet's nucleus or damaged the spacecraft. It would have been NASA's most ambitious mission to explore the solar system. The next comet that NASA could approach would be Tempel 2, which would pass by earth in 1998. Such a mission, also costing $400 million, required a NASA decision by the middle of 1986. (W Post, Oct 17/85, A21)
Wesley Hymer, a biochemist at Pennsylvania State University and one of 20 researchers who analyzed tissue samples from 24 rats flown aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in April, said today the rats suffered significant reductions in the release of growth hormones, the NY Times reported. The findings could signal a problem for astronauts, in that weightlessness could affect the ability of special cells in their pituitary glands to produce growth hormones that govern development and maintenance of muscle and bone tissue. Richard Grindeland, a researcher at NASA's Ames Reseach Center, reported the previous month that the same rats lost bone and muscle strength. Grindeland said that they "were limp, like dishrags," and that dissection revealed "very drastic changes" in bone and muscle strength. However, researchers would need more test results before they could link growth hormone reduction to muscle and bone atrophy, Hymer said. But he added, "I think there's probably a good chance that there is a relationship." After a battery of tests that included implanting normal rats with growth hormone cells from the space rats, Hymer noted a reduction of up to 50% in release of the hormone. "Something is radically changed in those pituitary glands as a result of the space flight," Hymer said. And he added, "I think the surprising thing was these changes occurred so quickly. They happened in seven days in flight." However, Hymer said researchers did not know if astronauts suffered the same kind of changes. "I can tell you that there are data that show that the blood levels of growth hormones in the astronauts from Skylab were reduced by a significant amount," Hymer said. Hymer planned to send growth hormone cells, some of which would contain inhibitory and stimulatory chemicals, on a Space Shuttle flight the following September. He said he also would like to see similar experiments on primates. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C8)
NASA announced it signed with Rockwell Internatl. Corp. a memorandum of understanding (MOU) covering Space Shuttle flight assignments for Rockwell's materials-processing laboratory, which flew on STS 41-D and, using the float-zone technique, grew a single indium crystal with a lattice structure originating from a crystal seed. The agreement called for Rockwell to develop an industrial space-processing program under which research institutions and commercial firms would install and operate experiments in the modular laboratory. Rockwell designed its fluids-experiment apparatus (FEA), the first zero-gravity laboratory for basic and product research in low-earth orbit, to fit in the Space Shuttle's mid-deck stowage area where crew could operate and monitor it. Experiments could range from processing applications to liquid chemistry, fluid physics, thermodynamics, crystal growth, and biological-cell culturing. The laboratory, about the size of a 19-inch TV, could heat, cool, expose to vacuum, and manipulate experiment samples that might be gaseous, liquid, or solid, and could mix or stir, remove, and change samples during a mission. A motion-picture or video camera would record sample behavior and instrument data displays. (NASA Release 85-2)
Assured access to space is one of the Defense Department's "bottom lines" in fulfilling its mission, said Col. Victor Whitehead, deputy for the Air Force Space Command's (AFSC) Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV), "and we're quite proud of our record," AFSC's Newsreview reported. "We've gone three years in a row without a launch failure. In that time we have launched 30 totally successful ELVs. "We've learned over the years what makes a successful launch; we don't go until everything is ready." The Space Command was examining what might be beyond the Space Shuttle and ELVs for space transportation, considering both manned and unmanned systems as a follow-on. "But I don't think you'll see a future scenario in which we will be dependent on a single system," Whitehead said. "There will be alternative ways of flying payloads. Our job is to determine what they are." The colonel pointed out that the Space Shuttle was a very good system, but that the Air Force recognized that if it stopped using ELVs and was dependent on the Space Shuttle alone, "our access to space would be limited if the shuttle, for some reason, is not available. We therefore found we needed a complementary ELV." Whitehead noted the follow-on Titan 34D7 would fulfill this alternative need. "This new booster will give us into the mid-1990s a totally separate way to launch a payload," he said. "We determine it should have the same capabilities as the shuttle in terms of performance, payload, and volume. This way, a payload that could fly on the shuttle can also fly on the Titan 34D7." But it was a true complement to the Space shuttle in that it had "no common modes with shuttle. We have a completely separate set of contractors and separate launch facilities for the shuttle and Titan. If one system is down, the other continues on and flies those payloads," Whitehead concluded. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 26/85, 3) November 2Ch NASA announced it had scheduled an Air Force AF-16 satellite for launch December 12 aboard a Scout launch vehicle from Wallops Flight Center. NASA and the Department of Defense entered into agreements in June 1962 for joint use of the Scout launch vehicle. NASA and the Air Force Systems Command continued the agreement under a memorandum of understanding dated April 19, 1977, and amended May 17, 1983. Under the agreement, NASA maintained the Scout launch vehicle system, and DOD used the system for appropriate missions. The Air Force had requested NASA to provide Scout launch vehicles for the Instrumented Test Vehicle Program. The Air Force would pay in accordance with the existing interagency agreements the costs associated with this launch of a Scout vehicle. (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [prelaunch], Nov 20/85)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-C would carry the first of two experiments to investigate effects of different diseases on red blood cell aggregation and blood viscosity. The experiment was originally scheduled for mission 51-A in November 1984 but withdrawn due to orbiter weight and center-of-gravity considerations. The Department of Defense (DOD) had agreed to add the experiment to 51-C, a dedicated DOD mission. Called aggregation of red blood cells (ARC), the experiment would determine rate of formation (kinetics) and internal structure and organization (morphology) of red cells and the thickness (viscosity) of whole blood at high- and low-flow rates. Healthy donors and donors with various medical conditions such as heart disease, hypertension, diabetes, and cancer would provide blood samples. Researchers would compare results obtained in microgravity with results from a simultaneous and identical ground-based experiment to determine what effects gravity had on the kinetics and morphology of the blood and, therefore, whether researchers could use information obtained in microgravity to formulate new diagnostic tests or improve existing tests for the benefit of clinical research and medical practice. Flight hardware, weighing about 165 lb. and installed in three mid-deck lockers in the crew cabin, would consist of a container housing a blood pump/storage subsystem, parallel plate slit capillary viscometer, photo/opti-cal subsystem, thermal control system, pressure transducer, and an electronics equipment package to provide automated control and data acquisition. A crew member would activate the experiment; the electronics package would automatically operate all other procedures. Running time would be about eight hours. Dr. Leopold Dintenfass of the Kanematsu Institute (Department of Medical Research), Sydney, Australia, had developed the experiment and experiment hardware. Marshall Space Flight Center had responsibility for the flight experiment. After landing, data from the flight experiments would be delivered to Dintenfass for analysis and comparison with ground-based experiment data. (NASA Release 85-6; NASA MOR E-420-51-C-21 [prelaunch] Jan 23/85)
NASA was still evaluating data submitted by four companies in response to its request for responses on the possibility of opening a second source for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motors (SRM), Aerospace Daily reported. Those responding were Hercules, Aerojet Strategic Propulsion, United Technologies' Chemical Systems Division, and Atlantic Research Corp. NASA also had a proposal from Morton Thiokol, the current sole-source producer, and would not make a final decision until later in the month. In April Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, told the House appropriations HUD and independent agencies subcommittee that he expected to "have a review of the assessment sometime in the early part of May" and that in the interim NASA would proceed with the next buy of SRMs from Morton Thiokol. Agency officials expected it would take about four years to qualify a second source and "get them up to speed." NASA Administrator James Beggs would make the final decision on whether to open a second source for SRMs. A NASA official said he thought there was "a good possibility" that Beggs would have the needed information to make "a decision by the end of this month." {A/D, June 6/85, 1)
NASA deputy associate administrator for space science and applications Samuel Keller, speaking at a weekly staff meeting, said "We expect 1986 will be the most demanding year we've ever had,'' the Washington Post reported. In January Voyager would encounter the planet Uranus. In March the Space Shuttle would fly a mission dedicated to observing Halley's comet. In May NASA would launch Ulysses, which would fly to Jupiter and use the planet's gravity to "slingshot" itself around the sun, and Galileo, which would orbit Jupiter. In August the Space Shuttle would carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit. The three spacecraft cost $2 billion not including launch costs. Keller's toughest time would occur in May, the Post said, when Ulysses and Galileo at the same time would be in the cargo bays of two Space Shuttles on their launch pads. NASA would try May 15 to launch Ulysses and then Galileo four days later. If anything delayed the May 15 launch, NASA had 24 days to get the Space Shuttle into space, a launch window that allowed the two spacecraft to fly to Jupiter using the least amount of fuel. "I'll be glad when 1986 is over," Keller said. (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21) October24: NASA announced that an October 29 conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies would provide a forum for government executives to discuss the Reagan Administration's program to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. Following welcoming remarks by Dennis Whitfield, chief of staff to the Secretary of Labor, and David Braunstein, director of NASA's productivity programs, conference participants would be briefed on several perspectives on the President's productivity improvement program. Stephen Scholossberg, deputy under secretary for labor-management relations, Department of Labor, would then provide a labor-management view of quality and productivity. In the afternoon, NASA astronaut Bruce McCandless, first human to freely maneuver in space without a tether, would speak on the importance of quality and productivity in the space program. John Franke Jr., assistant secretary for administration, Department of Agriculture, would then give case examples of management's commitment to quality; and Commodore John Kirkpatrick, commander, Naval Aviation Logistics Center, would discuss quality improvement through total quality management. (NASA Release 85-146)
Arnold Engineering Development Center completed the fourth and final qualification test firing of the Payload Assist Module-D (PAM-D) II rocket motor, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The PAM-D II featured increased propellant capacity (7200 lb.) over its predecessor, the PAM-D (4400 lb.), and could boost both military and commercial communications satellites into geosynchronous orbit about 22,300 miles above earth. A Space Shuttle would deliver the motor and its payload into space at an altitude of 160 to 180 miles, where the PAM-D II satellite package, spinning at 30 to 85 rpm, would spring-eject from the orbiter's open bay doors. At a safe distance from the orbiter, the PAM-D II, which served as a perigee kick motor, would ignite and propel its payload more than 22,000 miles higher. PAM-D II would then separate from the payload, which was positioned by its own apogee motors activited by signals from earth. AEDC test-fired the motor in one of its high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated pressure altitude of approximately 100,000 feet while spinning it about its thrust axis at 70 rpm. Test objectives were to determine ballistic performance and to take plume (exhaust) radiation measurements, which were important in determining if the exhaust radiation would damage the motor case or satellite. With the fourth test completed, the Air Force considered the motor ready for production and flight. Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division was the rocket's manufacturer. NASA had tentatively scheduled PAM-D ll's first flight for November 1985 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger to place the RCA SATCOM satellite into orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, July 12/85, 7)
After 16 Space Shuttle flights, NASA believed it had solved the spacecraft's commode problems, as reports of the last two missions indicated the improved waste-disposal system performed perfectly, the Washington Post reported. A $12 million-GE design had transformed the commode from a multipronged, motor-drive blender, which had fogged the Space Shuttle's air with particles of noxious dust or frozen liquid, to a device using a blast of air from a fan to carry waste into the toilet bowl; by pressing a lever, the user closed the commode top and opened a valve in the side of the Space Shuttle, where the waste was frozen and dried by the cold and vacuum of space. A tube collected urine and directed it to a holding tank for later overboard disposal. (W Post, Feb 11/85, A5)
NASA today invited Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who chaired the U.S. House science and technology subcommittee on space science and applications, to be a congressional passenger on an unspecified flight of the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Nelson, who represented the district in which the Kennedy Space Center launch site was located, later held a news conference at his office in Melbourne, Florida, to announce acceptance of the invitation. The first congressional Space Shuttle passenger on an April 1985 flight was Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the committee that oversaw NASA spending. Although Nelson, unlike Garn, had no flying experience, he was an outspoken supporter of the space program. (W Post, Sept 6/85, A8)
The Teal Ruby experimental space-based aircraft detection system, which had encountered technical problems, would fly on the Space Shuttle around March 1986, Defense Daily reported. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Director Dr. Robert Cooper said DARPA had run into expected problems with the Teal Ruby flight sensor caused by heat leaks in the cryogenic system. The leaks posed two problems: they prevented the temperature of the instrument from getting low enough to provide necessary high sensitivity and threatened the one-year nominal life of the system. Cooper said the DARPA had found all leaks except one. Teal Ruby was the first large-scale demonstration of a two-dimensional, staring mosaic infrared detector array and lightweight telescope optics. Its goal was to establish the technology base for future space-based infrared surveillance systems capable of detecting aircraft and other low threshold targets against the earth's clutter background; it would develop a comprehensive radiometric background database and space qualify the advanced technologies embodied in its design. Teal Ruby would be the primary payload of the Air Force space test program satellite P80-1. (D/D, Mar 29/85, 167)
NASA had scratched four squirrel monkeys scheduled to be carried into orbit by the Space Shuttle Challenger in April because NASA found they had a form of herpes that could be transmitted to the astronaut crew, the Washington Post reported. The monkeys' herpes, called Herpes Samirii, was not the virus transmitted sexually by humans, but was unique to New World primates whose natural habitat was the rain forests of South America. Researchers suspected the virus of causing cancer in lower mammals such as rats and therefore classified it as potentially cancerous in humans. NASA replaced the monkeys with those from colonies bred to be virus-free. Four monkeys recruited from the National Institutes of Health and one from Harvard University had been in training since January for their flight on the second mission of Spacelab, scheduled for April 29 at the earliest. Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian, NASA's chief of space medicine, said they were looking for a sixth monkey even though only three might be flown. "One of the monkeys in training is too small and will have to be replaced, and it will be nice to have a backup when the time comes for them to go into orbit," he said. In space the monkeys' cages would have their own oxygen and food and water supplies in the Spacelab portion of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, which was shut off from Challenger's cabin by an airlock. The upcoming flight was a shakedown cruise for the monkeys to ascertain that their cages functioned properly and to make sure the monkeys wouldn't get frightened or injured during launch or return to earth. (Washington Post, Mar 27/85, A20)
The White House announced that it had sent Congress a new Space Shuttle pricing policy that entailed, starting October 1, 1988, auctioning the Space Shuttle's cargo bay to commercial and foreign customers at a minimum rate of $74 million for a full bay, the Washington Times reported. This meant that owners of three satellites could share a mission and pay NASA a little less than $25 million apiece or about $1 million more than they presently paid for Space Shuttle launches. However, if demand for shuttle space exceeded its availability, the auction system would drive prices upward. Europe's Arianespace SA charged $25 million for a launch. President Reagan, who earlier had suggested that space should be open to private enterprise and that the Space Shuttle might be turned over to industry, directed NASA under the new policy to establish auction procedures "to ensure maximum return to the government and equitable treatment for all potential launch customers." The President also told NASA to review annually Space Shuttle costs and the effectiveness of its pricing policies and report its findings and recommendations to the president's national security adviser and the director of the Office of Management and Budget. The new policy represented a victory for NASA and defeat for the Transportation Department and Secretary Elizabeth Hanford Dole, who had argued for a full-bay price no lower than $129 million in order to encourage private industry to get into the launch vehicle business on its own, the Washington Post reported. Two companies wanted to compete with NASA and Arianespace. General Dynamics signed a letter of intent with NASA to use the Atlas-Centaur rocket, and Transpace Carriers Inc. signed a similar letter to use the Delta rocket to launch satellites. Both companies said they could not compete with a Space Shuttle price of less than $40 million to send up a single satellite. The Transportation Department argued for a higher Space Shuttle launch price to improve private industry's bargaining power. But NASA said a higher charge would send customers to Arianespace, which had booked more than a third of the world's future commercial satellite launch traffic. (W Times, Aug 2/85, 10C; W Post, Aug 7/85, A3)
Neil Hutchinson, Johnson Space Center's (JSC) space station program manager, at a U.S. House Science and Technology space science and application subcommittee authorization hearing, said that ferrying and assembling a space station would require seven Space Shuttle flights over a period of nine months to a year, Aerospace Daily reported, and assembly would rely on automation and robotics, not Space Shuttle crew extravehicular activities. Assembly would begin with a beam of solar panels and a 90-ft. truss structure. Space Shuttle orbiters would dock with the space station structure at different points to assemble the facility, using the orbiter's remote manipulator system (RMS) arm and a remote arm operated on the space station. The 3rd and 4th Space Shuttle flights would take up habitation modules; the 5th flight would ferry two more sets of solar panels and a 3rd module, possibly for logistics. Hutchinson said current planning called for permanent manning of the station after the 5th flight; the 6th flight would carry the 1 st of two planned laboratories with the baseline configuration producing 75 kw of power, which would be completed after the 7th flight. Phil Culbertson, NASA associate administrator, said a new program plan envisioned a 21-month definition and preliminary design effort beginning in April and extending through January 1987, which reflected the lower than anticipated funding level of $230 million for space station activities in the NASA's FY 86 budget. Of the $230 million, $15 million was for utilization, $82 million for advanced development, $52 million for program manage-ment/integration, $7 million for operational readiness, and $74 million for system-definition contracts. Defense Daily noted that Culbertson said NASA would have to "stretch" to meet the $8-billion price of the space station and that it would ask its contractors to "stretch with us." (A/D, Feb 20/85, 1; D/D, Feb 20/85, 227)
In his "State of the Union" address, President Reagan commented on funding requested for activities in space, the Washington Post reported. "We have seen the success of the Space Shuttle. Now we are going to develop a permanently manned space station and new opportunities for free enterprise because, in the next decade, Americans and our friends around the world will be living and working together in space. "In the zero-gravity of space, we could manufacture in 30 days lifesaving medicines it would take 30 years to make on earth. We can make crystals of exceptional purity to produce supercomputers, creating jobs, technologies, and medical breakthroughs beyond anything we ever dreamed possible." (W POst, Feb 7/85, A16)
NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft's (SCA) functional check flight was successfully flown today following engine repairs made in accordance with specifications. The SCA would fly the Atlantis orbiter to Kennedy Space Center on April 12, with one refueling stop. (NASA Daily Activities Report, Apr 11/85)
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) issued a request for proposals to LTV, Martin Marietta, and TRW to compete for a contract to design, develop, and manufacture an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). The three companies worked previously on OMV definition studies and had until December 20, 1985, to respond. NASA expected to award the contract in June 1986 and planned the first OMV flight for early 1991. The contract would include provisions for testing and hardware flight testing before the OMV's actual operational missions. The company selected would build one vehicle, with NASA having an option to request construction of a second. Often called a "space tug," the OMV would transfer satellites and other objects between earth orbits and would extend the reach of the Space Shuttle by about 1000 miles. It would have the ability to retrieve satellites from high orbits, bring them back to the Space Shuttle for maintenance and repair, then return them to their operational orbits. The OMV would also be able to reboost satellites as their orbits gradually decayed. The OMV would be an unmanned spacecraft, 15 feet in diameter and approximately 4 feet long. Its life would be about 10 years with refurbishment and on-orbit maintenance included in the design. NASA expected initially to deploy the OMV from the Space Shuttle for short duration missions; later the OMV would remain in orbit for extended periods for use in both Space Shuttle-based and space station-based modes of operation. (NASA Release 85-151) Civilian Programs
The Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger made a three-mile, six hour journey from the launch pad back to a hanger as a result of mission cancellation due to problems with the intended payload, a tracking and data relay satellite, the NY Times reported. NASA would replace Challenger on the launch pad with the orbiter Discovery on about March 15 and would combine elements of the scrubbed mission with some from Discovery's flight originally scheduled for March 22. Officials had selected Discovery for the mission because they decided it could be modified more easily and quickly than Challenger. (NYT, Mar 6/85, B10)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) service and contractor personnel completed within 90 days installation of a launch environment instrumentation system (LEIS) for Space Shuttle launches at Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Spaceport News reported. The LEIS, a 400-channel instrumented system, was designed to acquire data on the environment in the vicinity of the launch pad and support facilities during launch. The system's transducers measured in the launch pad vicinity pressure, acoustics, strain, vibration, and temperature for use in determining baseline data, sources of problems, and possible solutions. Such equipment at KSC, for example, pinpointed engine gas leaks during the first mission of the orbiter Challenger and provided design measurements of the overpressure problem that occurred during the first Space Shuttle launch. The KSC engineering development directorate, with the assistance of Planning Research Corp., completed design, management, and integration of the system, which Fairchild Weston Systems Inc. built under the direction of KSC for the Air Force. Fairchild began work on the system in March 1984 under a $4,549,256 contract. (Spaceport News, Aug 2/85, 7)
NASA had completed a series of tests to validate parachute systems to be used with advanced lightweight, solid-fuel rocket boosters that would replace the boosters then in use on the Space Shuttle, Ames Research Center (ARC) announced. The new boosters would be first used during a Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB no earlier than January 29, 1986. For the tests, researchers used a vehicle a third the size of a solid-fuel booster with one main parachute and, to simulate a splashdown, drop tested it from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility's (DFRC) B-52 over the China Lake Naval Weapons Center at Ridgecrest. Most drops were made at an altitude of about 40,000 feet with an airspeed of about 230 knots. ARC and DFRC conducted the drop tests in cooperation with Marshall Space Flight Center, which was responsible for the parachute system. (ARC Release 85-1)
Hermann Oberth, considered by some to be the father of spaceflight, watched on TV at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) the landing of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A, the Washington Post reported. Oberth is the last scientist survivor of the group that transformed theory into modern space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the Russian who worked out some of the early theory of rocket propulsion, died in 1935; Robert Goddard, the American who experimented with early rockets and for whom GSFC is named, died in 1945. But Oberth, who made the most complete analyses of the problems and prospects of human space travel, lived to "see it happen." In 1932 Oberth wrote a paper in which he not only showed mathematically that it was possible to escape earth's gravity, but also anticipated a host of other aspects of spaceflight not seriously approached for the next 30 years. Oberth described in the book a spaceship's propulsion system and architectural form down to the rocket engine's nozzles; designed spacesuits and methods of eating in weightlessness; conceived of astronauts performing spacewalks; proposed space stations in earth orbit as transfer points for interplanetary travel; considered the problems of weightlessness and motion sickness (which astronauts still faced); proposed that the stations spin slowly to create an artificial gravity; and suggested the use of flying shuttles that could take off like a rocket, visit the space station, and land back on earth like airplanes. Oberth also worked out the physics of joining two spacecraft in orbit (referred to now as rendezvous and docking), anticipated that photos of earth from space would be useful for studying the ground and forecasting weather, foresaw that telescopes in earth orbit could gather far better astronomical data than those that looked through the atmosphere, and claimed that practical uses for space travel would someday make it a profitable enterprise. Working unaware of Tsiolkovsky or Goddard, Oberth wrote the paper as an amateur physicist and mathematician while serving as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. Oberth's commanding officer sent the paper to the War Ministry, where the generals rejected it as obvious fantasy. After the war, when Oberth was at the University of Heidelberg, he submitted as his dissertation a longer version of the paper, complete with elaborate mathematical formulas proving his ideas. Again it was rejected. Eventually Oberth paid to have the paper published. "The Rocket Into Interplanetary Space" gained a wide following and attracted Wernher von Braun, who worked as Oberth's assistant and then left to join the German military rocket research program at Peenemunde. Von Braun brought Oberth to work on the V2 rocket, the first major device based on Oberth's ideas. During three years in the 1950s, Oberth joined von Braun in the U.S. where he was developing the Redstone rocket. In 1958 Oberth retired to West Germany. Oberth had concluded in his book that "the foregoing demonstrates that it is possible, with present day science and technology, to construct vehicles which could attain cosmic speed and that it is probably possible for men to ride in these vehicles," but that it would take more than a decade to realize these possibilities. At GSFC today, Oberth said it had "proven to be much more complicated that I thought." (W Post, Nov 7/85, C1)
A sophomore at Purdue University and a senior at San Francisco's Lowell High School designed experiments to be carried on two 1986 Space Shuttle Flights, the Washington Post reported. Kentucky Fried Chicken would sponsor an experiment in which eggs would fly in orbit to determine whether chicken embryos could survive the rigors of weightlessness. The Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory at the University of California would sponsor an experiment to measure the effects of weightlessness on cell division in yeast. Greg Delory, 16, said he got the idea for flying baker's yeast from the first Spacelab mission where bread mold was grown in orbit. "The mold was supposed to produce spores every 22 hours, but in space it lost its circadian rhythm and produced spores all the time," he said. Delory won a competition to design a Space Shuttle experiment while attending the U.S. Space Camp under the auspices of Marshall Space Flight Center. John Vellinger, 20, who won a competition to design a NASA experiment, said, "We hope this will give us some data about the feasibility of raising chickens as a food source in space." (WPost, Aug 15/85, A19)
At the halfway point in Space Shuttle mission 61-A in which the orbiter Challenger carried Spacelab D-1 [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Missions, Oct. 30], a slow air leak in one of Spacelab's vacuum chambers developed, but flight controllers in Houston did not consider it serious, the NY Times reported. Terry White, a public affairs officer at Mission Control, said the oxygen leak was so slight that, "provided there are no additional fluctuations, we have enough gases to go to the end of the mission." After encountering some Spacelab equipment malfunctions during the mission's first two days, Challenger's crew indicated they had achieved encouraging success with nearly all of the Spacelab's 76 scientific experiments on the effects of microgravity on metals, biological growth, and human physiology. Mission planners in Houston and scientists at the West German science control center near Munich were studying the possibility of extending the flight by a day to permit more time for experimentation. The crew reported preliminary results showing that, as expected, seedlings growing in the virtual absence of gravity developed roots that curved in odd directions. "The roots, lacking gravity, do not seem to know which way to go," a crew member commented. In another experiment, the Bacillus subtilis bacteria showed a higher rate of growth than anticipated. Mission control scientists said this "may be taken as an indication that bacteria do react differently in space." Most of the studies in processing metal alloys and growing crystals for electronics were still underway, so results were unavailable until completion of the mission. Earlier in the mission, crew member Dr. Ernst Messerschmid, a West German physicist, reported being "disoriented" when he awoke, a symptom of the space motion sickness that had plagued nearly half of all Space Shuttle astronauts. (NYT, Nov 3/85, A27)
The Syncom II communications satellite lost one of its 13 channels, described as an important wide-band channel, and efforts were underway to reactivate it, Defense Daily reported. The U.S. Navy leased the satellite from Hughes Communications Inc., which was under contract to provide four such Leasats to the Navy. NASA in September 1984 launched Syncom I and II from the Space Shuttle and launched in April from the Space Shuttle Syncom III, which failed to fire in orbit. The Space Shuttle crew in July repaired Syncom III, with a reboost attempt scheduled for October. NASA launched in July from the Space Shuttle Syncom IV, but its communications failed in orbit. (D/D, Oct 3/85, 174)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that M. Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, and Ing. Heise, executive vice president and president of the Space Systems Group of Messerschmidt/Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno, signed a contract for the development of the European Retrievable Carrier, EURECA, a payload carrier intended for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle. MBB/Erno would serve as EURECA prime contractor with support from some 24 European industrial firms. The approximately $95 million contract called for delivery of the EURECA flight unit to NASA by the end of 1987 for launch from the Space Shuttle in March 1988 and recovery, by the Space Shuttle, six months later. The first EURECA payload, developed by European national institutes and space agencies, would consist primarily of experiments in the microgravity sciences (life and material sciences) and a limited number of experiments in space science and technology. Work on the payload would proceed in parallel with the development of the carrier, and plans called for delivery of all payload elements to MBB/Erno by spring 1987 for integration onboard EURECA before shipment to the U.S. The EURECA payload carrier incorporated the more attractive features of Spacelab and in addition provided for relatively long duration flights (up to eight months), higher power and mass capability for the payload, and lower costs compared with Spacelab and many conventional satellites because the system occupied only about 2.5 m of the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay. ESA also envisioned EURECA's eventual use in association with the proposed U.S. space station, with the EURECA operating either in a free-flying mode (co-orbiting with the space station or in polar orbit) or as a man-tended, semipermanent payload carrier with modified docking facilities. (ESA release July 1/85)
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) would launch in 1986 Ulysses, previously known as the International Solar Polar Mission, to explore behind and around the sun beginning in July 1987, the JPL Universe reported. JPL managed the U.S. mission phases and was responsible for part of the magnetometer experiment. The Space Shuttle would take Ulysses into orbit; a modified Centaur upper stage rocket would send it on a trajectory toward Jupiter, where it would gain energy from Jupiter's gravity field to pull it out of the ecliptic plane (the plane of the earth's orbit) and back over the sun. Researchers would incorporate into the spacecraft bus instruments shipped to the European Space Research Technology Center near Amsterdam, Holland; after extensive testing scheduled for completion in August, an international board would review the spacecraft's readiness. After a mission operations review, ESA would ship Ulysses to KSC for flight tests and preparations. At a June meeting in Switzerland, a team of scientists would decide whether Ulysses would approach the sun over its north or south pole, yPL Universe, Jan 25/85, 1)
A dispute over application of U.S. laws to foreign companies apparently killed a joint U.S.-W. German project to commercialize remote sensing-equipment data and could affect negotiations over European participation in the planned U.S. space station, Science magazine reported. The joint project, known as SPARX, was to finance regular flights on the Space Shuttle of the modular optoelectronic multispectral scanner, an instrument developed by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB) under contract with the German Aerospace Research Establishment. NASA said proposals received from SPARX were unacceptable, because data would be available solely on a proprietary basis to SPARX's commercial customers, conflicting with NASA's "open skies" policy mandating nondiscriminatory access to all data obtained from U.S.-launched civilian missions. NASA and MBB were continuing discussions on the possibility of a separate venture using the German equipment that would respect licensing conditions applied to U.S. companies under the Land Remote Sensing Commercialization Act. Some members of the European space science community—particularly those with reservations about tying Europe's fortunes too closely to those of NASA's proposed space station—were using the apparent conflict as evidence of their concerns, the Science article said. The scientists noted the extent to which the regulations and other provisions contained in the legislation's licensing requirements—such as those requiring licensees to deposit any data obtained in a single central archive—would apply to foreign companies becoming NASA's commercial customers. The dilemma hinged on the conflict between companies based outside the U.S. resenting being subject to legislation over which they had no formal control and Congress and U.S.-based companies that would complain if they saw foreign companies getting an advantage by not having to meet domestic-licensing requirements. Udo Pollvogt of MBB's Washington office said the issues raised by SPARX "definitely need to be resolved over the next two years" as Europeans considered whether participation in the space station would make them unacceptably liable to U.S.-domestic laws. (Science, Feb 8/85, 617)
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)
NASA announced a new Space Shuttle manifest for 41 Space Shuttle missions through December 14, 1987 that included nine flights for the remainder of 1985, 15 flights in 1986, and 17 flights in 1987. Highlights for 1985 included the first Atlantis flight in late September for a Department of Defense mission; a Spacelab 3 flight in late April, Spacelab 2 with extensive European Space Agency participation in July, and another Spacelab flight in October dedicated to W. German scientific investigations. Also during 1985 NASA would deploy communications satellites for Hughes, AT&T, RCA, Mexico, Australia, Canada, and the Arabsat consortium. In 1986 the first launch of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base would occur. The first liquid-hydrogen-powered Shuttle Centaur upper stage would be used to deploy Ulysses (formerly the International Solar Polar Mission), and the Galileo mission to Jupiter (also using the Shuttle Centaur) and the Hubble Space Telescope flight would be launched. NASA said launch dates of missions to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and to retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF-1) were under review. Also, NASA assigned Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce McCandless as mission specialists for the Hubble Space Telescope flight on mission 61-J in August 1986. (NASA Release 8550)
Planetary scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory outlined plans for two future $400 million missions, one of which NASA would select for funding, the Washington Post reported. One mission entailed a spacecraft that in September 1991 would fly by the asteroid Hedwig and rendezvous in 1995 with Comet Wild 2. The other called for a spacecraft in 1995 to pass by the asteroid Freia and rendezvous in 1996 with Comet Tempel 2. JPL scientists preferred the Hedwig and Wild 2 mission, in part because Wild 2 was a newer and brighter comet than Tempel 2. Plans for that mission called for a March 1991 spacecraft launch from the Space Shuttle with an ultimate encounter January 8, 1995, with Wild 2, when the comet was at the far end of its orbit 465 million miles from earth. Scientists would program the spacecraft to match the comet's speed as it turned in toward the sun, which would then draw the comet and spacecraft toward it at the same speed for the next 850 days while the spacecraft's instruments measured the comet. (W Post, Sept 31/85, A23)
A computer failure 25 minutes before launch today forced postponement for at least two days of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the NY Times reported. Launch crews planned to replace the malfunctioning computer, inspect the Space Shuttle's fuel plumbing, and try to launch Discovery on August 27 at 7:02 a.m. EDT. At 7:15 the Space Shuttle crew and Johnson Space Center (JSC) flight controllers almost simultaneously noted warnings that a backup guidance and control computer was registering errors. This came as the backup computer was undergoing a final check to see that its programs agreed with those driving the Space Shuttle's four main computers. NASA halted the launch countdown while engineers at Kennedy Space Center and JSC examined data retrieved from the malfunctioning computer and compared it with data from one of the regular computers. They concluded that the trouble was an apparent failure in the computer, which could not be remedied in time for a launch. That the computer worked perfectly in tests before August 25 and worked in tests after the failure, although it showed signs of trouble, puzzled engineers. NASA was about 99% sure that it was a hardware failure, although only an inspection of the computer by JSC engineers would determine the exact nature of the problem. It was the second postponement in two days for the Discovery and its crew of five, and NASA officials were growing concerned that Discovery might not reach orbit in time for repair of the crippled Leasat 3 satellite. Any delay beyond August 29 would cancel the repair effort, and the crew would have to confine themselves to deploying three communications satellites in the first three days of the mission. The flight would thus fall short of the eight days then planned. Arnold Aldrich, manager of the Space Shuttle program at JSC, said NASA would not reschedule beyond August 29 any attempt to repair Leasat 3, as that would have too disruptive an effect on other flights scheduled in the next few months. If it had been only a matter of replacing the computer, the delay would have been a day. However, the need to inspect insulated ducts that carried liquid-hydrogen to the Space Shuttle's three main engines necessitated the twonday postponement. After NASA had pumped the super-cooled fuel into the Space Shuttle system two consecutive mornings and drained it again, there was a chance that the contractions and expansions caused by the alternating freezing cold and Florida heat might have damaged the engines, which in extreme cases could cause them to explode in flight. (NYT, Aug 26/85, All) November27: NASA announced that it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base until mid-July 1986. NASA originally scheduled this mission, STS 62-A, for no earlier than March 20, 1986. Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward "Pete" Aldridge, Jr. said, "There are no major problems at the Vandenberg site. We have repeatedly stated that safety and quality would not be sacrificed for schedule. Our decision reflects our continued commitment to this philosophy." Aldridge added that, "We have had to make some facility modifications because of what we learned from routine Air Force/NASA operational readiness inspections. We have also added time to the schedule to allow for better preparation and evaluation of the operational systems tests and we have extended the training period for the launch crew of this historic, first West Coast shuttle mission. "This revised schedule will permit us to complete ongoing modifications, inspections, rework and operational testing with higher confidence than could be permitted with the March 20 schedule," he added. "It also minimizes the potential for conflict with the NASA Ulysses and Galileo planetary missions scheduled in May." NASA Office of Space Flight associate administrator Jesse Moore concurred, adding, "NASA agrees completely with the Air Force regarding Vandenberg. Our first commitment is to the safety of the crew and the reliability of the vehicle and launch systems. The development of the Vandenberg site is proceeding very smoothly. This readjustment gives us all more time to carry out our commitment to safety and reliability." The decision to delay meant NASA would deliver the orbiter Discovery to Vandenberg around March 1, 1986, and NASA and Air Force officials would continue to evaluate the STS 62-A schedule in order to establish after January 1 a firm launch date. (NASA Release 85-158)
In assessing the status of the Syncom IV-3 (Leasat 3) satellite that was drifting in low-earth orbit after its apogee kick motor failed to push it into proper orbit [see Apr. 18], aerospace engineers said astronauts might be able to salvage the satellite, the Washington Times reported. Payload specialists originally believed it would be too dangerous to return the satellite to earth on the Space Shuttle because of the nearly six tons of highly volatile rocket fuel it carried. Jerome Hammack, a spacecraft safety operations expert, said deactivating the satellite's electronic systems would significantly reduce the chance of stray sparks igniting the fuel, most of which would turn to gas upon descent. To ensure that there was no power going to any of the electrical circuits, a spacewalking astronaut would have to cut power circuits running to the satellite's batteries and solar power cells. However, NASA would mount a rescue attempt only if Hughes Communications Inc., Leasat 3's manufacturer, and Hughes' insurance underwriters agreed to a salvage contract. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
The U.S. House Appropriations Committee deleted $7.2 million in FY 86 funds requested by the Air Force to initiate a $350 million program to refurbish Titan II ICBMs for use as space boosters, Defense Daily reported. The committee warned that the Titan II launchers could "only have a further impact on the Shuttle and result in a less efficient use of Shuttle facilities" and pointed out that the Air Force had "not been able to demonstrate why the expensive Titan II refurbishment program is critical to the defense of the nation." The Committee also noted that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration dropped its plans to launch some payloads on the Titan II in favor of launching them on the Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Revenues Feb. 25 and Oct. 18], "bringing into question whether Titan II is cost-effective on a per launch basis," the committee said. It also cited classified reasons for its action. (D/D, Oct 29/85, 305)
NASA announced today that Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), chairman of the subcommittee on space science and applications, would fly as a payload specialist aboard Space Shuttle mission 61-C scheduled for launch no earlier than December 20. NASA said it was willing to schedule flights for the chairmen of its four Congressional appropriations and authorization subcommittees in connection with their NASA oversight duties. Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the subcommittee on HUD/independent agencies, was a payload specialist the previous April aboard mission 51-D. NASA assigned Nelson to mission 61-C after reassigning Gregory Jarvis, a Hughes Communications, Inc. payload specialist, from that flight to mission 51—L which was scheduled for launch January 22, 1986. Hughes's decision not to launch its Syncom IV-5 spacecraft on the December mission eliminated the need for a company payload specialist on that flight. Jarvis would conduct experiments in fluid dynamics on the January flight. (NASA Release 85-141)
NASA announced it selected April 29, 12:00 noon EDT, for launch of STS mission 51-B, the Spacelab 3 flight, and Dryden Flight Research Center/Edwards Air Force Base, California, as the primary end-of-mission landing site, with KSC as an alternate. Landing was set for May 6 at 12:03 EDT. NASA selected Dryden over KSC for the landing as a result of problems encountered during the STS 51-D mission when the orbiter Discovery's right-hand braking systems locked causing a tire to blow out. Landing conditions had included a crosswind—the first experience at KSC of such conditions—and a higher-than-usual sink rate. A landing at Dryden would provide a greater safety margin for Challenger's tires and brake systems due to the availability of the unrestricted lakebed and the smoother surface. The decision to land at Dryden for the next flight only would enable engineers to determine what corrective actions were appropriate before returning to the KSC runway for nominal end-of-mission landings. (NASA Release 85-63) During April: NASA announced it had scheduled for launch on April 12 from KSC the remanifested Space Shuttle 51-D mission with landing on KSC's Space Shuttle runway after the five-day 78-orbit flight. NASA originally scheduled mission 51-D for March 1 for deployment of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility, but cancelled the 51—E Challenger mission and revised the 51-D cargo to include LEASAT-3 and the Canadian communications satellite Anik C-1. Other payloads were the continuous-flow electrophoresis system and the American echocardiograph experiment [see Apr. 12], two middeck student experiments, and two Getaway Special canisters. (NASA Release 85—47)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center awarded a $32,346,000 follow-on contract to General Dynamics's Convair Division (GD/C) to erect, test, and launch (with accompanying launch facility modifications) Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles and to perform support testing and launching of Centaur upper stages from the Space Shuttle in 1986; GD/C would work at Kennedy Space Center. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, beginning January 1, 1985 and running through December 1986, was a continuation of work GD/C had performed under earlier contracts. The Centaur should increase the Space Shuttle's capability to carry heavier payloads from low-earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release 85-5) During March: In a report of 1984 accomplishments, Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) commander, USAF Col. Philip Conran, said that AEDC conducted more than 200 separate test and evaluation programs during FY 84 and demonstrated the importance of the center's full-spectrum test support to development and operational aerospace programs. In that year, propulsion systems testing dominated test and evaluation efforts, turbine engine testing being the busiest in the history of the center. Much of that had resulted from the new start for the F109 next-generation trainer engine and the fly-off competition between the F110 and F100 engines for the USAF's F-16 Fighting Falcon and the subsequent product verification of the F110. In rocket motor testing, AEDC conducted three altitude test firings of the inertial upper stage (IUS) in an effort that helped Space Division and Boeing Aerospace Co. successfully understand and fix the April 1983 upper stage inflight anomaly. After failure of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 commercial satellites to reach desired orbits, AEDC supported the conversion of defense and commercial satellite perigee and apogee booster motors from carbon-carbon to carbon phenolic rocket nozzles. AEDC considered completion of construction of the aeropropulsion systems test facility (ASTF) its outstanding achievement for 1984 and was proceeding with activation and acceptance testing to prepare the ASTF for operations in September 1985. In the flight dynamics area, AEDC completed in a specially modified vacuum chamber the initial ground testing phase of the antisatellite pathfinder sensor that required the use of a spin mount rig, which had been three years in development, and an optical alignment system that provided accuracies on an order of magnitude better than any other available system. AEDC also developed and successfully demonstrated a new test technique of spinning a nose cone to evaluate reentry erosion. One of the most productive programs at AEDC in 1984 was for the C-17 advanced cargo aircraft. AEDC provided more data in less time than usual and saved the sponsors about $1 million in wind-tunnel test time. The in-house technology program, which supported testing and evaluation missions, delivered needed test techniques for testing of advanced reentry-vehicle materials, engine icing, and rocket motors. For example, AEDC applied a flash X-ray technique and worked with the University of Tennessee Space Institute to enhance the image of three test firings of the inertial upper stage, resulting in successful completion of the anomaly investigation. (AEDC Test Highlights, Spring/85, 2)
The turnaround clock began running when the Space Shuttle Discovery left the KSC launch pad at 8:59 a.m. April 12 and stopped 70 hours and 35 minutes later when NASA declared the orbiter Challenger, configured for launch of the Spacelab 3 mission, “hard down" on the pad, the KSC Spaceport News reported. The tightly coordinated effort began approximately one minute after Discovery's launch. After launch control center's firing room 1 issued the command for automatic washdown of the pad structures, an operational TV scan, ordnance system resistance checks, and statusing fire and leak detectors commenced operation. About 15 minutes after launch, when it was certain the Space Shuttle would not return to the launch site, a convoy of waiting vehicles moved into action. Workers dumped small cryogenic (hydrogen and oxygen) tanks at the 155-foot level of the fixed service structures (FSS). Two Lockheed and EG&G teams inspected in minutes the hydrogen and oxygen farms, high-pressure hydrogen gas battery, and the gaseous battery beneath the pad, clearing the way for another team to safe and secure the oxygen and hydrogen farms. Following dumping of the cryogenic tanks, two other teams began a level-bylevel quick-look inspection of the FSS and rotating service structure, setting the stage for safety and security procedures, including configuring purge line valves and doors, making environmental checks in the mobile launch platform (MLP), and checking operation of elevators. At the same time, others removed ordnance from the external tank vent arm and tail service masts, secured guard rails where necessary, and cleared the pad for entry of general repair crews. Some damage was anticipated during a launch. In this case, pins had melted off some of the solid-fuel rocket booster holddown posts on the MLP; burnaway (or sacrificial) plates needed repairing; FSS light bulbs had blown at various levels; and some SRB waste residue was present. A 40-foot piece of waterpipe at the 95-foot level of the FSS, part of the Firex system, was bent at a 90° angle. The KSC integrated control schedule called for removal of the MLP by 7 p.m. the day after launch and for it to be at the doors of the vehicle assembly building (VAB) by midnight. To accomplish this, workers had to mount service platforms, disconnect waterpipes, and move flame deflectors. They also serviced the hydrogen burn pond and its several igniters. On schedule, the crawler/transporter crew moved into position to begin the return of the MLP to the VAB. At 11:30 p.m. April 13, crawler 1 and MLP 1 reached the entrance of high bay 3; at 12:17 the next day the crew started the journey to the pad with Challenger. The Space Shuttle was "hard down" on the pad at 6:25 a.m. April 15. (KSC Spaceport News, Apr 26/85, 4)
The National Space Institute (NSI) announced establishment of "Space Outreach '85," a program to acquire original ideas from the public as to potential uses of space for social and economic benefit. The program was intended to broaden what appeared to be a too narrow debate on a new and clarified set of long-term civilian space goals. Rules for the program were that ideas could not exceed 750 words; submissions could not include projects already under review by the federal government; and proposals must be creative, innovative, and feasible. The NSI would present all ideas received during the program to Congress, NASA, and, in particular, the newly created National Commission on Space [see Mar. 30]. Judges for the program, which had the support of the Sophron Foundation of McLean, Virginia, were Walter Boyne, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum; Evert Clark, technology editor, Business Week, former astronaut Michael Collins; and Robert Cowen, science writer for the The Christian Science Monitor. The NSI would present awards for the outstanding entries, with the writer of the most innovative suggestion receiving an all-expense-paid trip to see a Space Shuttle launch. (NSI Release, May 13/85) August 9; World amateur radio operators participated in the shuttle amateur radio experiment (SAREX) on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, the Lewis News reported. SAREX allowed people connected with amateur radio to talk with Challenger's crew and watch TV transmissions from the flight deck. The SAREX test, conducted during off-duty hours in cooperation with onboard mission specialists/ham operators Tony England and John-David Bartoe and mission commander Gordon Fullerton, allowed world amateur radio operators access to the Space Shuttle's voice and video transmissions to earth on amateur 2-m band. A video buffer circuit designed, built, and tested by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ham operators was key to SAREX's success. The SAREX system worked in two primary modes, one mode at a time. The first allowed voice communications back and forth between radio operators on the ground and spacecraft crew. The second primary mode was amateur TV. Using a set-up similar to the ham radio system, amateur TV operators and the Space Shuttle crew sent images to one another—the first such use of two-way video in space. Users transmitted color TV pictures in a slow-scan-mode—one picture every 8 to 36 seconds. SAREX, closely connected to the Young Astronaut Program, was a joint effort of the American Relay League and NASA. A ham radio experiment with mission specialist Owen Garriot conducted in 1983 on STS-9 was generally credited as the genesis for the current SAREX. (Lewis News, Aug 9/85, 1)
Researchers in the Workload and Ergonomics Branch of the Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory were working to adapt machines to pilots rather than the traditional other way around, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "The success or failure of a modern Air Force aircraft and mission depends on whether the pilot has the ability to handle the unpredictable situations typical in a wartime environment," said Maris Vikmanis, supervisory industrial engineer for the lab. He explained that laboratory researchers studied how pilots performed in different environments, including combat, to provide information to aircraft designers so that future aircraft would be better adapted to pilots. But he pointed out there was more to it than simply assessing new aircrafts' cockpit designs. "Not only do we have to observe how the pilot performs in the aircraft cockpit, we also have to tap into the pilot himself," Vikmanis explained. "We must know how much effort the pilot is expending, his mental capability, and his workload limitation." In analyzing cockpit design, researchers checked into how well a pilot could see and reach cockpit controls and displays. Only in existence as an aerospace research field since 1979, workload research measured both the pilot's performance and his internal state of wellbeing. By combining experiments in the laboratory and in flight, lab researchers measured human performance/workload using three different methods. First, researchers used a computer-based performance test to measure a pilot's physical and mental action. By having the pilot perform up to 11 different tasks, researchers could characterize various aspects of human behavior. Second, pilots answered, after flying a simulator or an actual aircraft, subjective questions about their experience. A third method measured human performance/workload from a physiological viewpoint by collecting and analyzing variable responses of the human brain, heart, muscles, and visual system. Lab scientists and engineers used the test data to prepare a workload scale, which focused on problems the pilot, aircrew, and the aircraft itself might encounter in the future. NASA was applying similar methodology to the Space Shuttle and its crew, particularly to examine the effects on astronauts of microgravity as an element of stress. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 7)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) selected Boeing Aerospace Operations, General Electric Co., Grumman Technical Service Inc., Hughes Aircraft Co., Messerschmidt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno (the West German firm that produced Spacelab), and McDonnell Douglas Technical Services to serve as prime assessment teams to observe payload processing activities, the Spaceport News reported. KSC made the selection in connection with the initiation of a competitive procurement for a single payload ground operations contract (PCOC) during the Space Transportation System's operational period. NASA expected to request proposals from the companies near the end of 1985 or the beginning of 1986 and would award a contract during fall 1986. This contract along with those for shuttle processing and base operations were the last major contracts to streamline operations as the Space Transportation System matured. The PCOC contract would consolidate operations, minimize interfaces, and focus clear responsibility on a single payload contractor at KSC. Under the new arrangement, NASA would consolidate work then performed by four KSC contractors into a single contractor with prime responsibility for processing of payloads at KSC, primarily for the Space Shuttle. Other contract duties would include sustaining engineering, communications, instrumentation, and telemetry operations, and miscellaneous support. (Spaceport News, Sept 13/85, 1)
Hughes Communications faced the possibility of a $10,000 per day fine, up to a total of $5 million, if the Leasat communications system was not fully operational by November 30, Aviation Week reported. The potential of a fine resulted from the failure of its Leasat 4 satellite following deployment from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, reducing significantly the likelihood of three Leasat satellites being operational by the November 30 deadline. Hughes could avoid the fee if the repaired Leasat 3 activated in late October; otherwise the firm had the option of launching a ground spare. Telemetry data from Leasat 3, repaired during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission, continued to confirm the satellite's functioning. The liquid propulsion system was intact, and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures were rising toward acceptable levels. However, the satellite could explode when its main rocket fired late in September, and Hughes officials gave it no more than a 50-50 chance of reaching geosynchronous orbit. Leasat 1 and 2, launched in August and November 1984, respectively, were operating according to specifications, and the Navy was leasing them. Hughes had to provide the U.S. Navy with four operational satellites by March 31, 1986, to meet the second contract deadline and could at that time again face fines for noncompliance. Company officials estimated December as the earliest date for a Leasat 5 launch. Albert Wheelon, Hughes Aircraft Co. senior vice president and president of Hughes's space and communications group, said the Leasat 4 loss and other recent spacecraft losses were having an impact on the industry. "My reading is that generally the whole insurance market for satellites has just gone belly-up," he commented. "I think it's going to have a major impact on startup companies. I think it's going to be a narrowing, both on the operator and the development side." He added that the status of spacecraft underwriters would have less of an impact on companies like Hughes, because it could provide self-insurance. (AvWk, Sept 23/85, 21)
NASA confirmed successful launch on January 24 from KSC of the Space Shuttle with a Department of Defense inertial upper stage deployed and an aggregation of red blood cells experiment for the University of Sydney completed. Spacecraft orbital parameters were classified. The mission had lasted three days, one hour, and 33 minutes, with landing at KSC. Unusually cold weather, causing icing on the external tank, had delayed launch for one day. (NASA FOR M-989-51-C [post flight] Mar 5/85)
NASA and the Defense Department (DOD) with White House concurrence abandoned any consideration of transferring the management of Space Shuttle operations to a commercial venture or quasi-public corporation for the foreseeable future, Aviation Week reported. The decision would thwart plans of commercial ventures that had sought the combined Space Shuttle management/marketing role. The Shuttle Operations Strategic Planning Group, a team made up of officials from NASA, DOD, the White House, and private enterprise, said ". . . the suggestion that the space shuttle should or could be transferred, sold or leased to private enterprise for its operation, marketing and future development is simply not a viable alternative for the foreseeable future." Although some commercial space officials called the group's study a "whitewash," others believed the decision could introduce more Space Shuttle launch and cost stability, a critical issue with a large segment of commercial space ventures that needed Space Shuttle transportation no matter who was managing it. DOD Space Shuttle military space-flight requirements, including the potential for Strategic Defense Initiative Space Shuttle activity, were key elements in the decision not to take management of the program away from NASA. As a result of the decision, NASA would have to create a new management structure in order to get the Space Shuttle out of existing development-oriented management. "As the shuttle evolves and the flight rate increases," the strategic planning group said, "organizational realignments within NASA will become necessary to ensure that NASA's R&D and shuttle operations do not detract from one another but are mutually supportive." (AvWk, Apr 29/ 85, 42)
NASA Administrator James Beggs and U.R. Rao, chairman of the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), signed a launch services agreement covering the reimbursable launch of INSAT 1C around mid-1986 from the Space Shuttle, the Marshall Star reported. A multipurpose satellite, INSAT 1C would provide communications and meteorological services to India. In addition, the two agreed that an ISRO scientist/engineer would serve as a payload specialist during that Space Shuttle mission and discussed other possible NASA/ISRO cooperative activities in space applications and space science. (Marshall Star, Jan 23/85, 4)
As a result of White House prodding, the Air Force had signed an agreement to use NASA's Space Shuttle for at least eight flights a year for 10 years starting in 1988, and the Air Force would get a discount when NASA worked out a new pricing policy for the start of FY 89, the Washington Post reported. The Air Force would pay a fixed fee at the start of each fiscal year, then a per-flight charge less than commercial and other government customers would pay. Under the agreement, NASA would drop opposition to an Air Force plan to buy 10 single-use unmanned rockets to orbit two satellites a year for five years starting in 1988, and NASA and the Department of Defense would work together to ensure a fully-operational and cost-effective Space Shuttle. NASA hoped the Space Shuttle would begin to break even in 1987, as the agency anticipated making from that time on 24 Space Shuttle flights yearly for 10 years. The new agreement called for the Air Force to use one third of all Space Shuttle flights for the 10 years starting in 1988. The agreement also permitted the Air Force to pick the single-use rocket it would use to orbit secret satellites too small for economical use of the Space Shuttle. (W Post, Feb 27/85, A22)
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
In an administrative realignment reflecting the maturation of the Space Shuttle program, NASA announced the appointment of Arnold Aldrich, a 26-year NASA veteran and head of the Space Shuttle projects office at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), to manager of the National Space Transportation System (NSTS). He would fill the vacancy left when Glynn Lunney retired in April. The Level II NSTS organization at JSC would assimilate the projects office, consolidating all program elements under Aldrich. With this combined responsibility, Aldrich would take charge of integration of all Space Shuttle program elements including flight software, orbiter, external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, main engines, payloads, payload carriers, and Space Shuttle facilities. His responsibilities would also include directing the planning for NSTS operations and for management of orbiter and government furnished equipment projects. NASA named Richard Kohrs, who was acting program manager, and Lt. Col. Thomas Redmond, U.S. Air Force, deputy managers. In a related move, Thomas Utsman, head of Space Shuttle management and operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), would become deputy director of KSC, with NASA dividing shuttle management and operations into two primary organizations: Shuttle engineering and Shuttle operations. The engineering directorate, headed by Horace Lamberth, would expand to include skills necessary for sustaining engineering of the orbiter. The operations directorate, headed by Robert Sieck, would retain all functions necessary to manage day-to-day Space Shuttle processing and its logistical support. NASA would transfer later in the year from Johnson Space Center to KSC launch support services and orbiter thermal protection system manufacturing contracts, functions closely associated with KSC responsibilities for Space Shuttle maintenance and launch preparation. At the beginning of 1986, KSC would take over logistics responsibility for spare parts refurbishment and procurement and would assume sustaining engineering responsibility for orbiter subsystems. (NASA Release 85-112)
The Space Shuttle Enterprise arrived the afternoon of November 18 at Washington Dulles International Airport after a two-hour delay due to inclement weather, the Washington Post reported. NASA had announced earlier that it would transfer title to Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum [see Smithsonian Institution, Nov. 8], NASA delayed Enterprise's takeoff from Kennedy Space Center until an early morning fog burned off so more people along the route could see the craft. Enterprise, atop a Boeing 747, was visible to onlookers in Annapolis and Baltimore before it began a counterclockwise circuit over Washington's Capital Beltway. Officials at Dulles would store the spacecraft in a temporary shed about two miles from the airport terminal until a permanent facility was constructed. (IVPost, Nov 19/85, Bl) SPACE SCIENCE AND APPLICATIONS
In testimony today before the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration, Smithsonian Institution Secretary Robert McCormick Adams said the Smithsonian opposed a bill introduced by Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) that would authorize funds to construct a museum administered by the National Air and Space Museum for historic airplanes and spacecraft at Dulles International Airport, the Washington Post reported. He said the Institution had more immediate legislative priorities, although it would support planning appropriations. In 1976 Goldwater was instrumental in pushing funds through Congress for the National Air and Space Museum. The bill Goldwater introduced in June called for $42.6 million in government appropriations in FY 89 and beyond, contingent on an equal amount in matching donations from the private sector. Adams questioned whether the Institution should, or could, raise that much money, particularly because the Institution had more pressing fund-raising commitments. Although Goldwater was on the Smithsonian's Board of Regents, he was pushing the issue now, Terry Emerson, his legislative assistant said, because "its just an interest in priorities." Emerson noted that politicians had a greater sense than did Smithsonian officials of the interest in technology-related museums. "Later they'll come in once they see the overwhelming interest in it," he added. "Once enabling legislation is enacted," Goldwater said, "I believe numerous private individuals and firms will begin a major fund-raising campaign that will produce enough matching monies to get the first construction going by fiscal year 1989." The Smithsonian's Board of Regents initially approved in September 1983 the concept for the air museum, citing insufficient space at the National Air and Space Museum and the difficulty of transporting large aircraft and spacecraft to the Mall building. Under the plan, the Federal Aviation Administration would lease 100 acres of its land at Dulles without compensation. Proximity to a runway was essential, because many of the aircraft and spacecraft, such as the Concorde and Space Shuttle, were too large to be transported on roads. The committee would rule on the proposed legislation in September. (W Post, July 25/85, B9)
NASA announced a new launch date of no earlier than March 7 from KSC for the 51—E Space Shuttle mission with landing at KSC on March 11. Routine checkout of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite had disclosed that one cell in a 24-cell flight battery would not accept a charge. Rescheduling the launch would permit battery repair and retesting. The three nickel-cadmium batteries would supply full power to the satellite during orbital-flight, solar-eclipse periods when its solar panels could not provide the required electrical power. Final checkout of the Space Shuttle orbiter systems was progressing satisfactorily. The 51 —E launch date would cause an STS 51-D launch date of no earlier than March 22. (NASA Release 85-29)
NASA announced that, based on a review of engine data following the July 29 Space Shuttle mission 51-F launch, Marshall Space Flight Center and Kennedy Space Center engineers believed that failed sensors—not an engine failure—were the probable cause of the main engine No. 1 shut down [see Space Transportation System/Missions, July 29]. The data suggested the high-pressure fuel turbopump on that engine performed normally, because there were no indications the pump was running hot. If the pump were running hot, Johnson Space Center flight engineers, who monitored engine performance during ascent, would have expected to see changes in the position of an oxidizer valve indicating an increased flow to supply the pump with more power. Data showed the valve position did not change. A second data indication of normal pump performance was present in the engine discharge pressures, which were monitored by ground controllers and the main engine controller. Based on these indications, NASA engineers reviewing the cause of the engine shutdown tentatively concluded that the main engine controller was receiving faulty data from failed sensors. Resistance measurements taken by the engine controller provided an indicator of pump temperatures, because the resistance increased as the temperature increased. The controller logic was able to distinguish, within certain limits, a valid reading from one that indicated the sensor wire, a very thin wire, was broken or had otherwise failed. The controller recognized the bad reading from the Channel B sensor; the reading from Channel A, however, drifted, indicating a temperature rise above the redline limit. Because of the failure mode in the second sensor, which gave readings above the redline limit but below those that would cause the controller to disregard them as unreasonable and thus indicative of a sensor failure, the engine controller believed there was a possible pump problem and shut down the engine. A temperature sensor on main engine No. 3 also failed. Because there was a history of these temperature sensors failing on previous Space Shuttle flights, NASA decided to develop a new sensor for use on future Space Shuttle flights beginning with mission 51-1. Until such time as NASA confirmed this explanation by an examination of the engine and its various systems, NASA would not launch another mission. Flowever, the agency did not anticipate that this would result in a delay in the next mission. The call "abort to orbit" used to describe the action ordered for the July 29 Space Shuttle flight was the preferred type of Space Shuttle launch "abort" in that it gave the crew, the orbiter, and the ground controllers time to review options and to ascertain that the crew and orbiter were in good condition. In nearly all cases, the abort-to-orbit contingency would allow completion of most of a particular mission's flight requirements. Once NASA determined that an orbiter was in a safe orbit (minimum would be about 105 nautical miles circular), then the crew and ground flight controllers could begin to assess the impact on planned mission activities. In the case of mission 51-F, the orbit achieved was 106 by 146 nautical miles, 40 miles short of the planned designations; the orbiter was at a velocity of 25,760 feet-per-second, which was 110 feet-per-second less than planned. NASA determined all abort modes based on the weight of the orbiter, the inclination of the desired orbit, and other characteristics. Each mode had a specific applicable time and duration during the ascent phase, and crew and ground controllers practiced these contingency situations regularly. (NASA Release 85-114)
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
NASA launched at 11:15 a.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis, the maiden voyage of the orbiter and the 21st mission in the Space Shuttle program, on mission 51 -J, a secret flight for the Department of Defense (DOD), the NY Times reported. The secrecy was part of DOD's efforts to make it difficult for the Soviet military to monitor the Space Shuttle takeoff and find out the identity and mission of the payload. Despite these precautions, it was widely reported that a primary goal of the flight was to launch a pair of $100-million military communication satellites. DOD apparently planned to station the satellites, designated DSCS III for Defense Satellite Communications System, 22,300 miles above earth, where they would relay messages to U.S. military forces around the world. The commander of Atlantis was Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, flying his third Space Shuttle mission; the pilot was Air Force Lt. Col. Ronald Grabe. Other crew members were Maj. David Hilmers of the Marine Corps, Army Lt. Col. Robert Stewart, and Air Force Maj. William Pailes. The first four were members of NASA's astronaut corps; Pailes was an Air Force pilot assigned to the mission to assist in deploying its secret payload. In accordance with security rules, NASA gave out little information about the flight. There were no space-to-ground communications released to the public and no postlaunch news conference. Nearly five hours after the launch, mission control in Houston said, "On the maiden voyage of Atlantis, the crew is doing well and all systems on board the orbiter are performing satisfactorily." NASA officials said it would issue no other status reports during the mission, which might last a week or more. Atlantis was the lightest and most advanced of the four orbiters. In its planning and construction, engineers removed minor design flaws found in earlier versions and incorporated the latest in electronic technology and light-weight, high-strength structural materials. NASA strengthened Atlantis mainly so it could withstand more vigorous launchings from the Air Force's facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base. These launches, which would take the Space Shuttle into orbits around the earth's poles, required greater thrust from the Space Shuttle's engines. Although the mission was devoted to the military, NASA officials said there was a civilian experiment on board to study exposure of the orbiter and its crew to cosmic rays, which were extremely high-energy particles from space that bombarded the earth and the orbiting Space Shuttles. (NY Times, Oct 3/ 85, A18, Oct 4/85, B5)
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B celebrated Thanksgiving in space today, saying it was one of the best Thanksgivings they ever had, the Washington Times reported. It was the first U.S. manned spaceflight during that holiday since the third Skylab flight in 1973. The crew's main job for the day was deployment of the 4,144-lb. SATCOM KU-2 satellite owned and operated by RCA American Communications (RCA Americom). The uninsured $50 million satellite was the last of three KU-brand domestic communications satellites that operated in the 12 to 14 gigahertz range. It had 16 operational transponders and six spares, each transmitting 45 watts of power, more than the 12 to 30 watts used for C-Band transponders. The payload assist module (PAM) on the satellite was instrumented with radio frequency telemetry that would downlink data to ARIA (advanced range instrumentation aircraft) during burn of the solid-fuel rocket motor, a mission requirement for this first flight of a PAM-D2, the Kennedy Space Center Spaceport News explained. The uprated upper stage was identical to the PAM-D, except for size and weight. The spinup would be noticeably slower due to the larger mass and inertial components of the payload. NASA designed PAM-D2 to place up to 4,200 lb. in geosynchronous orbit, compared to the 2,800-lb. PAM-D version. The crew's dinner menu—chicken consomme, smoked turkey, cranberry sauce, green beans, corn, pasta, butter cookies, and lemonade—sounded traditional, but the turkey was preserved before launch by irradiation, sealed in foil, and had to be heated in a device similar to a toaster oven. Crew added warm water to the consomme, vegetables, and pasta to make them edible. (IV Times, Nov 29/85, 3A; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
NASA announced that live classroom lessons and scientific demonstrations, which would be broadcast live around the country, would be filmed for use in educational products which were just some of the activities planned by Christa McAuliffe, the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Project, for Space Shuttle mission 51—L. The first live lesson, entitled "The Ultimate Field Trip," would allow students to compare daily life on the Space Shuttle with that on earth. McAuliffe would take viewers on a tour of the orbiter, explaining crew members' roles, showing the location of computers and controls, and explaining experiments being conducted on the mission. She would also demonstrate how daily life in space was different from that on earth in the preparation of food, movement, exercise, personal hygiene, sleep, and the use of leisure time. The second lesson, called "Where We've Been, Where We're Going," would help the audience understand why people use and explore space by demonstrating the advantages of manufacturing in the microgravity environment, explaining technological advances that evolved from the space program, and projecting the future of humans in space. Also during the flight, McAuliffe would participate in activities that would be filmed and later used in educational products. Possible activities included demonstrating earth magnetism by photographing and observing the lines of magnetic force in three dimensions in a microgravity environment; demonstrating Newton's first, second, and third laws in a microgravity environment; discussing why products might or might not effervesce in a microgravity environment; encouraging creative works from students that reflected their interpretation of the space program/experience; explaining the use of simple machines/tools and the similarities and differences between their uses in space and on earth; showing the effect of microgravity on plant growth, growth of plants without soil (hydroponics), and capillary action; and demonstrating chromatographic separation of pigments in a microgravity environment. In addition, McAuliffe would assist mission specialists conducting three Shuttle Student Involvement Project experiments that would fly onboard the Space Shuttle. The experiments dealt with using a semipermeable membrane to direct crystal growth, studying chicken embryo development in space, and the effect of weightlessness on grain formation and strength in metals. (NASA Release 85-139)
The orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F landed at 12:46 p.m. PDT today on Edwards Air Force Base's Mojave Desert lake-bed runway, the Washington Post reported. During the flight, Challenger circled the earth 127 times, a distance of a little over three million miles. Technicians stood by at the runway to remove immediately the heat sensors from Challenger's main engines to check a NASA theory that the sensors caused the premature shutdown of the center rocket engine during the July 29 launch. NASA was confident enough that the sensors would be found at fault that it had equipped Discovery's engines with redesigned sensors before moving it August 5 to the launch pad. During the mission, Challenger became an orbiting astronomical observatory with more than $72 million of telescopes and other instruments to study the sun, stars, and distant galaxies. The NY Times reported that Dr. Burton Edelson, NASA associate administrator, said, "We met more than 80 percent of all science objectives of this mission. We're absolutely delighted." Dr. Eugene Urban, chief mission scientist, added, "Everyone has collected tantalizing new data. It's going to take a long time before this data is analyzed and really fully appreciated. We've made some interesting new observations, and some have been very spectacular." Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, commented that the orbiter appeared to be in good shape after the landing, the eighth for the Challenger. "It was a beautiful landing," he said. "The tiles looked very good. The brakes look excellent. The orbiters continue to be magnificent flying machines." (W Post, Aug 7/85, A3; NYT, Aug 7/85, A1)
Members of the U.S. House Science and Technology space science and applications subcommittee questioned Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, office of space flight, on the agency's decision not to request funding for a 5th orbiter in its FY 86 budget, Aerospace Daily reported. Moore restated the agency's position that a four-orbiter fleet was adequate to meet traffic demand for the next five years or so, pointing out a recent decline in commercial and military traffic. NASA had requested $2.1 billion for 14 FY 86 Space Shuttle flights; Moore said NASA planned 17 missions in FY 87, 19 in FY 88, and projected 24 per year after that. Subcommittee chairman Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who had indicated strong support for a fifth orbiter, questioned Moore on the likelihood of increased launch traffic demand, potential schedule impacts of an accident, and the possibility of stretching out orbiter fabrication over a seven-to-eight-year period. Moore responded that NASA's program included adequate funding for structural spares procurement and maintenance of a viable base for initiating orbiter production over the next several years, pointing out that any funds for orbiter construction over a seven-to-eight-year period would be an add-on to NASA's runout budget and could be in competition with other items. He had also remarked on increasingly pessimistic market projections, even considering upcoming yearly launches of 18 to 20 communications satellites. Earlier, NASA Administrator James Beggs, in response to questions on NASA's exploring possibilities of private-sector purchase of a 5th orbiter, had said that no Space Shuttle privitization proposals submitted to NASA would result in a cost savings to the government. (A/D, Feb 22/85, 1)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power pointed out that the Soviets were developing a version of the U.S. Space Shuttle, a space plane, and directed-energy weapons and were engaged in military-related experiments abroad the Salyut 7space station, the Washington Times reported. The book concluded that the USSR's grand strategy was to attain global supremacy "by means short of war—exploiting the coercive leverage inherent in superior forces, particularly nuclear forces." (W Times, Apr 1/85, 1 A)
The Washington Post reported that W. Germany had agreed to contribute $900 million over the next decade to participate in an American-led program to build an $8 billion permanently manned space station for initial operations in 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America. The W. Germans would negotiate detailed contracts over the next two years to ensure a fair return on their investment and access to space-based technology, as U.S. restrictions on technology transfer (ostensibly to prevent USSR acquisition of sensitive information, the W Post said) had increasingly irked European allies. W. German and Italian companies planned a special laboratory module that would plug into the U.S.-built spacecraft's main structure for experiments in zero gravity and vacuum conditions. A W. German ministerial report had said cooperation embodied in the space station program "should be welcomed in W. Germany not just for technical and economic reasons, but for political ones, as a transatlantic connecting link." However, the venture had evoked controversy, as some European scientists contended that robots could conduct the work planned for the space station, and others alleged that a $750 million European investment in 1973 to underwrite Spacelab had attained few research benefits. Heinz Riesenhuber, W. German minister for research and technology, said that Bonn would also contribute nearly $500 million to develop a more powerful and versatile Ariane rocket to achieve some European independence in space travel by the 1990s, although he admitted a major W. German investment in the French space shuttle project "Hermes" was impossible. (W Post, Jan 17/85, A1)
During NASA's general management status review, the office of space flight reported on the agency objective to undertake a pricing and marketing strategy that would capture for the STS a dominant percentage of the planned free-world, commercially launched payloads, as measured yearly by payments for launch reservations, through the end of CY 88. R. Wisniewski, assistant associate administrator, noted that a NASA recommendation for full-cost recovery sent to the White House would likely undergo close scrutiny. He anticipated strong competition as NASA marketed the Space Shuttle capability, with 28 to 36 STS launches of the approximately 58 planned payloads through 1988; Ariane would capture a sizeable portion of the remaining launches. Wisniewski reported $140 million in Space Shuttle receipts in FY 84 and predicted $188 million in Space Shuttle revenue in FY 85. (GMSR Report, Jan 15/85, 35)
NASA announced it would transfer on December 6, 1985, the title to the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum. The NASA Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, on November 16 would deliver Enterprise to Washington Dulles International Airport, where cranes would remove Enterprise from the top of the 747 and lower it to Dulles's tarmac. Rockwell Internatl., NASA's Space Shuttle prime contractor, constructed Enterprise, which was the first orbiter built. NASA used Enterprise, Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle 101 (OV 101), to test airframe loads, flight dynamics characteristics, and other aspects of the orbiter as it flew through earth's atmosphere. NASA also used Enterprise as a test bed for manufacturing techniques, aerodynamics, and flight control tests, and mating and fit checks for the remainder of the Space Shuttle components—the external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and mobile launch platforms at both Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base. On September 17, 1976, Enterprise rolled out from Rockwell's assembly facility at Palmdale, California, and was first flown on February 15, 1977, aboard the modified 747 in taxi tests at Edwards Air Force Base. There were then five approach and landing tests, commanded and piloted alternately by astronaut teams of Fred Haise, Jr. (commander) and C. Gordon Fullerton (pilot) and Joe Engie (commander) and Richard Truly (pilot). After ground vibration tests, engineers at Kennedy Space Center used Enterprise for fit checks with the other Space Shuttle components and the mobile launch systems. More recently, engineers used Enterprise for fit checks at the Space Shuttle launch complex at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 85-150)
A controversy between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA [see Space Transportation System/Reve-nues, Feb. 25] appeared over when NOAA agreed to launch meteorological satellites (Metsats) into orbit in return for which NASA would give NOAA a discount for carrying the satellites into orbit aboard the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. A deal between NOAA and the Air Force that would have saved NOAA $90 million in launch costs never went through, in large part because NASA and NOAA began working behind the scenes to bury the hatchet, the Post said. The previous week NASA Administrator James Beggs sent Anthony Calio, NOAA administrator, a letter outlining a deal governing three Metsat launches starting in 1989. NASA agreed to share with NOAA the $80 million cost of modifying the Metsat for a Space Shuttle launch, to put a Metsat on a Space Shuttle within three months after NOAA asked for it, and to shave $6.5 million off the $105 million in feed NASA ordinarily would charge NOAA for the three launches. "We gave them a good price," Beggs said. "They're on the shuttle at what essentially is our cost for launching them." (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21)
The European Space Agency (ESA) launched at 9:15 p.m. EST today from Kourou an Ariane rocket that successfully deployed two telecommunications satellites including a U.S.-built G-Star 1, the Washington Post reported. A breakdown in timing between the rocket and the ESA's various earth-based satellite tracking stations delayed launch 79 minutes. ESA officials described the launch as "another success" in the agency's competition with the U.S. Space Shuttle to capture the world market for satellite launches. The Ariane rocket was the 13th fired, including two aborted launches, since 1979. The previous launch February 9 also put two satellites into orbit. Officials said they had nearly 30 orders to launch commercial satellites, compared with about 60 orders for the Space Shuttle. The Ariane rocket deployed the G-Star 1 satellite, owned by the GTE Spacenet Corp., and the French Telecome-1B 20 minutes after liftoff at about 22,000	miles above the equator. (W Post, May 8/85, A26)
Researchers would install actual Space Shuttle tiles on the leading edge of a flight test fixture mounted below the F-104's fuselage. Some tiles were unused; others had flown in space on the orbiter Columbia. During initial flights in the 16-to-18 flight test program, the F-104 would fly at subsonic speeds behind a KC-135 tanker aircraft, which would emit a water spray to create artificial rain. Tanker personnel could control the flow rate, nozzle pressures, and size of the artificial raindrops. Pilots would fly additional flights at subsonic speeds near Vandenberg Air Force Base, a future Space Shuttle launch site, to observe and measure the effects of mist and low stratus clouds. Pilots later would fly at transonic and supersonic speeds flights at high altitude through ice particles in clouds. A particle-measurement probe located on the F-104's wing pylon would record moisture particle size, while high-frequency load sensors would measure impact forces. A noseboom on the flight test fixture would record velocity, and test fixture pressure orifices would measure pressure distribution. Video cameras, one pylon-mounted and one mounted on the F-104's lower fuselage looking back at the flight test fixture, would also record data. (NASA Release 85-135)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51 —J landed just after 10 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, ending a four-day flight operated under secrecy rules imposed by the Department of Defense (DOD), the Washington Post reported. "Of course, I can't say anything about our mission," said flight commander Karol Bobko, an Air Force colonel and one of five military men on the mission, "but I can say Atlantis performed superbly its first time in space. I've flown Challenger, Atlantis, and Discovery now, and I think that NASA really has quite a fleet of orbiters and that we have a great national asset here," he added. NASA ground operations manager Fritz Widick said Atlantis was in "excellent condition" at the end of the 1.7 million-mile flight, although engineers were inspecting an underside area of the left wing to see if tile-insulation damage might have exposed its aluminum mainframe to reentry heat. Such heat might have discolored a region along the portside engine pod under the Space Shuttle's tail. Widick said Atlantis's brakes came through the 190 mph landing on the lake-bed with only "minor damage" to one of four brake assemblies on the main landing gear. Bobko appeared to apply minimum braking after landing into a stiff headwind that brought Atlantis to a stop on the center line halfway down the 15,000-foot desert runway. Fewer than a dozen reporters and about two dozen NASA employees were present for the landing, an event that usually drew hundreds of spectators, the NY Times reported. The military gave just 24 hours notice of when the mission would end and had barred members of the public from watching. (W Post, Oct 8/85, A3; NYT, Oct 8/85, C3) Air Force Maj. Ronald Rand said the Department of Defense (DOD) approved dissemination of information about the payload because it was experimental and not designed to carry out an operational mission. He said there were two payloads: an assembly of six space physics experiments that would remain in the Space Shuttle's open cargo bay and an experimental airplanedetecting experiment. "In light of the mounting Congressional and public interest in this historic first manned polar orbit and first west coast shuttle mission, we've made an exception to our policy with the understanding that we'll continue to protect performance data and results of these two experiments," Rand said. "This doesn't mean we've changed our policy of classifying DOD payloads." Flying aboard Discovery, which was scheduled for launch March 20, 1986, would be Comdr. Robert Crippen of the Navy; pilot Guy Gardner; astronauts Jerry Ross, Dale Gardner, and Richard Mullane; Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward Aldridge; Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson; and a DOD specialist to tend the cargo. (NYT, Oct 11/85, A6)
Under the agreement, NASA would provide ITA with two Space Shuttle flights to obtain data and validate the ISEM design. NASA had scheduled for late 1987 the first ISEM test that would carry a payload for the Bioprocessing and Pharmaceutical Center of the Philadelphia University City Science Center. ITA would design the ISEM to be compatible with the proposed space station with the idea that initial users of the module would progress to larger and more sophisticated payloads to fly in the future aboard the station. (NASA Release 85-94)
Michael Burch, assistant secretary of defense for public affairs, said beginning in 1987, two years earlier than planned, two Space Shuttle flights a year would carry experiments for President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research program, with initial experiments testing the ability to detect, track, and aim against targets in space, the Washington Post reported. The tracking and targeting tests, developed in a Pentagon research program that antedated the Reagan Administration, would include a mounting device for attaching the telescope-like sight to the Space Shuttle and sensors that could pick up at a distance equal to the width of the U.S. the "signature of objects" such as the booster plume of a missile. The Department of Defense had canceled a Space Shuttle test of the system's main telescope, though sources said it would continue land-based tests to develop a more capable telescope. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the previous year's congressional SDI program budget cuts would delay by one year an integrated-system demonstration. (W Post, Feb 20/85, A5)
A fare war had broken out in space, Fortune reported, and Arianespace, a consortium of European governments and private companies that operated the European-built Ariane rocket, was grabbing communications satellite launches away from the U.S. Space Shuttle by aggressively underpricing it. Although NASA had launched 30 satellites, nine aboard the Space Shuttle, over the previous four years and the Ariane less than 12, the Europeans would become major competitors, Fortune predicted. A Space Shuttle launch cost $25 million; Arianespace charged $24 million. And Arianespace had cut that price by as much as $3 million to lure some U.S. customers. Arianespace officials said its throwaway rockets were more efficient at the single task of launching satellites than was the complex Space Shuttle, which NASA had designed to perform a range of scientific and military missions. "Using the shuttle for launching satellites," Charles Bigot, director of Arianespace, said, "is like flying a supersonic Mirage jet fighter when all you need is a puddle jumper." American entrepreneurs who wanted to get into the satellite-launching business complained that prices charged by both Arianespace and NASA were ridiculously low as a result of government subsidies. Transpace Carriers Inc., for example, held the rights to buy the Delta rocket from its manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp., but couldn't launch a satellite for less than $45 million. The U.S. Department of Transportation, which wanted to encourage private companies like Transpace Carriers, was encouraging President Reagan to set Space Shuttle launch rates high enough to make the commercial launches profitable. So the future of the launch business, Fortune said, would rest with President Reagan's decision on Space Shuttle pricing—and on Arianespace's reaction. If Reagan boosted Space Shuttle launch fees, it would please entrepreneurs anxious to get into the space business. But that would also give the Europeans a bigger opening into the space business than they've had so far. (Fortune, May 27/85, 138)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) requested proposals for a 12-month study of an advanced high-thrust, high-performance liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engine that could be used for the advanced launch vehicles being examined in NASA/Air Force Space Transportation Architecture Studies (STAS), which included heavy lift launch vehicles, Defense Daily reported. NASA considered the advanced LOX/hydrogen cryogenic engine and a new LOX/hydrocarbon engine to be key elements to advanced transportation systems. MSFC said it planned to award up to three parallel firm-fixed-price contracts for the study of the Space Transportation Main Engine (STME). During the study, the contractors would prepare parametric trade-off data for engine requirements and configurations that might be employed in future launch vehicles. NASA would compare these engine configurations to the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME) for application to new launch vehicles. The contractors would identify candidate engine configurations, compare their features, and then recommend engine configurations that would best satisfy the requirements of future launch vehicles. The three principal contenders for the STME study were Rockwell's Rocket-dyne Div., prime contractor for the SSME; and Aerojet Technologies and United Technologies's Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, who conducted component improvement studies for the SSME. (D/D, Nov 21/85, 105) Military Applications
NASA announced plans for a March 4, 1985, Space Shuttle 51-E launch from KSC, with a landing at KSC on March 8. NASA based its launch decision on flight readiness-review results. The completion of cargo integration and orbiter-systems testing necessitated additional time in the schedule. The current 51—E launch date would not change the planned launch of STS mission 51-D, which was planned for no earlier than March 19, to retrieve the Long-Duration Exposure Facility and to launch the Navy Syncom satellite. (NASA Release 85-27)
Vice President George Bush announced that Sharon Christa McAuliffe would be the teacher to go into space in January 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. McAuliffe, a social studies teacher at Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire, was the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Program that was announced by President Reagan in August 1984. Her backup was Barbara Morgan of McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho. McAuliffe proposed that, while in space, she would gather information for a personal journal, "just as the pioneer travelers of the Conestoga wagon days kept personal journals. My journal would be a trilogy. I would like to begin it at the point of selection through the training program. The second part would cover the actual flight. Part three would cover my thoughts and reactions after my return," McAuliffe said. Vice President Bush, in his announcement of the selection at a White House ceremony in the Roosevelt Room, where McAuliffe was accompanied by the other nine finalists selected from among 11,416 applicants, said, "We're here today to announce the first private citizen passenger in the history of spaceflight . . . We're honoring all [the teacher applicants] today, and we're doing something else because the finalists here with me and the more than a hundred semifinalists will all in the months ahead serve as a link between NASA and the nation's school system." McAuliffe, a teacher of 15 years and the mother of two children, would work a year for NASA. She and Morgan would report in September to Johnson Space Center for 114 hours of training over four months. The Washington Post reported that a top NASA official said McAuliffe was an early favorite of the 20-member selection panel. The official said "the judges thought McAuliffe appeared to be a good team player and—vital to her image-making duties—stood out as a good communicator," the Post reported. (NASA Release 85-107; Admin of Ronald Reagan, July 19/85, 913; W Post, July 22/85, A1)
NASA announced that the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) selected the Space Shuttle to launch July 1988 and mid-1989 two communications satellites in INMARSAT'S second generation series. The spacecraft would enhance INMARSAT'S existing maritime satellite network and the communications services the organization provided to 43 member nations including the U.S. British Aerospace Corp. would build the spacecraft; Hughes Aircraft would supply the spacecraft communications payload. A McDonnell Douglas spin-stabilized upper stage, the PAM-D, would boost the spacecraft from low-earth orbit into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. An apogee kick motor, a smaller rocket motor on the spacecraft, would position the spacecraft in a circular 22,300-nautical-mile geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 85-111)
NASA announced that students in classrooms throughout the continental U.S. would have an opportunity to observe various aspects of Space Shuttle mission 51—L and to listen, look, and learn from NASA's Teacher in Space, Christa McAuliffe, during her flight on Challenger. A few students would also be able to question McAuliffe about the mission. TV viewers with satellite dishes would be able to access the live lessons directly from the RCA satellite Satcom F-2R, Transponder 13. The Public Broadcasting Service, as a result of an agreement with NASA, would carry the live lessons via the satellite Westar IV, Transponder 12. PBS would offer the programs to member stations after requesting that they preempt regular instructional TV or classroom programming to carry the lessons live. McAuliffe would teach two lessons on the sixth day of the flight [see Space Transportation System/Civilian in Space Program, Oct. 2]; the first at approximately 11:00 a.m. EST, the second at about 1:00 p.m. EST. Classrooms with access to a satellite dish or cable network that carried NASA-Select would also be able to participate in a "Mission Watch," which covered aspects of the entire Space Shuttle flight from the day before launch through the conclusion of the mission. Barbara Morgan, backup for McAuliffe, would moderate the Mission Watch broadcast. (NASA Release 85-156)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that Warren North, JSC specialist in astronaut selection and training, retired February 1 after 38 years with NASA. North had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA's predecessor agency) in 1947 as a test-pilot engineer at LeRC. In 1959 North had transferred to NASA Headquarters, where he participated in early planning for Project Mercury, including selection and training of the seven original Mercury astronauts; in 1962 North assumed leadership of the JSC division responsible for training astronauts for Gemini rendezvous and docking development flights and for the Apollo lunar landing program. North was currently special assistant to the JSC flight-operations director for planning Space Shuttle crew training and flight-simulation equipment and techniques. North received a bachelor's degree from Purdue University and master's degrees from Case Institute of Technology and Princeton University. (JSC Release 85-7)
NASA launched today at 2:50 p.m. EST the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-C with its five-man military crew to carry out secret military objectives, the NY Times reported. NASA, which had delayed launch due to subfreezing temperatures [see STS/Launch Schedules, Jan. 23], did not announce liftoff time until nine minutes before launch. One and a half hours after launch, Houston Mission Control reported the Space Shuttle had reached its intended orbit, the altitude and position of which were secret. How long the astronauts would remain in orbit was unknown; although most Space Shuttle flights lasted five to eight days, the apparent Discovery mission to launch a single satellite might limit it to three or four days. Discovery carried a 32,000-lb. propulsion, inertial upper stage capable of boosting a large satellite to 22,300 miles above the equator south of the USSR. This was the first test of the rocket system since a predecessor had misfired on a Space Shuttle mission in April 1983. Many newspapers had already published reports, based on information in the aerospace trade press and other unclassified documents, that the secret payload was an electronic spy satellite. Both the U.S. and USSR had engaged in electronic eavesdropping from orbit for several years, and the USSR had obtained many of the plans and engineering information for the earlier U.S. electronic reconnaissance satellite Rhyolite. The Carter administration had cancelled an advanced version of Rhyolite, the Argus, but the Reagan administration had revived the project. Most reports described the Discovery's payload as the most advanced and sensitive form of orbital electronic spying. The Air Force began an investigation to find the officials or contractor employees who had provided information about the secret payload aboard Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Inquiries were not aimed at news organizations, Michael Burch, a Department of Defense (DOD) spokesman, had said. When questioned about a photo of an early-warning satellite published on the cover of Aviation Week, Burch said the picture should not have appeared. However, the Pentagon later acknowledged that the Air Force had given the photo to the magazine after determining it was unclassified. Burch refused to say what action the government would take if it could identify those who leaked information on the Space Shuttle mission. Brig. Gen. Richard Abel had previously warned reporters not to speculate about the Space Shuttle's cargo. After the Washington Post had reported it was an intelligence satellite intended to eavesdrop on the USSR, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the story might have given "aid and comfort to the enemy." Abel later had told a Univ. of Georgia journalism class that little or nothing in the Post story was not available from public sources. Aviation Week's January 21 issue had described the Pentagon's next generation of early-warning surveillance satellites, which would monitor missile and spacecraft launches from Soviet territory and be protected against Soviet laser weapons. {NYT, Jan 25/85, A1; W Post, Jan 25/85, A3)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) announced it had extended an existing contract with Planning Research Corp. (PRC) to provide engineering services for the Directorate of Engineering Development at KSC and at Vandenberg Air Force Base (VAFB). The $12,421,841 extension brought the total contract value to $66,187,413 and extended the period of performance from January 1, 1986, through September 30, 1986. Under the contract, PRC would design ground-support systems for the Space Shuttle/Centaur program, which NASA would use to inject space vehicles into interplanetary trajectories after deployment from the Space Shuttle. PRC would also provide designs for Space Shuttle launch-support equipment for the Department of Defense (DOD) at VAFB, which would become the second launch and landing facility for the Space Shuttle in the mid-1980s, particularly for launching DOD payloads into polar orbit. Another PRC task under the contract was to provide KSC with designs for Space Shuttle cargo ground-support equipment. (KSC Release 186-85)
A C-5A aircraft carrying the German Spacelab D-1, the first payload in the history of U.S. manned spaceflight to be controlled from another country, landed May 1 at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) Space Shuttle runway, Spaceport News reported. The Federal German Aerospace Research Establishment's (DFVLR) German Space Operations Center in Oberpfaf-fenhofen near Munich would have responsibility for the 80 Spacelab D-1 (D for Deutschland) experiments. During the welcoming ceremony, (KSC) Director Dick Smith said, "We are looking forward to giving your payload 'tender loving care' and seeing it launched aboard the shuttle and getting it safely returned to you after the mission." Germany's Parliamentary State Secretary Albert Probst responded, "We are pleased to take part in this event and consider the joint ventures between the Federal Republic of Germany, Europe, and the U.S. in manned space flight to be a good example of international cooperation." Spacelab D-1, scheduled to fly on the seven-day Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia mission 61-A no earlier than October 16, consisted of a long Spacelab module containing the space sled and a unique support structure. Half of the D-1 experiments were from Germany, the remainder from the U.S. and European countries. Investigations included the vestibular sled, a device driven by an electromotor and traction rope, positioned in the center aisle of the Spacelab module, in which astronauts would serve as test subjects to collect information on human reactions to the equilibrium sensing system; the Biorack for botanical and medical/physiological experiments; the navigation experiment (NAVEX) to test systems performance of clock synchronization and one-way distance measurement; the materials experiment assembly (MEA) that would use Marshall Space Flight Center furnaces and alloy, fluid physics, and crystal growth investigations. The DFVLR, the result of a merger of three organizations and employing about 3,500 people in five research centers, would also participate in the European Retrieval Carrier (EURECA), a free-flying apparatus of experiments, and project "Columbus," internationally manned space station modules. (Spaceport News, May 10/85, 5)
$341,496,165. Under the contract, the company would provide system integration, selected flight hardware, software, ground support equipment, and mission integration support for manifested Spacelab missions. Spacelab, developed by NASA under an international agreement with the European Space Agency, when carried in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter converted it into an orbiting scientific research center. MSFC was responsible for monitoring Spacelab design and development activities and for management of U.S. development of selected Spacelab components. (MSFC Release 85-53)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power said the USSR was continuing in 1984 deployment of new nuclear and conventional military weapons systems, including test firings of fifth-generation ICBMs, launchings of new classes of submarines, and installing new strategic bombers, the Washington Times reported. The book detailed several significant developments by the Soviet military, the article said, including continued test firings of the SS-24 and SS-25 intercontinental ballistic missiles, launch of two units of new Delta IV-class of strategic ballistic missile submarines to be fitted with the SS-NX-23 submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) then being flight tested, and completion of sea trials of a third 25,000-ton Typhoon-class strategic ballistic missile submarine to join the two Typhoon units already operational and fitted with 20 SS-N-20 SLBMs. The book also said the Soviets had developed a heavy-lift launch vehicle capable of putting 150-ton payloads into orbit as part of an "extremely high priority" military-related space program. The Soviet version of the U.S. Space Shuttle and manned Space Station would benefit from this heavy booster. Major emphasis in their space program was on long-duration manned missions for military research. The USSR continued research on ground- and space-based, antisatellite high-energy lasers. "The Soviets currently have the world's only deployed antisatellite weapons system that can attack satellites in near-earth orbit," the book said. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	385 L„lfllENTIQNAll.y 8LANK The Soviets also continued upgrading detection and tracking systems for ballistic missile defense and development of new early-warning and air-surveillance radars. Their work on a new, large phased-array radar at Krasnoyarsk violated the ABM treaty, the book stated, and "in addition, the Soviets are actively engaged in extensive research on advanced defenses against ballistic missiles." {W Times, Apr 1/85, 1A)
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-F made major progress in fixing the instrument pointing system (IPS) for a $60 million solar telescope, the Washington Post reported; and flight planners moved closer to extending the mission one day to make up for lost sunwatching time. The extension would have Challenger landing in California after eight days in orbit. The IPS's improved operation enabled the astronauts to increase the pace of their observations of the sun, the only star close enough for detailed study. Although the balky telescope mount late in the evening again failed to work properly, the Space Shuttle scientists manually locked the telescope on target. New computer commands radioed earlier from earth had helped solve some initial problems with the IPS, and it aimed its three solar telescopes precisely at specific spots on the sun, holding them there for a few minutes each time. However, the steadiness did not last. During one long sun-sighting period, astronaut-physicist Loren Acton said the solar chronosphere, a layer of gas that resembled a flaming forest, appeared more active than he had suspected. The phenomenon was dubbed the "Acton effect." A decision to extend Challengers's mission depended largely on the orbiter's supply of hydrogen for generating electricity. {W Post, Aug 3/85, A10)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-1 took time August 29 to observe Hurricane Elena, the Washington Post reported. Commander Joe Engle took photos of the storm, a dense white circular mass that stretched across almost half of the Gulf of Mexico, and noted a second storm in the western part of Gulf. Among the contingencies NASA faced was the possibility that the storm could strike the Houston area and knock out communications with the Johnson Space Center. A NASA spokesman said they could quickly switch operation to the Goddard Space Flight Center. The crew also that day launched the Syncom IV-4 satellite, which was almost identical to the satellite the crew would attempt August 30 to salvage. (IV Post, Aug 30/85, A3)
NASA announced it was negotiating an agreement with Hughes Communications, Inc. (a wholly owned subsidiary of Hughes Aircraft Co.) to develop jointly plans for a Space Shuttle mission to attempt salvage of the Hughes Leasat 3 satellite then in orbit [see Space Transportation System/ Missions, Apr. 17], As a result of Hughes's negotiations with New York- and London-based underwriters insuring Leasat 3, Lloyd's and other European underwriters had agreed to proceed with the attempted salvage. Hughes was continuing negotiations with U.S. underwriters. Although the joint salvage effort would include activities never before attempted, it was based in large part on experience gained by NASA during its April 1984 repair of the Solar Maximum Mission satellite and its retrieval November 1984 of the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites. Pending an independent review of safety considerations by the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, the mission would occur during Space Shuttle flight 51 —L scheduled for no earlier than August 24. The salvage plan called for modification to the satellite by two of the Space Shuttle crew during rendezvous with it to permit ground command of the satellite. Ground command would then perform the activation sequence, normally performed by an automatic timer onboard the satellite. Modification made during the rendezvous would bypass all hardware likely to have caused the Leasat 3 failure. (Although Hughes had identified satellite activation components and circuits as the cause of the failure, the company had not determined, due to limited flight data, a specific cause of the failure.) In its dormant state, the satellite was experiencing temperatures well below the design and test limits of the liquid- and sold-fuel propellant systems, electronic units, batteries, and all other components. These factors, combined with the complexity of the modifications by the Space Shuttle crew, limited the chances of success. Hughes Communications, Inc. would contract with NASA for the costs, at that time under assessment, for preparation and execution of the mission. (NASA 85-77)
The information gathered by several Space Shuttle missions underscored the need for improved weather forecasting at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA along with the U.S. Air Force developed a plan to improve the quality of weather data available at KSC as well as the manner in which it was presented to the forecaster, Spaceport News reported. KSC officials recently held a ribbon cutting ceremony at the Range Control Center on Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to inaugurate the new Cape Canaveral Forecast Facility (CCFF), marking completion of a $3 million three-year effort by NASA, the Air Force, and contractor Pan Am World Services. The facility was the first important tool for improving the efficiency of the weather forecaster during launches and landings of the Space Shuttle. The facility housed a system called MIDDS, meteorological interactive data display system, which animated and overlaid data from various forecasting tools in color graphic displays. For example, a forecaster could begin with display of a current satellite picture; over that he could place a color enhanced radar display of shower activity. Next he might add a graphic presentation of indications from wind towers around KSC; and over that he could display locations of lightning potential as well as where lightning was striking cloud-to-ground. Motion added to the entire composite picture would illustrate trends in weather activity over a period of time. The system could overlay maps of upper wind data or barometric pressures collected from weather balloons or sounding rockets. The forecaster could also display figures from the data network of other weather stations around the country or the world. Although the console was at the Cape Canaveral facility, the new rotating antenna was at Patrick Air Force Base to compensate for the blind spot directly above the radar. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration radar located in Dayton Beach supplemented the Cape radar. A forecaster could call up a current graphic display of any official weather radar in the U.S. A lightning location and protection (LLP) system would show cloud-to-ground strikes up to 100 miles away, from which antennas were located ten miles north of the vehicle assembly building and at Melbourne Regional and Orlando International Airports. These antennas supplemented an existing network of 30 area field mills that detected lightning potential. NASA officials hoped within five years to have at the facility a clear air doppler radar, of which there were only six in the country. It would reduce the number of wind towers needed and improve forecasting efficiency. In the meantime, Space Shuttle weather officer Scott Funk said, "We haven't tapped the full potential of the new MIDDS system. Most weather forecasters have never seen anything like this. But there are still a number of potential capabilities the system has which we will add next year." (Spaceport News, Oct 11/ 85, 7)
There were five Americans aboard the Space Shuttle, but commander Daniel Brandenstein decided Nagel took the 100th honor because three Americans sat in front of him on Discovery's flight deck. "Shannon Lucid was the first runner-up," Brandenstein said. "She got to space three inches ahead of Steven Nagel." To mark the occasion, which was televised back to earth, Brandenstein presented Nagel with a cake that had "100th" written on it. "I'm not sure if that's true," Nagel said. "Although I sat three inches behind Shannon, my nose is about three and a half inches longer than hers is." (W Times, June 20/85, 3A)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced its researchers completed at KSC a series of three intensive tests that verified the compatibility of Spacelab 2 experiments in space. Known collectively as the "mission sequence test," the tests determined for the first time that actual experiment flight hardware for the mission operated in tandem with the Spacelab flight systems. MSFC's Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester said they learned they “could operate this complex system with high efficiency within acceptable Spacelab resource allocations." MSFC had responsibility for managing the first three Spacelab missions in a series of Spacelab flights that extended over several years. The first mission flew in 1983; the next would fly later in April. "This third and last test was a simulated six-hour slice of the actual on-orbit timeline," Lester said. "It simulated the commanding of experiments as if they were being done both from the payload operations control center (at Johnson Space Center) and from the flight deck of the orbiter." The period chosen was one that would put maximum stress on the computer, "a worst-case scenario," Lester explained. "Without a situation like that, we wouldn't have gotten the confidence we have now that we're ready to go." The 13 Spacelab 2 experiments, covering seven scientific disciplines, would rest on three pallets and a special support structure. Unlike the other two Spacelab missions managed by MSFC, there was no habitable laboratory. Spacelab 2 crew would operate the experiments from the aft deck of the orbiter interior. (MSFC Release 85-19) During April: NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-B/Spacelab 3, an ESA<Jeveloped Spacelab carrying 15 experiments [see Spacelab, Apr. 17], was scheduled for launch April 29 from KSC. The mission's main objective was to provide a high-quality microgravity environment for materials processing and fluid experiments. For the second time in U.S. space history, crew members would perform scientific investigations continuously. Two scientists who developed Spacelab 3 experiments, payload specialists Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg, a materials scientist from EG&C Energy Management Corp., and Dr. Taylor Wang, a fluid physicist from JPL, would conduct onboard research during the mission. Mission specialist Dr. Don Lind, a high-energy astrophysicist, and Drs. Norman Thagard and William Thornton (both medical doctors making their second Space Shuttle flight) would also do scientific research. The payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center would manage all Spacelab 3 operations. Members of the Marshall Space Flight Center mission management team and the investigator teams that developed Spacelab 3 experiments would monitor, direct, and control experiment operations from the ground control center. The mission control center in the same building as POCC would control the orbiter and basic Spacelab systems. (NASA Release 85-60)
Engineers with Hughes Communications Inc., owner of the Syncom 3 communications satellite, sent at 11:53 a.m. today from the company's Guam ground station a radio command to fire the marooned satellite's rocket booster, causing the satellite's ICBM-type rocket motor to fire for 64 seconds as planned, the Washington Times reported. The undertaking capped the most ambitious space salvage effort ever attempted, the Times said, a two-day effort in August by two astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery (see Satellites Apr 22 and Aug 31). The engineers fired the rocket without knowing whether it would blow up or work properly after months exposed to freezing temperatures. "We really nailed it," said Albert Wheelon, president of the Hughes space communications group. "We'll have it in synchronous orbit round about the first of November and then we still have 30 days of checking out the radio equipment and all the systems." Insurance underwriters stood to recoup 85% of the insured cost of the satellite, a boost for an industry that had lost more than $600 million in the past 20 months because of seven satellite failures including Syncom 3. (W Times, Oct 28/85, 3A)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced a NASA source selection board was evaluating proposals from the industry teams of Boeing Aerospace Co. and Wornick Corp.; General Electric, Northrop, and Integrated Systems Analysts; and Hamilton Standard, ILC, and RCA for a single Flight Equipment Processing contract (FEPC) that would consolidate work being done by 15 firms. NASA planned by the end of October to award an initial three-year contract with a two-year priced option extension. The contract would be cost-plus-award-fee for the first six months; cost-plus-incentive-fee, plus an award fee, for the remainder of the term. Estimated contract value at the end of 15 years was $300 million. The contract would cover processing Space Shuttle flight crew equipment, including operation and maintenance of associated ground systems, primarily at JSC. The winning contractor would be responsible for space suit maintenance and testing before and after flights; failure analysis and repair of spaceship galleys; operation of the space food production facility; preparation and delivery of food for each mission; medications and equipment for medical kits; clothing, personal hygiene and flight kits; tools; radio and TV support; and all film and cameras. The award would be the second large consolidation contract let in 1985 at JSC; on September 12 Rockwell International won the Space Transportation System Operations Contract to consolidate JSC Space Shuttle operations. (JSC Release 85-038)
A fire of unknown cause today destroyed one of the four buildings used to mix rocket solid fuels for the Space Shuttle at Morton Thiokol's rocket motor assembly plant outside Brigham City, Utah, the Washington Post reported. No one was injured in the fire that leveled a 400-sq.-ft. building operated largely by robots at a remote part of the Thiokol plant. Because three of the four fuel mixing plants at Thiokol were needed at all times to maintain solid-fuel rocket motor production schedules, NASA said it was concerned enough to send an accident review board team from Marshall Space flight Center to investigate. (IV Post, June 5/85, A5)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that NASA's first experiments to construct large structures in space were a success [see Space Transportation System/Mission, Nov. 30 and Dec. 2]. EASE (Experimental Assembly of Structures in Extravehicular Activity) and ACCESS (Assembly Concept for Construction of Erectable Space Structures) carried out by astronauts Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring "went exactly as we had planned, and all experiment and Space Transportation System objectives were met," said Ed Valentine, mission manager for the EASE/ACCESS payload flown on Space Shuttle mission 61 -B. Those objectives included gathering data to compare assembly rates and techniques in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tests, evaluating potential space station assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques, and identifying ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. "Preliminary data obtained from live downlink TV looks very good," Valentine explained. "But we won't be able to make a complete analyses until we see the rest of the data," which was in the form of videotape and film shot while Ross and Spring performed the construction tasks. Once the data were analyzed and reported, Valentine said, it would give large space structure designers baseline data on the two construction approaches studied. "They can then determine which approach would be appropriate for a particular task," he explained. On December 11 Valentine said he would meet for a debriefing with the Space Shuttle crew and principal investigators. Then in about three weeks the principal investigators would receive the videotape and film shot during the experiments, and Valentine would publish a final report in about three months. (NASA Release 85-66)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) director Dick Smith and Lockheed Space Operations Co. president Doug Sargent today hosted a dedication ceremony for KSC's launch pad B after six years of modification at a cost of $150 million, the Spaceport News reported. NASA would use pad B, the second of the two complex 39 launch pads to undergo modification from the Apollo configuration, to support Space Shuttle and Shuttle Centaur upper stage launches. First launch from the modified pad would be Space Shuttle mission 51-L, scheduled for January 22, 1986. NASA first used pad B in May 1969 for the Apollo 10, third manned Saturn V/Apollo launch. Its last use was for the launch of the Apollo/Soyuz mission in July 1975. Pad modifications included a new Centaur rolling beam, permanent orbiter weather protection system, TV camera floodlights and a TV camera system, boxcars, upgrading of the payload changeout room, a cost-saving lighting system, variable speed motors for loading liquid oxygen, and hydrogen flare stacks. Although there were currently minor differences between pads A and B, the work underway at pad A would eventually make the two functionally identical. (Spaceport News, Dec 20/85, 1; Kennedy Space Center Release 242-85) Launch Schedules
Hughes Communications Inc. said today it would negotiate an approximately $180 commitment with NASA for launch by the Space Shuttle of six communications satellites, including two for a new Japanese network, after receiving proposals from NASA and from Arianespace for its expendable Ariane launch vehicle, Aerospace Daily reported. Hughes indicated selection of the Space Shuttle was based solely on cost and was not related to the recent Ariane 3 failure [see European Space Agency, Sept. 12]. Space Shuttle flights scheduled for December 1987 and May 1988 would launch HS-393 Ku-band satellites that Hughes was building for the Japan Communications Satellite Co. (JCSat). Hughes reserved between 1988 and 1990 four slots for placement of HS-393s over the U.S. Hughes Communications owned 30% of JCSat, a joint venture licensed the previous June by Japan's Ministry of Post and Telecommunications to construct and operate a two-satellite system to serve Japan. The Japanese trading companies C. Itoh and Co. Ltd. and Mitsui and Co. Ltd. owned 40% and 30%, respectively, of the joint venture. (A/D, Sept 18/85, 1)
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
Christa McAuliffe, first teacher as well as private citizen to fly onboard the Space Shuttle, and backup Barbara Morgan arrived September 9 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) to begin their training program, the JSC Roundup reported. Reporters, photographers, and TV crews accompanied the two as they arrived at building 100 to receive their identification badges. Mission commander Francis "Dick" Scobee that afternoon welcomed McAuliffe and Morgan at a meeting with the crew of mission 51 -L, scheduled for launch in January 1986. Other 51 —L crew members were pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, and Judith Resnik. JSC personnel the next day measured them for flight suits, helmets, and G-suits. McAuliffe said she would be allowed to select either a jumpsuit or a standard flight suit to take home with her following her flight. After a food tasting and rating session, in which food lab manager Dr. Charles Bourland asked McAuliffe and Morgan to taste about 40 food and drink items and rate them on a scale of 1 to 9, both teachers commented on their surprise in finding space food so flavorful. They would have several more opportunities for taste tests before McAuliffe selected her flight menu. Other first-week activities included orientation briefings by management and training officials and familiarization tours of training facilities and mission control. Asked by a reporter how drastically her life had changed since her selection, McAuliffe said that other than having the opportunity to fly onboard the Space Shuttle and the accompanying publicity she didn't perceive that much difference. She pointed out that as a teacher for a long time she had to gather material and present information to students daily. "As I see it, I'm doing basically the same things, only my audience has changed." (JSC Roundup, Sept. 27/85, 7)
Recently completed agreements between insurance underwriters and Hughes Communications Services acknowledged loss of the disabled Leasat-3 spacecraft but established a plan under which Hughes and the underwriters would share in communication lease revenues if a plan to repair the satellite during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission was successful, Aviation Week reported. Under the agreement with American and European underwriters who insured Leasat-3, Hughes would provide the funds, estimated at about $10 million, for the rescue attempt. If the rescue was successful, Hughes would regain the cost of the salvage mission through initial lease revenues. The agreements recognized a loss of $85 million for the spacecraft and launch costs. The loss resulted from the failure of the spacecraft on April 13 to activate during an automatic deployment sequence after the spacecraft was ejected from the Space Shuttle orbiter Discovery's cargo bay [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 17]. Hughes and NASA v/ere developing equipment and procedures to mount the rescue attempt, johnson Space Center had concluded a critical design review for rescue hardware such as a worksite, stowage assembly, and the capture, handling, grapple, and spinup bars that would be used to stabilize, restrain, and spin the satellite once modifications aimed at restoring ground control were made on orbit. The design review also covered components Hughes was building, such as the remote power unit, spun bypass unit, and a checkout box that would be used to test electronic components on orbit prior to the rescue attempt. Completion of the critical design review enabled NASA to obtain information on the electronic components Hughes was building and to build rescue equipment for the mission, conduct vacuum chamber testing, and begin training for the salvage mission. NASA had already conducted initial neutral buoyancy training in the weightless training environment facility and mass simulation tests in preparation for the mission. (AvWk, July 8/85, 24)
NASA announced that in a two-and-one-half-year effort costing $15 million it had lengthened and improved its Aircraft Landing Dynamics Facility at Langley Research Center. The track, used to test aircraft wheels, tires, and landing gear, used a high-pressure water jet system to propel the test carriage along the rail/track system where researchers conducted experiments under simulated runway conditions. Track testing options included choosing between concrete or asphalt runway surfaces and among a full range of weather-related surface conditions, including dry, damp, or flooded runways or slush- or ice-covered surfaces. Even before the expansion, NASA believed the track to be the only facility in the world capable of testing full-size aircraft landing gear systems under closely controlled conditions simulating takeoffs and landings. Lengthening the track to more than one-half mile increased the facility's maximum test speed from 120 to 250 mph and made possible, for the first time, simulated landing tests of all modern aircraft and the Space Shuttle. Other facility improvements included a higher capacity water jet system and a newly designed high-speed test carriage. The improved catapult system produced a 1.7-million-lb. thrust on the carriage, resulting in a 17—g (gravity force) acceleration that pushed the carriage in only 400 feet from zero to 250 mph in two seconds, and the new carriage had a 20-by-40-foot test bay to accommodate larger test articles. NASA used ten thousand gallons of water in maximum speed run. Initial research at the modified facility would study the cornering forces and spin-up characteristics of the Space Shuttle main gear tire, which spun up from zero to landing speeds almost instantly at touchdown. NASA would mount a tire-wheel-brake assembly on the carriage for tests of tire wear and applied loads and would run these first tests on the facility's existing smooth concrete surface. Later runs would require the touchdown area of the track altered to simulate the roughness and grooving of the Space Shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center. NASA would then paint smooth the relatively rough runway to determine the best KSC runway characteristics to lessen Space Shuttle tire wear. Later tests would include a variety of aircraft landing hardware tests, averaging about 75 to 100 runs each. NASA estimated the facility could accomplish 300 runs a year with as many as six a day during the height of a test program. One test program, for example, would compare the performance of radial tires, not commonly used on aircraft, to that of conventional bias ply tires. NASA would run these tests in conjunction with a Federal Aviation Adminis-tration/NASA program to gather information on runway surface traction. NASA had scheduled over the next several years test programs that included track tests to develop a data based for the National Tire Modeling Program, an analytical computer model to aid in design of new tires, and a tire failure study. (NASA Release 85-109) Lewis Research Center
NASA announced today that an American journalist would fly on a Space Shuttle mission in late 1986 as the second in a series of communicators to be selected as part of the agency's Space Flight Participant Program. The first candidate selected under this program was Christa McAuliffe, a classroom teacher scheduled to fly in January 1986. In today's announcement NASA said it would select the journalist, like the teacher candidate, after a nationwide competition conducted by professionals representing a broad spectrum of individuals in the candidates' field. The competition would be limited to full-time working media representatives (U.S. citizens) with five or more years' experience covering or commenting on the news for U.S.-based audio, video, or print media. Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly and effectively to mass audiences in both broadcast and print media would be the basis for evaluation of applications, although it was not necessary for the candidate to have worked professionally in both. The selection process would first require identification of eight candidates from each of five regions in the U.S.; from the 40 regional nominees, a National Selection Panel would recommend five for final consideration by the NASA Space Flight Participant Evaluation Committee composed of seven senior NASA officials. The five semifinalists would undergo medical examinations and receive briefings on the spaceflight experience at the Johnson Space Center. Based on results of the physicals and subsequent interviews, the evaluation committee would recommend a primary and backup candidate to the NASA Administrator who would approve the final selection. The Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communication in cooperation with the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication and a Journalism Advisory Committee comprised of representatives from 16 professional journalism organizations including the American Newspaper Publishers Association, Radio Television News Directors Association, American Society of Newspaper Editors, National Association of Broadcasters, Society of Professional Journalists/Sigma Delta Chi, and the National Newspaper Association would administer the competition. (NASA Release 85-147)
Discovery and its five-man crew on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 landed at 9:16 EDT today at Edwards Air Force Base after a seven-day mission [see Aug. 27], the Washington Post reported. During the mission, the crew deployed AUSSAT-1 for the Australian government, ASC-1 for the American Satellite Corp., and Leasat 4 for Hughes Communications (reports indicated Leasat 4 had lost its UHF communications link). In addition, the crew successfully retrieved and repaired the Leasat 3 originally deployed on STS 51-D. Later Hughes issued a statement saying "Leasat 3 is under full control by Hughes' ground command, and telemetry data continued to confirm the good health of the satellite. The liquid propulsion systems are intact and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures appear to be rising gradually toward acceptable levels," the JSC Roundup reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said after the mission that "1 would have to characterize this mission as near to perfect as you can get. It was a perfect mission from the outset, one that shows America's space program at work." Moore added that he hoped there would be only two more Space Shuttle landings in California before pilots could resume landing in Florida. NASA switched to Edwards Air Force Base landings after brakes failed and a tire blew out in an April landing on Kennedy Space Center's concrete runway. (IV Post, Sept 4/85, A7; JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 1)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pioneered the concept of a satellite system for mobile users and, because a U.S. mobile satellite industry was emerging, was turning its attention to developing technologies critical for future systems, the JPL Universe reported. Similar to cellular phones popular in urban areas, the mobile satellite system (MSS) would provide voice and data communications for the entire North American continent, employing one or two satellites in geosynchronous orbit to relay communications instead of depending on ground-based, line-of-sight relay towers that celluar phones used. There were four categories of MSS users: people who needed uninterrupted communications while they traveled over wide geographical areas, for example interstate truckers; those responding to unpredictable events such as medical emergencies or natural disasters; people working at planned but temporary installations such as oil or gas drilling facilities, mining camps, or archeological excavations; and those in very remote areas. The new technologies JPL was developing included mechanically steerable low-profile and electronically steerable medium-gain vehicle antennas, digital speech compression, digital modems, and multiple-access techniques for integrated voice and data. NASA was working with industry and, through a joint endeavor agreement, would exchange a Space Shuttle deployment for 15% of the channel capacity for two years to test the system. “But first," said Dr. Firouz Naderi, JPL's mobile satellite experiment project manager, "we must further develop the technology and try to squeeze as many channels as we can from a very narrow frequency allocation. That is the biggest obstacle we face." Also, JPL must design sophisticated multi-beam antennas that service "spot areas" and create techniques so frequencies could be reused to provide the most efficient use of the limited spectrum. Recently JPL sponsored a two-day briefing on the state of the industry. Attending were more than 250 representatives of 120 organizations including the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which would regulate the MSS; 11 of 12 candidate companies that petitioned the FCC for the right to operate the system; communications equipment manufacturers such as General Electric, Harris, and Motorola; Canadian government and industry representatives; banking officials; and potential users of the system. At the briefing, the FCC said it hoped by the middle of 1986 to assign a frequency to the mobile satellite industry as well as license an operator to be in charge of the system. NASA scheduled for launch in 1990 the first generation satellite with a 5 to 7 m antenna. During the program's second phase, NASA would launch from the Space Shuttle a 20m (65 ft.) antenna. NASA then planned for the program's final phase to construct on the proposed space station a 50m (180 ft.) antenna for deployment into geosynchronous orbit. (JPL Universe, Nov 29/ 85, 1) During November. Quoting from the Congressional Record, NASA reported remarks of Rep. Don Fuqua, (D-Fla.) chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, who introduced the Federal Science and Technology Revitalization Act of 1985. The act ". . . would establish an alternative personnel management system for scientific and technical people in the federal government," Fuqua said. "This is something I have been interested in for a long time, and I am hopeful that the proposal I am introducing will be able to help improve the quality of government-operated federal laboratories by encouraging the recruiting and retention of highly qualified scientific and technical individuals." Major provisions of the bill would permit agencies to include scientific and technical personnel in the new personnel management systems; simplify job evaluation and remove covered positions from the classification requirements of 5 U.S.C., Chapter 51; provide flexibility to develop a salary structure that ensured a competitive position in the labor market and that reflected the hiring and pay policies needed to attract, retain, and motivate a highly qualified scientific and technical work force; increase base pay on performance, not longevity; allow waiver of the pay cap for up to 5% of specially qualified scientific and technical personnel; provide for performance and special awards and remove the pay cap for lump-sum awards; and create a senior scientific and technical personnel service. In May 1983 the Federal Laboratory Review Panel of the White House Science Council chaired by David Packard reported that federal laboratories had several serious deficiencies and, consequently, a number of them did not meet the quality and productivity standards that might be expected, Fuqua explained. The panel reported that salaries at federal laboratories were noncompetitive with the private sector at entry and senior levels and that federal laboratories had to deal with a personnel management system that was cumbersome and had little flexibility. As a result, there existed what the panel referred to as an alarming "inability of many federal laboratories—especially those under civil service constraints—to attract, retain, and motivate qualified scientists and engineers." The panel concluded that administrative and legislative actions should be initiated to create, at government-operated laboratories, a scientific-technical personnel system that was independent of current civil service personnel systems, Fuqua continued. This "bill is the legislative attempt to deal with these very real problems," Fuqua said. "My own experience ... is that the requirements for NASA and Department of Agriculture labs may be very different, but attracting and retaining quality personnel is absolutely essential for the space program and for emerging fields in agriculture." (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 9)
U.S. Air Force's imaging reconnaissance spacecraft had observed the USSR's 200-foot tall oxygen/hydrogen-powered rocket hardware, to be used in both their space shuttle and new unmanned heavy booster programs, being frequently mounted and removed from its Tyuratam launch pad, suggesting Soviet dissatisfaction with the ground test results and leading U.S. space experts to believe the troubles could greatly slow the Soviet's ability to launch large new space station elements or space weapons such as laser battle stations, Aviation Week reported. The Soviets had not test flown any of the new heavy space shuttle or new unmanned-booster hardware, and serious delays in their flight test schedules would undoubtedly arise from the ground test problems. However, U.S. reconnaissance had also discovered the Soviet shuttle program recently had added a significant new element—a second large space shuttle orbiter vehicle—observed sitting partially in a hangar at the Soviet Ramenskoye Flight Test Center east of Moscow. The other Soviet heavy orbiter was sitting outside the hangar. The orbiters were almost identical in size and design to the U.S. Space Shuttle orbiter, and the discovery of the second vehicle showed a forward program direction. (AvWk, May 27/85, 21)
NASA announced it had delayed for at least a week the February 20 Space Shuttle flight that would carry Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), because of thermal tiles problems and a backlog of paperwork, the Washington Post reported. A chemical reaction in the thermal tiles' adhesive on the orbiter Challenger's underside had caused about 4,000 of the more than 30,000 tiles to loosen during return to earth on the orbiter's last flight. Although NASA had replaced all but 47 of the faulty tiles, it had not certified the repair work. (W Post, Feb 6/85, A12)
NASA launched today from KSC Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-G with a crew of seven, including Saudi Prince Sultan Salman A1-Saud and Patrick Baudry from France, for the 18th Space Shuttle flight, the Washington Post reported. Earlier NASA had announced that mission 51-G would carry the automated directional solidification furnace (ADSF), Spartan 1, and the French echocardiograph (FEE) and posture (FPE) experiments. The objective of the ADSF was to provide a technology demonstration of the capability of the equipment to perform directional solidification of a magnetic composite material and to study the role of gravity-driven phenomena in such processing. The apparatus used for the directional solidification experiments was a specially designed furnace that melted a sample contained in a quartz tube one cm in diameter and 35 cm long. A furnace module (a heater with an integral quench block) moved along the four tubes in the experiment so that the manganese-bismuth alloy samples melted and solidified at a controlled rate. Electric resistance provided the heat; the quench block was liquid cooled. In that first flight, all four samples were the same alloy with only the solidification rate changed to allow a better understanding of that aspect of the process. Spartan 1 was the first of a continuing series of low-cost free flyers designed to extend sounding rocket experiment capabilities. The Spartan 1 objective was to map the X-ray emissions from the Perseus Cluster, the nuclear region of the Milky Way galaxy, and the Scorpius X-2 (SCO-X-2). NASA had flown the Spartan 1 instrument several times on sounding rockets; the resulting information led to the need to obtain greater viewing time of the selected targets, thus permitting more detailed studies with greater resolutions. The crew would deploy the Spartan 1 from the Space Shuttle and retrieve it using the Canadian-built remote manipulator system. After deployment, the Spartan 1 would perform scientific observations for up to 40 hours via an onboard microcomputer controller that commanded all pointing sequences and satellite control. There was no command or telemetry link; when observing sequences were complete, the satellite "safed" all systems and placed itself in a stable attitude for retrieval. The objectives of the FEE and FPE, a part of a cooperative program with France, was to obtain on-orbit data regarding the response of the cardiovascular and sensorimotor systems to weightlessness. French payload specialist Patrick Baudry would perform the experiments with participation from other crew members including the Arabsat payload specialist. The USSR's July 1982 Salyut mission had also flown the FEE system. By 4:30 p.m. June 17, Discovery's crew had successfully deployed a Mexican satellite, Morelos-1, the first of two identical satellites, which headed for a position 22,300 miles above the equator west of the Galapagos Islands. It would beam TV programs to the most remote regions of Mexico. (NASA Flight Operation Report M-980-51-G [prelaunch] June 5/85, NASA MOR E-420-51-G-16 [prelaunch] June 7/85, MOR E-420-51-G-17 [prelaunch] June 5/85, MOR E-420-51-G-18 [prelaunch] June 13/85, MOR-989-51-G [postflight] July 3/85; W Post, June 18/85, A3) During June: NASA announced that the Space Shuttle mission 51-G would carry three communications satellites, a deployable/retrievable Spartan 1 spacecraft, and six Get Away Special canisters. The orbiter Discovery would fly several mid-deck experiments including one for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) organization and a materials processing furnace. The Mexican spacecraft, Morelos-A, was a version of the Hughes HS 376 satellite, a number of which had already been deployed from the Space Shuttle. Morelos-A was the first of two domestic communications satellites that would provide advanced telecommunications to the more remote parts of Mexico. Arabsat-A, owned by the Arab Satellite Communications Organization and built by Aerospatiale, would provide telecommunications links between the member nations. A U.S. domestic communications satellite owned by American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), Telestar 3-D would provide telecommunications services to the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. All three spacecraft would first spring-eject from the orbiter's cargo bay, then on each a small attached payload assist module would ignite about 45 minutes after deployment to propel the satellites to transfer orbits out as far as 22,300	miles above earth. A second small rocket motor would then fire on each spacecraft to circularize the orbits, placing the spacecraft in geosynchronous orbits. Three of the six Get Away Special canisters contained West German payloads for study of materials processing in space and behavior of liquid propellants. A fourth canister contained a U.S. Air Force/U.S. Naval Research Laboratory investigation of the ultraviolet radiation environment in space. A fifth canister had a package of nine student experiments in biological and physical sciences. A Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) investigation of a developmental heat transfer system was in the sixth canister. A capillary pumped loop (CPL) experiment, it was the first flight of a CPL two-phase thermal control system. The advanced development and flight experiments section of the thermal engineering branch at GSFC developed the CPL (NASA Release 85-83)
NASA launched from KSC at 5:00 p.m. EDT today Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger carrying Spacelab-2. The flight was the eighth for Challenger and the 19th Space Shuttle mission. The flight commander was Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, who served as pilot on the third Space Shuttle mission. Air Force Col. Roy Bridges, Jr. was pilot; mission specialists were Dr. Anthony England, a geophysicist; Dr. F. Story Musgrave, a physician; and Dr. Karl Henize, an astronomer who at the age of 58 was the oldest American to travel in space. Payload specialists were Dr. Loren Acton, a solar physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, and Dr. John David Bartoe, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory. Approximately 5 minutes and 45 seconds after launch onboard computers shut down Challenger's center engine (SSME 1) due to failure of the orbiter's two high-pressure, fuel turbo-pump discharge temperature sensors. Challenger was 70 miles above earth at the time, about 50 miles below the orbit considered safe for a manned spacecraft. The two remaining main engines ran smoothly and burned about a minute and 10 seconds longer than originally planned, putting the Space Shuttle into a lower-than-scheduled orbit. The crew then used two auxiliary engines to raise the orbit in steps from an initial 122 miles to 194 miles at 10:30 p.m. the night of launch. The crew also dumped as much as 4,400 lb. of fuel to achieve the higher orbit. In explaining the problem with SSME 1, NASA associate administrator Jesse Moore said the onboard sensors first indicated that the center engine might be overheating four minutes after liftoff, the Washington Post reported. "Computers then ordered the center engine fuel pump to bypass one valve and use another to feed fuel into the combustion chamber," he said. Two minutes later computers again sensed that the fuel pump was overheating and automatically shut down the center engine.The mission control center in Houston also received indications of dangerously high temperature readings on a second engine and instructed the crew to disconnect a backup sensor to prevent the second engine from shutting down before the spacecraft reached orbit. The crew encountered the next problem when attempting to operate a $60 million telescope-pointing device. The instrument pointing subsystem (IPS) and its four solor telescopes were one of 13 experiments carried on the European-built Spacelab-2. Mission specialist Henize told mission control that the pointing attempts were "rather dismal," the NY Times reported. Lee Briscoe, flight director, elaborated to reporters. "It appears that we are able to find the sun, find the stars, get into what we call a rough track mode," he said. "But we never appear to get into a fine track and actually finish the total tracking." Since the problem appeared to be with the computer programming that drove the unit, NASA radioed up a new version of the programming. However, it initially failed to correct the problem, and NASA told the crew to try harder. Eventually the IPS operated successfully after the crew inserted a series of software patches developed at Marshall Space Flight Center. NASA extended the mission duration by one day to allow additional collection of engineering and scientific data. The Spacelab-2 aboard Challenger was the second of its two verification test flights and consisted of an igloo attached to a lead pallet, the IPS mounted on it and a two pallet train behind, with an experiment special support structure. Experiments conducted during the Spacelab-2 mission were in the fields of life sciences, plasma physics, infrared astronomy, high-energy physics, solar physics, atmospheric physics, and technology. Experiments were located on the IPS, the three pallets, the special support structure, the orbiter mid-deck, and one on the ground (NASA FOR M-989-51-F [postflight] Sept 27/85, [prelaunch] July 9/85; NASA MOR M-977-51-F-03 [prelaunch] July 1/85; W Post, July 30/85, A1, July 31/85, A3; NYT, July 31/85, B4)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced today the 10 finalists in the NASA Teacher in Space Project. The finalists would travel July 7 to Johnson Space Center for medical examinations and initial spaceflight suitability testing. The NASA Spaceflight Participant Committee would then interview the teachers in Washington, D.C., submitting results of the examinations and interviews to NASA Administrator James Beggs who would select the primary and backup candidate. NASA had tentatively scheduled the teacher for a January 1986 Space Shuttle flight. Finalists were Kathleen Beres, Kenwood High School, Baltimore, Maryland; Robert Foerster, Cumberland Elementary School, West Lafayette, Indiana; Judith Garcia, Thomas Jefferson School for Science and Technology, Alexandria, Virginia; Peggy Lathlaen, Westwood Elementary School, Friendswood, Texas; David Marquart, Boise High School, Boise, Idaho; Sharon Christa McAuliffe, Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire; Michael Metcalf, Hazen Union School, Hardwick, Vermont; Richard Methia, New Bedford High School, New Bedford, Massachusetts; Barbara Morgan, McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho; and Niki Wenger, Ven-dervender Junior High School, Parkersburg, West Virginia. (NASA Release 85-99)
NASA announced that John Young would command Space Shuttle flight 61-J scheduled for launch August 1986, Vance Brand mission 61-K scheduled for September 1986, and Donald Williams mission 61—I. Other crew for the 61-J mission, during which astronauts would deploy the Hubble Space Telescope, were pilot Charles Bolden Jr. and previously named mission specialists Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce Mc-Candless. S. David Griggs would pilot mission 61—K, and other crew would be mission specialists Robert Steward, Owen Garriott, and European Space Agency astronaut Claude Nicollier. NASA previously assigned payload specialists Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg to the mission. Remaining mission 61-1 crew would be pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists James Bagian, Bonnie Dunbar and Manley "Sonny" Carter. NASA also announced that Norman Thagard would replace John Fabian on mission 61-G scheduled for May 1986 during which crew would deploy the Galileo interplanetary spacecraft. Fabian was leaving NASA; he had not announced his plans. James Buchli would replace Thagard on mission 61-H in June 1986. (NASA Release 85-131)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
Continuing a project begun in 1984, some of the world's most prominent lightning experts gathered during the summer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to study lightning strikes and their effects, the Spaceport News reported. KSC attracted scientists with a variety of research interests because it was one of the nation's areas of highest frequency of strikes and the presence of French experts who had mastered the technique of triggering lightning. Taking part in the summer's project were representatives of NASA, the U.S. Air Force's Wright Aeronautical Lab, the Federal Aviation Administration, the U.S. Naval Laboratory, France's Center for Nuclear Studies, three U.S. universities, and two industry organizations. Since late May, the 36 lightning investigators had conducted studies at a specially equipped lightning research facility located on the shore of Mosquito Lagoon about nine miles north of the vehicle assembly building. The facility included a launch site for the three-foot rockets used to trigger lightning and two nearby trailers that housed the research teams and their equipment. From their control center, the French experts triggered lightning events by launching a small rocket that trailed a thin copper wire to an altitude of about 2000 feet. The wire acted as a trigger, attracting a stroke, which vaporized the wire while traveling down an electrical pathway to the ground. Special instruments and cameras near the launch site recorded the strike in detail. The triggered lightning events allowed researchers to obtain ground measurements that they could use in atmospheric and lightning research. Researchers might eventually use information from the studies to design advanced lightning protection systems for KSC facilities and for greater protection for aircraft such as the Space Shuttle that contained electronic flight control systems. Other research at the facilities included using a Convair C-580 to obtain measurements on a lightning strike; a study to determine how lightning strokes gained access to power lines; investigation of the Maxwell Current, which developed in a particular pattern before, during, and after thunderstorms; and attempts to obtain three-dimensional photos of lightning strikes. In addition to hosting the project, KSC was contributing funding to some of the university research. Project managers hoped to attract more participants in the future with the promise of research leading to tangible benefits in lightning protection and prediction. (Spaceport News, Aug 16/85, 7)
NASA Administrator James Beggs criticized the Air Force and NOAA for plans to launch some satellites aboard surplus Titan II missiles rather than using the Space Shuttle, saying it would cost NASA $500 million, the Washington Post reported. "You know the old syndrome," he said, "if it wasn't invented here [at the Air Force] it can't be all that good ... I don't like it. It is not good for our short-term future and makes it that much more difficult for us to get on an even footing in the next five years." The controversy had begun with an Air Force decision to refurbish and redevelop obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch up to 12 Air Force satellites that NASA had assumed would be flying on the Space Shuttle. When NOAA heard of the Air Force decision, its acting administrator, Anthony Calio (a former NASA official), had contacted the Air Force about launching over the next seven years three advanced weather satellites, called Metsats, into polar orbit. When questioned, Calio had said the Air Force offered a deal that would save NOAA $90 million—it would cost $100 million to redesign the Metsats to fly on the Space Shuttle and $105 million in launch fees versus an Air Force charge of $115 million for the three Titan II launches, resulting in a net saving of $90 million. "This agency has a budget of $1 billion a year so we're talking about 10% of our annual budget. This is strictly a business deal," Calio concluded. Beggs responded that he always assumed the Air Force and NOAA would use the Space Shuttle, although they had not signed a formal agreement. He said he did not believe NOAA would save that much and that the Air Force would bear the refurbishment cost to redevelop the Titan II, estimated by Beggs at $100 million. "I believe what we're talking here is a savings to NOAA and a net loss to the U.S. Treasury," Beggs said. "I think this whole scheme should be looked at very carefully by the administration and by Congress." And he mentioned his concern that the Air Force plan could set a dangerous precedent. (W Post, Feb 25/85, A1)
NASA announced the postlaunch status of the NOAA-A, -B, and -C missions carried out for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In addition, NASA announced it scheduled NOAA-D for launch in 1987.	NASA submitted on January 24, 1984 a postlaunch report for NOAA-E (launched March 18, 1983) and would submit a postlaunch report for NOAA-F (launched December 12, 1984) after a full year of data collection and evaluation. NASA successfully launched NO.AA-A (NOAA-6) June 27, 1979, from the Western Space and Missile Center into a sun-synchronous orbit. The satellite ceased providing usable atmospheric soundings on October 22, 1983, when the filter wheel assembly became inoperable. NASA still used the primary imaging system. NOAA-G would replace NOAA-6 in November 1985. During NOAA-B launch on May 29, 1980, one of the two Atlas booster engines had a thrust reduction. This premature booster engine cutoff caused a deficit in velocity and altitude of the Atlas, making the sustainer engine burn 55 seconds longer than planned. As the sustainer engine was still thrusting when the spacecraft attempted to separate from the launch vehicle, the spacecraft consumed most of its attitude control gas as it fought the booster for its attitude control. The apogee kick motor burn put NOAA-B into a highly elliptical, 269 x 1466 km, 92.5° inclination orbit. As a result of the combination of incorrect orbit and loss of attitude control, NASA terminated the mission. The aborted NOAA-B mission brought about changes in subsequent NOAA launches, and the next three launches were successful. On June 23, 1981, NASA successfully launched NOAA-C (NOAA-7) from the Eastern Space and Missile Center into a sun-synchronous orbit. Failure of the filter wheel assembly on February 7, 1985, terminated the collection of usable atmospheric soundings. On February 25, 1985, NASA placed the primary imaging system on standby when NOAA-9 became the operational spacecraft for afternoon observations. NASA achieved the mission objectives of NOAA-A and -C, and the spacecraft provided useful sounding and imaging data far in excess of their two-year design life. NASA certified these missions successful. Due to launch vehicle malfunction, NASA terminated the NOAA-B mission and reported that mission unsuccessful. (NASA MOR E-615-79-01 [postlaunch], E—615— 80-02 [postlaunch], E-615-81-03 [postlaunch] Apr 16/85) During May: The Canadian government had cut $5 million (Canadian) from the National Research Council of Canada's space sciences budget, eliminating the sounding rocket program and most of the balloon research, Spaceflight reported. The cuts meant the end of nearly a quarter-century of space research with the indigenous Black Brant family of sounding rockets. The council did not cut major satellite and Space Shuttle research projects. (Spaceflight,, May 85, 201)
Peoples Republic of China astronautics minister Li Xue said China would put their Long March 2 and 3 rockets on the international market to provide satellite launching services for local and foreign clients, FBIS Beijing XINHUA Hong Kong Service in Chinese reported. The decision resulted from the October 21 launch by a Long March 2 rocket of an earth surveying satellite and an April 8, 1984 launch by a Long March 3 rocket of China's first experimental telecommunications satellite. Li Xue said the recent Long March 2 launch was its seventh consecutive success, indicating the two-stage liquid-propellant rocket could reliably put a satellite of about two tons into a near-earth orbit from the Jiuquan launching center, in addition the Long March 3 launch from the Xichang launching center of a satellite into geosynchronous orbit showed China had mastered the technology for placing a satellite in that orbit. He added that in addition to launch services from the two centers, China could provide satellite orbital control and support from the Xian control center, which had an ocean-based survey vessel component. And he pointed out that China could provide preferential prices for foreign customers, would train technicians, and had the capability, through the Chinese People's Insurance Co., to underwrite satellites that were launched. In conclusion, he said that, after the Long March 2 and 3 rockets were on the international market, they would promote international technical and economic cooperation in the astronautics field and contribute to the maintenance of world peace. (FBIS, XINHUA Kong Hong Service in Chinese, Oct 26/85) January 1Ch Four years after cancellation of the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), the U.S. Navy had begun to develop a simple, low-cost system to monitor ocean conditions routinely from space, Aerospace Daily reported. Budgeted at about a third the estimated cost of NOSS, the Navy Remote Ocean Sensing System (NROSS) would have nearly the same capability as NOSS by 1989, lacking particularly the synthetic aperture radar, and would use many of the ocean observation capabilities NASA's Seasat program demonstrated in 1979. The Pentagon had avoided $591.5 million in FY 1981-88 costs by cancelling NOSS (NASA and NOAA contributions would have made the total over $1 billion). NROSS would use a single-satellite system with no backup; the Navy would resolve later the issue of replenishment satellites. NROSS would also use existing or already planned data-processing equipment at the Navy's Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center and the USAF's Defense Meteorological Satellite Program command and control facilities. The Navy expected to spend about $200 million from FY 85 development through a launch in 1989, with a NASA contribution of $115 million ($35 million for the satellite program and $80 million in research). The Office of Management and Budget had vetoed use of NOAA's NOAA-D spacecraft as the NROSS bus, so NROSS would use a Block 5D-2 DMSP spacecraft. The Navy had planned an Atlas E launch, but was considering a refurbished Titan II ICBM. Planners rejected a Space Shuttle launch as too expensive.
Presidential Science Advisor Dr. George Keyworth said to the U.S. House aviation subcommittee today that the U.S. was in the forefront of an unprecedented revolution in aeronautical technology, Defense Daily reported, and he called for an immediate start by the country on a streamlined, focused, and coordinated program by both government and industry to develop the necessary technology to field—before the end of the century-hypersonic transatmospheric passenger transport and space launch vehicles/military space planes. The latter could provide a two orders of magnitude reduction in the cost of transporting a pound of payload into orbit. Keyworth said he believed it was possible to develop the technology for the follow-ons to current commercial jetliners and the Space Shuttle under one R&D program. Although he was not certain if one vehicle could fill both roles, he predicted that the vehicles would be "very similar." Keyworth did not give specifics about funding requirements or a timetable but said that the government should in the course of the coming fall's discussions of the FY 87 budget focus on the opportunities available in the hypersonic area. Alluding to the British view that they could build the HOTOL (Horizontal Take-Off and Landing) transatmospheric vehicle by 1997, Key-worth said it was possible for the U.S. to exceed that goal. He noted that the Reagan Administration over the next few months would work with the aerospace industry to develop a program focusing on well-defined goals and added that he hoped NASA and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency would appropriately budget funds to make the program stand out. Keyworth said he was not talking about tomorrow's technology in the hypersonic area but technology that "is here" waiting to be assembled. At the same hearing, Rep. Tom Lewis (R-Fla.) said the British claimed that the HOTOL would be able to put payloads in orbit at one-half to one-fifth the cost of the Space Shuttle, and that they would capture 75% of the commercial launch market by the year 2000. Deputy Assistant Commerce Secretary Crawford Brubaker added that Britain had closed to the outside world all information about the engines being developed for HOTOL, so "they think they have made a breakthrough" on those engines. It was reported that a combination of Rolls-Royce conceived, airbreathing engines using atmospheric oxygen and liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engines would power HOTOL. (D/D, July 25/85, 129)
NASA announced that its Administrator selected Dr. Charles Chappell of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and Dr. Dirk Frimout of the European Space Agency (ESA) to serve as alternate payload specialists for the first Earth Observation Mission (EOM), which would use the Spacelab scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis in the latter half of 1986. Chappell and Frimout would serve as backups to flight payload specialists Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and his alternate, Dr. Michael Lampton. Chappell was chief of the Solar Terrestrial Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC and was responsible for directing a research group that studied the physics of the sun-earth environment. He served as mission scientist for the 10-day Spacelab 1 mission, during which 70 investigations were carried out. Frimout was the senior engineer supporting European researchers who would have experiments on the mission, and he had served as ESA crew coordinator and operations manager for Spacelab 1. Chappell and Frimout would train with the flight crew and serve as members of the mission management team in the Payload Operations Control Center during the flight. They would communicate directly with the crew on orbit, assist the payload operations team during normal operations, and aid in trouble shooting problems and in changing crew procedures when necessary. They would also advise the mission scientist, Dr. Marsha Torr, of the possible impact of problems and timeline changes. The EOM flight was the first in a series of Space Shuttle missions primarily dedicated to measuring solar irradiance and the chemical composition of the earth's stratosphere and mesosphere during an 11-year solar cycle. NASA would refly several instruments originally carried on the Spacelab 1 and 3 missions to accomplish these measurements. The mission would use the short version of the Spacelab module, in which a single Spacelab pallet and special support structure would hold instruments that required exposure to the space environment. The mission would consist of 15 experiments conducted in six disciplines—atmospheric science, solar physics, plasma physics, earth resources, astronomy, and life sciences. The international mission included experiments sponsored by Belgium, France, Japan, Federal Republic of Germany, and the U.S. ESA would provide operations support for the European investigations. The Investigators Working Group (IWG), which consisted of the principal investigator for each of the mission experiments, recommended alternate payload specialist candidates for selection by NASA's administrator. (NASA Release 85-179) External Tank November 27r The U.S. Senate awarded Martin Marietta Corp. the United States Senate Productivity Award for the state of Louisiana for manufacturing improvements and costs savings in production of the Space Shuttle's external tank, Defense Daily reported. The Senate cited the company for its innovative across-the-board productivity program that included plant modernization, installation of automated production processes, and development of an employee participation program that led to a number of improvements in the manufacturing process. "Estimates are that this increased productivity will save NASA and ultimately the American taxpayer more than a billion dollars over the long run," said Louisiana Senators J. Bennett lohnston (D) and Russell Long (D) in a joint statement. The two also cited the "flawless performance" of the tanks in Space Shuttle missions to date. (D/D, Nov 27/85, 142) Launch and Landing Facilities
NASA announced that its Comet Halley Active Monitoring Program (CHAMP), a middeck payload to obtain wide field visible and ultraviolet data on Comet Halley using handheld equipment, would have its primary flight January 1986 on the Space Shuttle (STS) mission 51 —L. It was during that time that the comet would be most active but viewing from earth would be most difficult due to the narrow viewing angle between the comet and the sun. The first flight of CHAMP would be on STS mission 61-C in December 1985; the third, on STS mission 61 —E March 1986. The December and March flights would provide important pre- and post-perihelion baseline data that would assist with the interpretation of the January flight data. NASA considered CHAMP data supplemental to the extensive and detailed space-based data to be obtained from the flight of the ASTRO payload on STS mission 61-E, the Spartan-Halley payload on STS mission 51-L, the UVX payload on STS mission 61-C, and the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft. However, the CHAMP data would be unique in its nature and ability to provide a single context for all of these activities, because it would make observations on three Space Shuttle missions. Before each observation, the assigned mission specialist would set up the experiment by mounting the CHAMP equipment in the appropriate window. On the January flight, the mission specialist would use the orbiter Challenger's UV transmissive side hatch quartz window. On the other two flights, data probably would be acquired through the aft flight deck windows. During observations, the orbiter would be oriented so the appropriate window was pointed to within 5° of the celestial coordinates of the comet, with attitude drift rates of less than 1.002° maintained. Each observation required exposing a series of one to four calibration shots plus six to eight frames of film for images or spectra during the approximately five-minute period occurring in each orbit when the comet was in view and the sun was at least 8° below the earth's horizon. NASA hoped there would be an observation for each flight day during the seven-day December and March missions, and up to 20 observations during the January flight. However, conflicts with other operational requirements might reduce the actual number of observations, although unusual cometary behavior could require additional time allocated to the experiment. (NASA MOR E-420-61-C-20 [prelaunch], Dec 17/85)
Already far ahead of their work schedule, astronauts aboard Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 began preparing tools they would use in an attempt to revive the U.S. Navy Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Mission planners had hoped the satellite repairs could be made during an August 30 spacewalk, but they added another spacewalk for August 31 because ground tests showed that the Space Shuttle crippled robot arm could not work fast enough to complete the repair job in one day. "It appears we are faced with a two-EVA (extravehicular activity) plan," flight director Bill Reeves said. He blamed a failed circuit that prevented Discovery's robot arm from operating in an automatic mode. Reeves noted that ground tests showed that the robot arm, when operated manually, would need about 75% more time to maneuver the Syncom 3 satellite and that it would take two 6-and-a-half hour spacewalks to complete the repair. Mission specialists Dr. James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher spent about four hours August 28 checking out electronic gear they would use to repair the satellite. Mission specialist John Lounge would work the robot arm from inside the cockpit, while van Hoften and Fisher worked outside on the satellite. The robot arm would play a crucial role, holding van Hoften in place while he worked on the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay. Lounge would also use the robot arm to help van Hoften turn the satellite so Fisher, standing in foot restraints inside the bay, could remove a panel and disengage a timing lever, then plug two electrical cables into the panel and, in effect, jump start the satellite. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A3)
"Let's face it, these brakes are right at the edge in a vehicle that lands as heavy and as fast as the shuttle does," said astronaut Daniel Brandenstein, commander of the next Space Shuttle mission. "My guess is we'll be landing for awhile out in the Mojave, where there's no end to the runways and there's almost nothing on either side of the runways to worry about either." Also, studies suggested that the Space Shuttle nose gear might require rebuilding to provide better steering during landing in a crosswind, a situation more likely to occur at KSC than at Edwards. Cost of such rebuilding could run as high as $3 million for each orbiter. (W Post, May 30/85, A19)
A new study issued by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) said competition from other nations and several private companies in launching spacecraft put the U.S. under pressure to protect its economic and technological leadership in space, the NY Times reported. This protection could be accomplished by reassessing the Space Shuttle's pricing policy, promoting greater private investment in space-related goods and services, and forging a long-term space policy to assure a competitive edge, report recommended. The European Space Agency, a consortium of 11 western European governments, broke the U.S. monopoly in launch services for the West with its Ariane rocket program. Arianespace, a corporation owned by the French government and European banks and aerospace companies, was aggressively pursuing customers for Ariane's services and had won several contracts that would otherwise have gone to U.S. conventional rockets or the Space Shuttle. France was planning later in the year to use the Ariane to inaugurate the world's first commercial remote-sensing satellite service, competing with U.S. Landsats that surveyed the world's geologic, water, and agricultural resources. China announced the previous month a new commercial space program using its own satellites, launching rockets, and ground stations. The Chinese had rockets capable of boosting satellites into the high orbit needed for communications satellites. Japan, emphasizing the export potential of space technology, was developing its own rocket launching capability and was planning to launch the next year the first of a series of ocean and land remote-sensing satellites. India also had joined the nations launching satellites, and Brazil was building a rocket base with the intention of becoming the first South American launching power. Although the USSR was apparently tempted to enter the commercial market, western space experts questioned whether the Russians would ever be a major force in commercial space operations. They said the USSR might be reluctant to allow outside scientists and businessmen access to their facilities and other governments would probably not allow advanced communications satellites to be exported to the Soviet Union. In its report, the OTA said that other nations developed their own space launching capabilities out of a desire to be technologically independent, to gain any economic benefits that derived from space technology, and to be regarded as "space powers." Consequently, the report concluded that the U.S.'s "competitive strategy based on price or superior technology alone will not prevent foreign entry into the launch service business." At stake, besides prestige, was a share of what by the end of the century could be a $50 billion annual business, according to estimates by some economists in the aerospace field. The report recommended that the U.S. government investigate new trade and regulatory policies to reduce the risks and uncertainties that hindered private investment in space technology. The study concluded that NASA by itself was "not well-equipped either to promote or to regulate growth in the commercial exploitation of space." The report suggested the regulation of "space industries" should be integrated with the regulation of their counterparts on earth. (NYT, July 26/85, A1)
NASA announced that a cubic crystal art work, the first nonscientific payload to fly aboard a Space Shuttle, would go into space in the spring of 1986. "The Boundless Aperture," created by artist Lowry Burgess, was one in a series of seven works in a project entitled "Quiet Axis," intended to express through art the scientific observation of order and harmony in the universe. The De Cordova Museum, the New Works Program of the Massachusetts Council on the Arts and Humanities, and the Massachusetts Artists Foundation funded and would pay for launch of "The Boundless Aperture," which was a six-lb. five-inch sq. cube of bronze-tinted transparent glass. The cube contained such materials as water from 18 of the world's rivers and minute amounts, or an appropriate substitute, of each of the elements in the periodic table. After flying in a middeck locker of the Space Shuttle orbiter, the work would be placed inside a petrified sycamore tree obtained from the Grand Canyon; and both would hover in a permanent magnetic field inside a rock formation on the grounds of the De Cordova Museum. Burgess was a professor at the Massachusetts College of Art in Boston and was director of its graduate program in fine arts and design. He was also a fellow and senior consultant at the Center for Advanced Visual Studies of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NASA would determine the final cost of flying the work when it arrived at Kennedy Space Center. (NASA Release 85-175)
NASA announced a launch date of no earlier than April 12, 1985, for the 51-D Space Shuttle mission, with two windows for launch on that date: from 8:04 a.m. to 8:18 a.m. EST and from 8:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. EST. The orbiter Discovery would land April 17 at approximately 8:14 a.m. EST at KSC. During the mission, crew would deploy the Canadian Telesat (Anik C1) and the Hughes Syncom IV (LEASAT) and operate the McDonnell Douglas continuous flow electrophoresis system. (NASA Release 85—43) During March: NASA announced it had scheduled for no earlier than March 3 from KSC the launch of Space Shuttle mission 51 -E, which was the 15th Space Shuttle mission and the orbiter Challenger's 7th flight. The Challenger was scheduled to land on March 7 at the 15,000-foot Space Shuttle landing facility at KSC. NASA previously announced the flight crew [see Feb. 7]. Challenger would carry the heaviest cargo taken into space by a Space Shuttle; total weight of the payload bay and cabin payloads would be nearly 53,400	lb., almost 15,000 lb. heavier than the previous record set on Space Shuttle mission 51-A. After liftoff and insertion into orbit, the crew would prepare to deploy the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B)/inertial upper stage (IUS). Following release, the crew would maneuver Challenger to a safe distance and observe the IUS perigee kick motor firing, placing the TDRS in geosynchronous transfer orbit. Following IUS first-stage burn of about 2 minutes 26 seconds, which would then drop off, the TDRS/IUS second stage stack would coast for six hours on the way to geosynchronous orbit altitude of 22,300 miles. Once there, the IUS second stage would fire for 1 minute 49 seconds to stabilize the TDRS in geosynchronous orbit and the IUS would drop off. The IUS was an advanced solid-propellant, two-stage booster designed to carry heavyweight payloads into orbits higher than the Space Shuttle could reach. NASA first used the IUS on the STS-6 mission for launch of TDRS-A. Changes to the IUS since then corrected problems that developed during the STS-6 mission. The IUS first stage developed about 46,500 lb. of thrust, the second stage about 18,500 lb. On the second day, the crew would use the Challenger's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) engines to raise their orbit to above 180 miles for deployment during the 22nd orbit of the 7,347-lb. Telesat-1 (Anik C-1) and its payload assist module (PAM). (NASA Release 85-24)
NASA announced selection of 13 new astronaut candidates, six pilots and seven mission specialists, who would report to the Johnson Space Center in late summer to begin a one-year period of training and evaluation. Upon successful completion of the training, they would be eligible for assignment to Space Shuttle flights. The candidates would join 90 current astronauts. Including the new group, NASA had named 157 astronauts since the beginning of the program. In making the latest selections, NASA considered 33 civilians from the selection rosters developed during the 1984 selection process and 133 nominees from the military services. Those selected as pilot candidates were LCdr. Michael Baker (USN), Maj. Robert Caban (USMC), Capt. Brian Duffy (USAF), Stephen Oswald (civilian), and LCdr. Stephen Thorne (USN). Mission specialist candidates were Jerome Apt (PhD—civilian), Capt. Charles Gemar (US Army), Linda Godwin (PhD— civilian), Richard Hieb (civilian), Tamara Gernigan (civilian), Capt. Carl Meade (USAF), and Lt. Pierre Thuot (USN). (NASA Release 85-84)
NASA launched at 12:02 p.m. EDT today from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger mission 51 —B carrying seven astronauts, Spacelab 3, 24 rats, and two squirrel monkeys for the most intensive science mission to date, the Washington Post reported. Launched 17 days after Discovery left the same launch pad, the Challenger flight bested the previous "turnaround" record of 34 days. Challenger carried the oldest crew ever to fly in space. Marine Col. Robert Overmyer, commander, was 49; Frederick Gregory, pilot, and Taylor Wang, payload specialist, were 44; Don Lind, mission specialist, was 54; Lodewijk van den Berg, payload specialist, was 53; William Thornton, mission specialist, was 55; and Norman Thagard, mission specialist, 41. The crew called the flight one by scientists for science. "This mission marks the first time that scientists who designed their own experiments will be executing those experiments in space," said Lind, who had been waiting 16 years for the flight. The five scientists would work in around-the-clock shifts on the 15 experiments inside the European-built Spacelab. Before liftoff NASA decided not to have the crew launch two Get-Away Special satellites, one a student experiment and the other a Pentago payload, because a nine-volt battery had failed on the last Space Shuttle flight. Ground tests showed that three other batteries from the same batch failed after 18 hours in vacuum. The satellites would return to the ground with the Space Shuttle. The crew successfully deployed a satellite intended to calibrate air traffic control radars on the ground, but encountered difficulties when trying to deploy a U.S. Navy satellite that would locate drifting weather buoys. The satellite would not move from the cargo bay despite repeated signals to trigger deployment. Later the crew discovered they had no fresh water from their galley faucet and had to bypass the faucet and reconnect themselves to their water supply using an all-purpose hose carried for such emergencies. Other problems ranged from an overheated hydraulic system power unit to a urine collection device that one crew member said sprayed water "all over the place." The monkeys and rats appeared to be doing well. Four of the rats had surgical implants in their hearts to record changes in heartbeat and blood flow. The others were testing cages and equipment for future animal experiments. The monkeys were on a shakedown flight to determine how they tolerated living in orbit. If they didn't get nervous or frightened in space, later flights would carry squirrel monkeys with surgical implants to test for space sickness and heart changes. (W Post, Apr 28/85, A18, Apr 29/85, A3, Apr 30/ 85, A7)
NASA announced it was donating a 26-m antenna located at the Orroral Valley Tracking Station, Australia, which had ceased operations in December 1984, to the Australian University of Tasmania. NASA, which had used the antenna in programs such as Skylab, the Apollo Soyuz test project, and the Space Shuttle, had offered to assist in antenna dismantling and transfer to Hobart, Tasmania. The University of Tasmania's physics department, one of Australia's major centers for astronomy and astrophysics, would use the antenna as part of its teaching and research activities, including operation with the Australian telescope under construction in New South Wales to improve telescope performance. Researchers would also use the antenna in conjunction with other instruments for very-long baseline interferometry, a system employing a number of separate antennas to construct a radio telescope with a high-resolution capability, to obtain more accurate measurements of earth's surface. Researchers would also make the antenna available to NASA for its future geodesy, geodynamics, and astronomy projects. (NASA Release 85-28)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $139,000 follow-on contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study a system for reclaiming unused propellant from Space Shuttle external fuel tanks and transferring it to an orbiting space station, Aerospace Daily reported. Martin Marietta Corp's New Orleans, Louisiana, manufacturing facility would perform the work on the preliminary design study. The contract followed one let in February 1984 and valued at $250,000 to examine the basic "propellant scavenging" concept. The system under study would consist of two to four propellant collecting or scavenging tanks in an aft cargo carrier affixed to the rear of the Space Shuttle external tank. After Space Shuttle launch and cutoff of the main engines, residual liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen would drain from the external tank into the collection tanks aided by a thrust system designed for zero-gravity conditions. Once filled with fuel, the scavenging tank assembly would separate from the aft cargo carrier as a self-contained, remote-controlled vehicle with its own propulsion system. After the vehicle moved into position beside the space station, technicians aboard the station would send an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV) to bring it to the space station fuel depot for transfer of the reclaimed propellant to permanent tanks. When out of fuel, the scavenger vehicle would return to earth in the Space Shuttle cargo bay for reuse on later missions. The proposed system would be capable of reclaiming and transporting up to 25,000 lb. of propellant per mission, depending on the Space Shuttle payload. Unused fuel on Space Shuttle missions to date had ranged from 9,500	to 28,300 lb. of the total 1.6 million lb. of propellant carried by the external fuel tank on each flight. It was currently estimated that the space station would require some 250,000 lb. of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants each year. Martin Marietta said the proposed system would result in reduced costs for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the space station; the company estimated the system could provide propellants at an average cost of approximately $350 per lb. NASA had studied other methods of scavenging fuel from the Space Shuttle external tank but found them to have a higher cost per lb. or to provide fewer opportunities for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the station. (A/D, July 12/85, 61) During July. Yvonne Clearwater, in an article in Psychology Today, described the work of the Space Human Factors team, an interdisciplinary team of which she was a member, to determine what could make the proposed space station a congenial habitat for living and performing highly sophisticated work. The team—representing psychology, architecture, and engineering— was defining what "habitability" meant in space by looking at the critical relationships among environment, psychological well-being, and performance. Clearwater said the team would begin by developing architectural and interior-design guidelines based on behavioral research. NASA contractors and development engineers at Johnson Space Center would then use the guidelines in designing and building the space station. The team would then turn to examining social and psychological issues such as crew selection, training, and support; organization and management; and operations planning. Although recommendations would focus on the physical and social-psychological environments separately, the team had to consider all the factors together in the planning process, because they interacted in the real world, whether on earth or in space. In contrast to the Soviets, who placed a high priority on the mental wellbeing of their space crews, NASA originally had focused on technological engineering rather than behavioral science. In addition, the early astronauts had little interest in psychological support or intervention; reportedly the first seven U.S. astronauts announced they would not tolerate psychologists. Clearwater pointed out, however, that NASA had grown more sophisticated and more sensitive to the fact that body-mind-environment interactions affected the health and performance of people. The formation of the Space Human Factors Office at Ames Research Center reflected NASA's commitment to psychological as well as physical health of space workers. The challenge was to troubleshoot the proposed space station systems and settings while they were still being developed conceptually by, first, identifying the environmental conditions likely to be significant stressors; second, defining the kinds of psychological, emotional, and behavioral problems these could produce; and finally, showing how such problems might affect work performance. Clearwater concluded that by defining and meeting human needs in space environments, it might be possible to create more supportive places for living and working on earth. (Psychology Today, July 85, 34)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that July 1 marked the center's 25th anniversary. MSFC currently managed a budget of about $2 billion annually and employed some 3,300 people, while thousands more worked with numerous aerospace and other high-tech organizations in the Huntsville, Alabama, area to support the center's projects. During the 25 years, MSFC had moved beyond its initial role as NASA's developer of launch vehicles and propulsion systems to that of a scientific and engineering organization also responsible for spacecraft and scientific experiments. The center was currently responsible for a number of NASA programs including the Space Shuttle's engines, propellant tank, and booster rockets; the Hubble Space Telescope; Spacelab orbiting research laboratories; the Space Shuttle upper stage systems; and a significant portion of the proposed space station. (MSFC Release 85-31)
NASA announced that the Department of Defense (DOD) had agreed that Space Shuttle mission 51-C, scheduled for launch January 23, 1985, from KSC, would carry the Australian aggregation of red blood cells [see Jan. 14] and shuttle storable fluid management demonstration (SFMD) experiments. NASA had scheduled both for previous missions, but withdrawn them due to orbiter-weight and center-of-gravity considerations. The SFMD, a joint NASA-Martin Marietta Aerospace/U.S. Air Force experiment, would test how weightless fluids behaved in transit from one tank to another to demonstrate the transfer of fluids planned for servicing and maintaining spacecraft in orbit. Space Shuttle crew would manually operate the experiment, consisting of 13-in.-diameter clear acrylic supply and receiving tanks, with a series of valves in which pressurized air would force fluid to and from transparent tanks, a video tape recorder and 35mm still camera photographing the operation and an accelerometer measuring any motion caused by the orbiter that affected the experiment. (NASA Release 85-10)
Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah) today joined five astronauts and a French pilot for the final two-hour practice aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger, which they would fly in two weeks, the Washington Post reported. They had run through launch procedures and checked all spacecraft systems to avoid any surprises at liftoff, ending with a simulated liftoff at 4 p.m. Garn, who would fly on Challenger as a congressional observer, was chairman of a subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding. The other non-NASA spaceman was French Air Force Lt. Col. Patrick Baudry, who would serve as a payload specialist. (WPost, Feb 18/85, A14)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B landed at 1:33 p.m. Pacific time today on the concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base before 6,700 spectators, the NY Times reported. NASA selected the concrete runway because a week of rain had left scattered puddles on the usually dry lake bed runways. 'Atlantis looks beautiful," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said after the landing. Apart from "a few dings" around the ship's nose and landing gear, he added, there appeared to be "no unusual damage." It was the second mission for the Atlantis, the newest in NASA's fleet of four orbiters. The crew described all aspects of the flight as highly successful. (NYT, Dec 4/85, B6)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it had scheduled for September 12 at Kennedy Space Center a 20-second on-the-pad test firing of the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis's three main engines to verify the flight readiness of Atlantis—the fourth and newest of the Space Shuttle orbiter fleet. The flight readiness firing in a launch-day environment would exercise the Space Shuttle's main propulsion system and computer programs to demonstrate the proper integration of all elements prior to the first Atlantis launch scheduled for October 3 for mission 51-J. Engineers had previously test fired each engine individually at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories. On September 9 a firing simulation would kick off preparations for the test. The one-day test would check out critical flight and ground computer systems that controlled the actual engine firing and give the Space Shuttle launch team a chance to re-review test procedures. Countdown for the flight readiness firing would begin at 4:00 a.m. September 10, with the clock at the T-43 hour mark, and culminate with the 20-second static firing. Three days of preparations would precede the firing countdown, including purging the external tank with inert gases, installing special firing instrumentation, and mounting a radiation shield on the deck of the mobile launcher platform to protect the solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank structures during the test firing. Total flight readiness firing, including pre- and post-test activities, would span six days and require support from personnel and operations from various NASA centers including MSFC and Kennedy and Johnson Space Centers. Events leading to the September 12 engine firing would be nearly identical to those that preceded an actual Space Shuttle launch, with built-in holds distributed throughout the countdown at the same times they occurred in an actual launch countdown. An automated ground launch sequencer would control the final nine minutes of the countdown. The sequencer performed the final series of events in a specific order, monitored various measurements of out-of-tolerance conditions, and detected system malfunctions for which it would automatically stop the countdown. Following the test, technicians would inspect externally and internally the three main engines to verify their readiness for flight. These post-firing activities would take about 11 days. (MSFC Release 85—44)
As five military officers on the Space Shuttle Atlantis orbited earth on the secret 51 —J mission, a debate was growing in the U.S. over how much secrecy was necessary in the civilian-run space program and what the military's role in it should be, the NY Times reported. Proponents of an expanded role for the Defense Department (DOD) said the U.S. needed to counter a growing Soviet threat in space. They pointed out that the USSR launched four to five times as many spacecraft a year as the U.S., with the majority of missions devoted to military objectives, and that Soviet military officers had logged years in space, while the U.S. military had logged days. Critics of an expanded DOD role said the U.S. already had an advantage in military space technology. They said U.S. systems worked better and lasted longer, pointing out the USSR was still trying to perfect a vehicle similar to the Space Shuttle. The critics also argued that the U.S. military's assertions about the Soviet Union were often veiled excuses to try to edge civilians out of the astronaut corps and to classify the most mundane Space Shuttle payloads. This goal of secrecy, they said, was not heightened security but was intended to protect DOD's plans and programs from public scrutiny. The debate was likely to become more vocal, the Times said, as the military expanded its manned space activity when secret military missions would account for 25 to 30% of all Space Shuttle flights in the next decade. Carl Sagan, professor of astronomy and space sciences at Cornell University, said there was a "fundamental tension" between open scientific inquiry and "the necessarily closed world of military activities ... As military programs expand," he said, "there's a huge deflection of resources, financial and intellectual, from peaceful uses into the production of weapons." Daniel Graham, a retired Army lieutenant general who formerly headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, disagreed, saying the military had been at the forefront of U.S. space exploration since its earliest days. "The myth since the Eisenhower Administration is that there's a distinction between military and civilian matters in space," he said. "That's a pretense that a lot of people in NASA would like to believe, that all their activities are sweetness and light," he insisted. However, even military proponents saw emerging tensions in the manned space program, the Times reported. William Gregory, editor of Aviation Week & Technology said in an editorial, "The original legislation creating [NASA] specified a civilian space program, separate from the military . . . That line is being crossed now not so much as a formal policy change as out of simple economic necessity. The shuttle needs the military as a customer to spread the system's overhead costs." Some critics feared that NASA's charter for free and open dissemination of scientific information was eroding as the military's role grew. Scientists ineffectually protested last year when NASA announced that its Defense Department Affairs Division would review and possibly censor images from a large camera and radar carried on a civilian Space Shuttle mission. "There's a real question of how the decision was made to move the space agency from being open to substantially closed," the Times quoted Morton Halperin, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What's at stake is the public's right to participate in the process of making government policy." (NY Times, Oct 6/85, A1)
The Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A landed at 9:44 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported, before an estimated audience of 9,000. "The bird fspace flight, said at a post-landing news conference. "The brakes look like it's in good shape," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator good coming in and we are very, very pleased with the results of the nosewheel steering test." During the landing, Challenger commander Henry Hartsfield tested a new steering mechanism built to reduce tire and brake damage that had occurred during several Space Shuttle landings. An orbiter had not landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) since the previous April, when both main landing gears collapsed and one tire blew out. The test called for Hartsfield to engage the new steering mechanism seconds after the nosewheel touched down on the runway so he could steer Challenger 20 feet off course and then bring it back to the centerline. One more successful test later in the year would clear orbiters to resume landing in December at KSC. Officials in West Germany, which paid NASA $64 million to fly Spacelab D-1 on Challenger, called the mission "highly successful" and predicted that 90 to 95% of all the science studies would be completed. Earlier, a West German official at the science control center near Munich said only one study, a heat diffusion test on a sample of salt, would be unfinished by the time Challenger returned to earth. Crew members Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, Col. Guion Bluford Jr., Dr. Ernst Mes-serschmid, Dr. Reinhard Furrer, and Dr. Wubbo Ockels did not attend a postflight press conference, the Washington Post reported, but traveled to Dryden Flight Research Center where researchers would run tests on them to determine how well they readapted to gravity after a week in weightlessness. Later the five would go to Kennedy Space Center for more elaborate tests. The European Space Agency (ESA) announced after the flight that it was particularly satisfied with results from Spacelab D-1, on which ESA had 38% of the payload in terms of critical resources (mass, energy, and crew time). All ESA facilities on Spacelab D-1—the Space Sled, for studies of man's behavior under microgravity conditions; the Biorack, a multi-purpose facility for biological investigations of microgravity and cosmic radiation effects on life forms; and the Fluid Physics Module, for studies of basic fluid phenomena in space—performed perfectly with no operational or technical failures. (NASA FOR M-989-61-A [postflight] Nov 8/85; NYT, Nov 7/85, A21; W Post, Nov 6/85, A4; ESA release Nov 11/85)
NASA Administrator James Beggs told Congress that the new version of the Centaur rocket designed for Space Shuttle-launched planetary missions would cost about $110 million more ($90 million for NASA; $20 million for the Air Force) than expected [see NASA/Budget, Feb. 28], the Washington Post reported. Wider and shorter than the old-model Centaur to fit in the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, the new rocket would launch in 1986 two spacecraft toward Jupiter. An even shorter version starting in 1987 would launch from the Space Shuttle two classified missions for the Air Force. Beggs told the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications that "We underestimated the job of integrating the Centaur into the shuttle and General Dynamics underestimated the cost of changing the configuration of the rocket." The new estimates raised Centaur program costs from $755 million to $865 million. (W Post, May 24/85, A16)
A prime time TV series for the first time would offer a comprehensive look at the history of manned U.S. and USSR space flight, the Ames Research Center's Astrogram reported. SPACEFLIGHT, a series of four one-hour programs sponsored by the Public Broadcasting System and the Du Pont Co., would chronicle man's achievements in space from the rocket plane that first broke the sound barrier to the touchdown of the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The series' executive producer, Blaine Baggett, said his staff interviewed some 40 key participants in space activities—astronauts, people on the ground, scientists, and historians. In addition, the Soviet science attache in Washington provided about 10 hours of film footage. Among those interviewed for the series were Chuck Yaeger, first man to break the sound barrier; Scott Crossfield, first to travel twice the speed of sound and to pilot the X-15; Werner von Braun, who worked on the U.S. rocket program; Alan Shepard and John Glenn, first American in space and first American to orbit the globe, respectively; and Sally Ride, first American woman in space. From the point of view of the USSR, the series sought answers to such questions as who the chief designer was of the Soviet space program and why the Soviets were first in the early days of space activities. SPACEFLIGHT also examined future space plans such as space colonies, space stations, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 11/ 85,4) PRECEDING PAGE SLAJ^K ftQT FILMED PAfilA.{0 INTENTlOHAtlT BUN*
NASA announced that interdisciplinary teams of teachers, scientists, and engineers selected seven finalists in the fifth national Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program (SSIP), a joint venture of NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, judges based selection of finalists' entries upon individual scientific or engineering merit for possible flight aboard the Space Shuttle. The national winners and their teacher-advisors would attend in August a special Space Shuttle conference at Kennedy Space Center and view the launch of the Discovery Space Shuttle mission 51—L. NASA would present the finalists and their teacher-advisors with orbiter models, and their schools would receive orbiter models for trophy case display. The sixth year of SSIP competition would open in September 1985. (NASA Release 85-79) During August: NASA announced that the newest solid-fuel rocket booster retrieval ship, the U.S. Air Force's Independence, arrived at Kennedy Space Center for outfitting with retrieval gear. The Air Force specifically designed the ship for retrieval of expended boosters after Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Independence would be the mother ship for west coast booster retrievals, towing one of the boosters and providing room for the majority of the crew and the six main parachutes and the bottoms for both boosters. The ship's first booster retrieval would be mission 51-F set for launch no earlier than July 15. The Air Force would lease another smaller ship to tow the other booster and carry the remainder of the 42-member retrieval crew. Independence, at 199 feet long and with a beam of 40 feet, was larger than its sister retrieval ships, the Liberty Star and the Freedom Star. Those two ships were 176 feet long and had beams of 37 feet. The Independence has both fore and aft water jet thrusters, making it highly maneuverable. The other two ships had only stern thrusters. Halter Marine in Moss Point, Mississippi, built Independence. (NASA Activities, Aug 85, 11)
The U.S. Commerce Department announced it signed a contract with Earth Observation Satellite Co. (Eosat) to pay $250 million over the next five years for Eosat to construct two new Landsat satellites (Landsat 6 and 7); provide a ground system to operate and process data from the new spacecraft; and operate, process, and market data from Landsats 4, 5, 6, and 7, the Washington Post reported. Eosat, a joint venture of RCA Corp., which would build the new spacecraft, and Hughes Aircraft Co., which would provide satellite instrumentation including the thematic mappers, would operate the orbiting Landsat 4 and 5 for their anticipated lifetime at a cost to the government similar to the government's projected cost. The Commerce Department said the new satellites, Landsat 6 scheduled for launch in 1988 and Landsat 7 scheduled for launch when Landsat 6 neared the end of its approximately five-year lifetime, should provide sharper images and enhance the value of the system for agricultural uses. The U.S. government would launch the new satellites from the Space Shuttle at an estimated cost of $44.9 million and also pay for any Space Shuttle system modifications necessary for the launches. Although the contract called for Eosat to market and operate the four Landsats, it allowed the company to terminate date marketing for Landsat 4 and 5 if cumulative revenue was below 65% of the mutually agreed upon projected revenues for data sales for the two satellites and to terminate operations and data marketing for Landsat 6 and 7 if total cumulative revenue fell below 60% of projected revenue after launch of Landsat 6, Defense Daily reported. Landsats used cameras and other scanners to produce pictures in various wavelengths for many uses, including agriculture, mineral explorations, fishing, forestry, snow cover and surface water surveys, and land use and city planning. NASA developed the Landsat system and in 1983 transferred it to the Commerce Department. {W Post, Oct 1/85, B3; D/D, Oct 1/85, 153)
NASA said today it postponed the December 18 launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia on mission 61-C for 24 hours because tired workers had fallen behind in countdown tasks, the Washington Post reported. "Essentially there were too many tasks to complete and too little time to complete them," NASA spokesman George Diller said. "We felt it was more prudent to delay than to take a chance on making a mistake." Diller added that crews used up more than eight hours of contingency time built into the countdown as they worked through the night December 16 to complete checkout of the engine compartment. NASA rescheduled the launch for 7 a.m. December 19. (WPost, Dec 128/ 85, A17)
NASA announced cancellation of the March 7 Space Shuttle Challenger flight due to problems associated with the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B). NASA officials determined that, in addition to repairing the previously announced problem with one cell of the TDRS's 24-cell flight battery, it was necessary to remove the TDRS-B from the Challenger cargo bay in order to repair a timing problem that became apparent during testing of the TDRS-1 then in orbit. Under certain operational conditions, the timing circuits could cause errors in the system switching sequences, interrupting user support. Tests run February 27 and 28 at spacecraft contractor facilities confirmed the problem. Although NASA and its contractors had developed procedures to operate the TDRS-1, these procedures were not acceptable for multiple spacecraft operations, requiring modifications for TDRS-B and subsequent spacecraft. Because the TDRS spacecraft had encryption devices to protect the system from interfering signals, NASA could not provide further technical detail on the problem. NASA expected a delay of several weeks for modifications, at which time it would remanifest TDRS-B. NASA would place the Anik-C (Telesat-I) satellite scheduled for the STS 51—E mission on the Discovery STS 51-D mission and delay retrieval of the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) from the 51-D mission to a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 85-31)
Effective today Lockheed Corp. reassigned six officers of its Lockheed Space Operations Co. at Kennedy Space Center after a six-month corporate investigation of the management practices and work procedures used to process the Space Shuttle for launch, Aviation Week reported. E. Douglas Sargent replaced A.R. Schroter as president of Lockheed Space Operations Co. and became program manager of the Space Shuttle processing contract, David Owen replaced W. John Denson as deputy program manager and became executive vice president of the space operations company, and David Dickenson replaced Ronald Petersen as vice president and director of Kennedy Space Center operations. Although the replaced Lockheed managers had previously received unfavorable management evaluations, the management realignment came as NASA completed a report on its investigation of a March 8 incident in which a work platform fell in the Orbiter Processing Facility, damaging the orbiter Discovery and injuring a workman [see Space Transportation System, Launch Schedules, Mar. 8]. The report would assign a large part of the responsibility for the accident to Lockheed safety and quality control procedures. However, a NASA official said the platform incident did not precipitate the realignment. He said a Lockheed Corp. investigating team, which had analyzed Lockheed's performance at KSC since the previous October, had made detailed recommendations on how to streamline and improve performance. Also, after receiving a grade of excellent in the award fee evaluation during the transition period when Lockheed took over Space Shuttle processing work previously done by 15 separate contractors, NASA gave Lockheed a low score in the next evaluation period of April 1 to September 30, 1984. Lockheed's basic space processing contract with NASA ran through September 30, 1986, and there was a priced option period for three more years. The two priced contracts were worth $2.5 billion; three additional unpriced three-year options could bring the contract life to 15 years and value to more than $6 billion. NASA said it had no plans to recompete the Space Shuttle processing contract. (AvWk, May 13/85, 14)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced that 10,690 teachers applied for a Space Shuttle flight. The Council was responsible for application and screening processes; NASA would choose the teacher to go into space. The Council's review panel would screen all applications to eliminate those not meeting basic requirements and forward the remaining applications to state-review panels to select two teachers per state by May 1, 1985. A national panel would then review applications of the approximately 118 nominees (two per state plus the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, territories and trusts, and Department of Defense and independent schools) to recommend 10 semifinalists to NASA's spaceflight participant evaluation committee. All nominees would attend a teacher-workshop and orientation program from June 24 to 28, 1985, in Washington to learn of current developments in the aeronautics and space-education program and to undergo further evaluation and screening; 10 semifinalists would report to JSC for thorough medical examinations, in-depth briefings, and interviews by NASA's evaluation committee. NASA's administrator and the evaluation committee would select a primary and a backup candidate to undergo training. NASA had not decided on a specific flight opportunity, but was aiming to fly the teacher on a mission in late 1985. California had the greatest number of applications, 926. (NASA Release 85-26)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Materials Science Laboratory would make its first spaceflight on Space Shuttle 61-C, scheduled for launch on December 18, the Marshall Sfarreported. Using a mission peculiar equipment support structure (MPESS) in the payload bay, the Materials Science Laboratory-2 (MSL-2) would provide accommodations for three experiments in materials processing—the MSFC-managed Electromagnetic Levitator (EML) and Automated Directional Solidification Furnace (ADSF) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory-Managed Three-Axis Acoustic Levitator (3AAL). The electromagnetic levitator experiment would allow scientists to study the effects of materials flow during solidification of a melted material in the microgravity environment. Six samples would be suspended in the electromagnetic field of a coil and melted by induction heating from the coil's electromagnetic field. The ADSF consisted of four furnace, or sample, units. The experiment would investigate the melting and solidification process of four different materials for later comparison to samples of the same materials processed on earth. In the 3AAL experiment, 12 liquid sampies would be suspended in sound pressure waves and rotated and oscillated in a low-gravity nitrogen atmosphere. Investigators would study the degree of sphericity attainable and small bubble migration similar to that having to do with the refining of glass. The standard switch panel in the orbiter aft flight deck would provide activation, deactivation, and status monitoring capability. (Marshall Star, Dec 18/85, 2) During December. NASA scheduled for launch on December 18 the Space Shuttle Columbia, making its first journey into space in two years, on mission 61-C, the 24th flight of the U.S. Space Transportation System. Robert Gibson would command the flight, his second trip into space. Charles Bolden, on his first spaceflight, would pilot; mission specialists would be Franklin Chang-Diaz, a physicist born in Costa Rica and the first American of Hispanic origin to fly in space, and Steven Hawley and George Nelson, both making their second spaceflight; and payload specialists would be Robert Cenker of RCA and U.S. Rep. Bill Nelson of Florida, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications and the second congressional observer to fly in space. During the mission, the crew would deploy RCA's Satcom KU-2 communications satellite, the second in a series of three, with its payload assist module D-2 (PAM D-2) upper stage. The crew on mission 61-C in November deployed Satcom KU-1. Also onboard Columbia in the payload bay would be the Materials Science Lab-2 (MSL-2) [see Space Transportation System/Scientific Research, Dec. 18], the first Hitchhiker (HHG-1) payload, the RCA Infrared-Imaging Experiment (IR—IE), and 12 Get Away Special (GAS) experiments in specialized canisters mounted to a GAS beam attached to the payload bay. Hitchhiker G-1, a more sophisticated version of the GAS concept, consisted of a baseplate on which small payloads were mounted directly or enclosed in canisters. The carrier for the first time provided small payloads with access to the orbiter's 1400-watt power supply and to ground communications. Hitchhiker G-1 experiments would study experimental capillary pumped loop heat transport systems (sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center-GSFC), provide film images of the environment around the Space Shuttle (Air Force Geophysics Laboratory), and study the effect of the Space Shuttle environment on coated mirrors (Perkin-Elmer Corp.). The GAS Bridge was a beam supporting 12 GAS canisters that were mounted across the orbiter's cargo bay. The beam consolidated the canisters into a single easy-to-load and unlead unit. Experiments in the GAS canisters would:
During his 13-year career at RCA, Cenker held a number of engineering positions in the Satcom program that included work on spacecraft design, integration and test scheduling, cost control, and launch site activity planning. During November NASA would launch the first RCA Satcom Ku-Band satellite, KU-2, on Space Shuttle mission 61-B. Three RCA Satcom Ku-Band satellites would complement the operating Satcom C-Band system in providing distribution of TV services to customers in metropolitan areas. (NASA Release 85-90)
I. V. Franklin, manager of future projects at British Aerospace Dynamics Group's Space and Communications Division, said at a recent international space meeting in Italy that British Aerospace had completed preliminary definition of a 50- by 60-foot-long, 24,250-lb. unmanned platform that Europe could develop as part of its Columbus space station program, Aviation Week reported. The platform would use a long beam as a common backbone that would contain docking ports for standardized plugin payload and resources modules. A single Space Shuttle flight would carry the basic platform into orbit, and the company envisioned that astronauts could assemble it in six hours of extravehicular activity. Franklin said the company would submit the platform proposal to the European Space Agency as one of the work packages in Europe's Columbus program. "The space platform is of particular interest to Europe, following President Reagan's invitation for international participation in the space station program," Franklin continued, "because it represents an element with relatively few direct interfaces to the rest of the program. Although it is not a 'core' component, it would be an important component of the space station complex and [a component] in which there would be substantial European user interest. The platform provides a point for reducing space operation costs at a price that Europe could afford." In addition to evaluating the platform in low earth orbit in conjunction with the U.S. manned Space Station, British Aerospace also considered the platform in a polar, sun synchronous orbit. The polar-orbiting platform offered possibilities for earth observation and earth resources missions. U.S. officials had encouraged European development of the polar platform to supplement low earth orbit activities performed on board the manned Space Station and its associated free-flying elements. "The polar platform does not need to work with a manned space station— and indeed, it cannot until a station facility is available in polar orbit," Franklin said. "The platform can be man-tended by a polar orbiting shuttle, although the shuttle's altitude is well below that of the platform." This problem could be overcome by using the platform's on-board propulsion to deorbit and dock with the Space Shuttle for payload replacement, repair, and maintenance and then return to the operational altitude. Franklin concluded that the concept of a polar space platform was justified by the level of user interest in both Europe and the U.S. and by the relatively favorable economics when compared with other systems. "The polar platform does not require use of a manned space station, and it therefore is not paced by development of the space station," he noted. (AvWk, Apr 8/85, 60)
Taylor Wang, the first space traveller of Chinese origin who performed materials science and fluids studies in weightlessness during the April 1985 Challenger Space Shuttle flight 51-B, arrived in Beijing, China, for a two-week visit at the invitation of the Astronautics Industry Ministry. Wang, a scientist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was born in China's Jiangxi Province and had not been in China for over 30 years. Wang said the purpose of his trip was to exchange views with Chinese scholars and to conduct academic exchanges with Chinese specialists in Beijing, Xian, and Shanghai. During a welcoming ceremony July 8 at the Ministry, Vice-Minister Bao Kerning said that China's open policy in recent years had given great impetus to the development of its space technology. He concluded by saying that Wang's visit would further promote the friendship and cooperation between scientists of the two countries and that Sino-American space science and technology collaboration and exchanges were promising. (FBIS, Beijing XINHUA in English, July 6/85, July 7/85, July 8/85)
The NY Times reported that NASA officials said the next Space Shuttle mission would not occur until mid-April as a result of the time needed to repair two one-foot-sq. punctures in one of the cargo bay doors of the orbiter Discovery. NASA officials said Discovery would definitely fly the mission, although they had considered substituting Challenger. Rockwell Internatl. was fabricating the replacement material for the punctures and would fly the material to Cape Canaveral that day or the next. Although NASA could not set a launch date until it had completed repairs, unidentified sources said that, if all went well, launch would be about April 19.	(NYT, March 13/85, A14)
U.S. Air Force Maj. Gen. Donald Kutyna said today that the Defense Department had decided to proceed with a $500 million program to design a hypersonic plane capable of flying around the globe in less than two hours and of flying in the highest reaches of the atmosphere and to provide a low-cost method for launching satellites and other equipment critical to President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, the NY Times reported. Speaking at a Colorado Springs symposium on space technology, Kutyna said construction of the plane itself could cost $2 to $3 billion. "It is something we are very serious about, and we think the technology is now within reach," said Kutyna, who coordinated the Air Force's research and development of space systems. "We have been examining the principles for some time, and now we are ready to head into the next phase." However, in Washington an aide to George Keyworth II, the President's science advisor, said, "Funding for the project's next phase is not assured." He noted Congress would have to approve the program. "This is all a little premature," the aide noted. "We have not yet presented the plan to President Reagan." But on November 20 Keyworth and top officials on the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and NASA presented details of the plan to members of Congress interested in aerospace issues. Unlike the Space Shuttle, which was launched vertically with rocket boosters, the aerospace plane would take off like an ordinary airplane, but would not have jet engines with heavy compressors, making the aerospace plane a light-weight vehicle. "Once you reach about Mach 3," or three times the speed of sound, Kutyna said, "the air streaming through the engines begins to compress itself. Some studies indicated that the plane could attain speeds of Mach 20, although there were experts who said half that speed would be more reasonable. If successful, the project could solve a key problem for the military: drastically reducing the cost of placing satellites and defensive space weapons in orbit. (NYT, Nov 22/85)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that a December 1985 experiment, EASE or the experimental assembly of structures in EVA (extravehicular activity), aboard Space Shuttle flight 61-C would provide information about humans working in space. In the experiment, two crew members would move six aluminum beams, each 12 feet long and four inches in diameter, into space from the Space Shuttle payload bay and assemble them into a tetrahedron shape and then disassemble them. This experiment would demonstrate human ability to build strong, practical structures in space. During the experiment videotape and still photographs would record crew member movements to link beams by special connectors at the beam tips. This building approach was a technique in the Large Space Structures program called an "erectible" method, as opposed to a "deployable" method that would not be demonstrated until 1986 or 1987 when NASA would orbit a structural-assembly demonstration experiment. MSFC had conducted tests similar to EASE in its neutral buoyancy simulator, a million-gallon water tank that gave a sense of weightlessness to submerged people working in space suits. Researchers would compare assembly and disassembly times recorded in the space test with results found in the neutral buoyancy tank. However, MSFC's Ed Valentine, experiment manager, noted, "We'd like to be able to measure a human's productivity in space scientifically, and we're not really sure if time measurements are all that are needed to guage that, so we'll be examining other possible criteria to use in the future." A Langley Research Center structural assembly experiment would accompany the MSFC experiment. (MSFC Release 85-3) During April: NASA announced it awarded to Howard University's School of Engineering Large Space Structure Institute (LSSI), Washington, D.C., an ongoing grant expected to total $1.9 million to develop theoretical knowledge supporting the design and construction of very large space systems. NASA expected the knowledge to make a significant contribution to the establishment of large space stations and space settlements. The LSSI research project would help demonstrate the practical benefits of U.S. space capabilities, including construction of a solar power satellite that would convert the sun's energy into electricity for transmission back to earth and construction of large platforms that would allow scientists to observe the earth for improved understanding of the weather and the ground water table. The LSSI team would consist of Dr. Taft Broome, chief project investigator and chairman of the Department of Civil Engineering, and other Howard University faculty members; and one faculty member each from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge University, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Graduate students from the latter institutions would also participate. NASA was primarily interested in LSSI doing the concept development and the research and demonstration analysis. Once Broome and his team provided the agency with the needed data, NASA could turn the project over to private industry for implementation. (NASA Activities, Apr 85, 8) Launch Vehicles
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) opened the Microgravity Materials Science Laboratory (MMSL) to aid scientists on earth in determining what was and was not feasible for science experiments in space [see NASA Installations/Lewis Research Center, Aug. 26]. "The MMLS will permit U.S. government, university, and industry researchers to conduct scientific experiments using equipment that functionally duplicates equipment aboard the Space Shuttle," explained Salvatore Grisaffe, chief of the LeRC materials division. "Access to such a laboratory will give U.S. companies a competitive advantage in developing better materials through microgravity research." Other microgravity research facilities at LeRC included two drop towers in which experiment packages could free-fall up to 500 feet, achieving a weightless condition for up to five seconds, and the Lewis Lear jet, which could fly parabolic trajectories to achieve a microgravity environment inside the plane for up to 22 seconds. The MMSL was one part of NASA's microgravity science and applications program, which fostered research in the science and technology of processing materials in low gravity. The aims of the program were to obtain a clearer understanding of the factors controlling earth-based processes to guide their improvement and development of new materials that could not be made on earth and procedures to support long-term space operations. The Space Shuttle then offered up to seven days for microgravity experimentation; the proposed space station eventually would provide a very longterm microgravity research and materials processing capability. However, the most efficient use of such space resources demanded that experimental procedures be based on a firm scientific understanding with extensive prior ground-based examination. (NASA Release 85-123)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
Chilean government member Admiral Jose Toribio Merino said today that he favored accepting the NASA request to build a Space Shuttle emergency landing airfield on Easter Island and that it was essential to build a port for the operation of larger and faster ships, FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish reported. "If someone offers to extend the Easter Island airport," Merino said, "we should accept because Chile does not have the money to do it." The need to supplement the project with the construction of a port for security reasons was a new element added by Merino to the NASA proposal. Merino explained that the operation of an international airport near the sea called for fast ships to act in case a plane went down in the ocean. It was imperative to have a port for the operation of such ships, and Easter Island had only a small bay, he said. "If someone offers to build a port, I would let them," he added. In referring to criticism of the project because of possible military uses of the airfield, Merino said that those who said that about the project were "ignorant people who were politicians in the past but not now." (Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish, June 12/85)
In a commentary in the Washington Times in response to a U.S. Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) study that had asserted NASA's plans for a permanent space station were not scientifically, economically, or militarily justified, Robert Melton, assistant professor at Pennsylvania State University, wrote that the study missed the point of NASA's current efforts to define better what should go into the station before proceeding with actual design and construction. He wrote that NASA had entered Phase B, the definition study of the project, in which contractors would provide NASA with thorough analyses of exactly what missions would be carried out in what time schedule and with descriptions of necessary equipment and technology together with a breakdown of costs. Such a detailed study was necessary to avoid premature overemphasis on design and to avert technical problems as the program progressed. Melton argued that the permanent space station was a logical next step after the Space Shuttle program and could serve as both a laboratory and base of operations for scientific, commercial, and security purposes. The space station could also serve as a permanent base for repairing and routinely servicing satellites, as a depot for permanently, space-based orbital transfer vehicles capable of delivering and retrieving high-orbit payloads, and as a base for building other large structures that would remain in orbit. Melton noted that the benefits of a permanent space station would make the $8 billion expenditure spread over several years seem a fairly small amount, especially when compared to other items in the federal budget. However, Melton acknowledged that the OTA study proved NASA had to do a better job of defining its space station goals and of impressing upon the public the importance of the project. (W Times, Mar 13/85, 2D)
The Coca-Cola Co. had developed the first container capable of dispensing carbonated beverages in weightlessness, and NASA officials said Coca-Cola could be aboard Space Shuttle flights as early as July, the Washington Post reported. Coca-Cola President Donald Keough said that including carbonated soft drinks on a Space Shuttle flight reflected NASA's interest in providing home-like comforts for the astronauts. Because liquids did not pour in weightlessness, astronauts had to sip drinks from straws inserted into plastic containers that collapsed as they were emptied. However, gas in carbonated drinks expanded in weightlessness and low atmospheric pressure and therefore could escape from plastic containers. A company spokesman said Coca-Cola had solved the problem with a steel supercan equipped with a drinking spout, a screw to adjust beverage flow, and a safety lock to prevent leaks. (WPost, May 9/85, A8)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1985 activities, which included nine Space Shuttle flights and launches of three Atlas Centaurs, two Scouts, and an Aerobee vehicle, its last flight. In 1985 NASA introduced the last and lightest-weight Space Shuttle orbiter—Atlantis. McDonnell Douglas inaugurated its upper stage booster, the Payload Assist Module D-2. Fifty two individuals flew aboard Space Shuttles in 1985. Of this group 19 were scientists performing observations, experiments, or investigations; 27 were U.S. military officers, and six were payload specialists from foreign countries (Mexico, Saudi Arabia, France, the Netherlands, and two from West Germany). The 52 individuals' combined time in space was nearly 55 days or over 880 earth orbits, for a combined travel distance of nearly 22 million miles. Six Space Shuttle astronauts spent a total of more than a day in extravehicular activities during the year. Two Spacelab missions aboard the Space Shuttle and an encounter by the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) with Comet Giacobini-Zinner highlighted the year for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	167 ^^LLLLjWTENTlONAai 8LANK On April 19, 1985, a little more than a year after President Reagan directed NASA to develop within a decade a permanently manned space station, NASA awarded competitive contracts to eight industry teams for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements of the station. NASA signed a memorandum of understanding with Canada, the European Space Agency, and Japan for cooperation during the definition and preliminary design phase of the program. NASA's aeronautical research and technology efforts included continuing work on such programs as the NASA/Department of Defense X-29 X-wing research aircraft, the tilt rotor/JVX aircraft, the advanced X-29 aircraft featuring a forward-swept wing, and the mission adaptive wing that could change its curvature. In the area of space technology, Langley Research Center completed development, assembly, and testing of a 15-meter hoop column deployable structure and antenna system. Other advances in space technology included significant modification to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to measure dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for design and testing for the space station space reactor power program, and completion of space construction experiments outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA's advances in space tracking and data systems included transition from ground network station support for low earth-orbiting spacecraft to use of the first Tracking and Data Relay Satellite in geosynchronous orbit. NASA had scheduled TDRS-2 and 3 for launch in January and July 1986, respectively. In February NASA completed consolidation of the Deep Space Network (DSN) and later an upgrade of the network that would enable the DSN to receive significantly more images from Voyager as it encountered Uranus in January 1986. NASA's Office of Commercial Programs funded and opened the first five of a planned series of centers for commercial development of space, which NASA expected would become self-supporting through research collaboration by industry, academia, and government agencies. (NASA Release 85177)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) prime contractor for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster motors, Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division, successfully static fired today a new lightweight version of that motor at its facility in northern Utah, the Marshall Star reported. The firing was the second and final test of the development version of that motor, which contained major sections made from graphite epoxy materials manufactured by Thiokol's subcontractor, Hercules, Inc. Thiokol would perform a final qualification static test of the flight version of the new filament-wound motor in September. NASA had scheduled the first use of the filament-wound motor segments for early 1986 during the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Lawrence Mulloy, manager of MSFC's solid-fuel rocket booster project, said each of the filament-wound boosters would weigh about 28,000 lb. less than the current steel boosters, making possible an increase in Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity of about 4,600 lbs. (Marshall Star, May 15/85, 2)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with Space Industries, Inc. (Sll) for the company to construct and operate an industrial space facility (ISF), the first habitable privately owned commercial platform in space, which NASA would deploy from the Space Shuttle. Sll also signed a separate agreement with NASA's space station office that would provide for exchange of information during the definition and preliminary design phase of the space station. The agreement laid the groundwork for subsequent discussions and negotiations during the space station development period to begin in mid-1987. Sll was the first private company to sign an agreement with NASA's space station office to share information that could result in a commercial facility capable of compatible operations with the space station. The modular ISF would initially measure 35 by 14.5 feet. Although not intended to be permanently manned, it would be habitable and provide a shirt sleeve work environment for astronauts when docked with either the Space Shuttle or space station. NASA Administrator James Beggs said, "We hope the ISF will be the first of many such platforms to be funded and built by private industry that will complement the permanently manned space station and lead eventually to an industrial park in space." Max Faget, president of Sll, said, "The facility is scheduled to be deployed in 1989 and will respond to a variety of private research and manufacturing needs. Industry could take advantage of the unique gravity-free environment of space to conduct experiments that cannot be effectively duplicated here on earth." Sll considered the cost of building the ISF to be proprietary. Under the novel agreement, a provision stipulated that Sll would reimburse NASA for all costs incurred by the government associated with the deployment of the ISF when it became operational and was revenue generating. (NASA Release 85119)
before liftoff and delaying STS mission 61-C until early in 1986, the NY Times reported. The shutdown came four seconds before ignition of the three main engines. NASA had called for a delay of 54 minutes earlier in the morning when clouds moved over the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA aborted the countdown when a computer on the ground sensed that a pump on one of the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket boosters was spinning at 86,000 rpm, exceeding the turbine's "red line" limits by almost 7,000 rpm. The device, described as a hydraulic power unit, provided power so the nozzle of the solid-fuel rocket booster could pivot slightly in flight, helping to control the direction of the orbiter's ascent. NASA officials indicated there was a backup pump on the booster, but that, if a single pump failed before liftoff, safety precautions called for abort of the countdown. That particular hydraulic power unit had flown twice before on the resuable solid-fuel rocket boosters, NASA officials said, and similar devices had flown up to four times before requiring replacement. It was the first failure in the Space Shuttle program of that particular part. NASA would have to repair or replace the failed pump and said it had rescheduled the launching for January 4, 1986, so there would be no interference with the holidays. The delay until January would also allow NASA to avoid paying the Air Force to keep open its Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral and paying launch pad workers triple-time pay for working between Christmas and New Year's, the Washington Post reported. "The team is obviously disappointed," said Robert Sieck, director of Space Shuttle operations at KSC. "But we're going to isolate the problem and fix it and get on with the launch process." NASA said the delay would have no impact on the 16 Space Shuttle missions, including 61-C, that it had scheduled for 1986. (NY Times, Dec 20/85, B10; W Post, Dec 20/85, A2) Main Engines
Astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today completed repair of the Leasat 1 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Steven Dorfman, president of Hughes Communications Corp., satellite owner, referred to the effort as the "most remarkable salvage mission" tried in space. During the second day of the salvage mission [see Satellites, Aug. 31], astronaut John Lounge, using the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm, raised the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay and placed its center of gravity on a straight line with that of the orbiter Discovery. Outside, van Hoften stepped into foot restraints on the end of the arm, and Lounge lifted him to the satellite. Reaching up, van Hoften placed gloved hands on the bar he had earlier attached to the satellite and pushed down as hard as he could to start the satellite spinning. Three more pushes sent the satellite spinning evenly into space over the equator near the west coast of South America where officials planned to operate it as a Navy radio relay. Although Hughes was still concerned that very cold temperatures might have permanently damaged the satellite, it did beam to earth its first signals since deployment on April 13. The signals indicated that temperatures in the satellite's outer shell were normal, suggesting that the inner drum holding the two onboard rocket engines and more than 7,500 lb. of rocket fuel might have survived the varying temperatures of space and be ready to carry the satellite into permanent position 22,300 miles above earth. (IV Post, Sept 2/ 85, A3)
NASA postponed for 24 hours the first classified Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch the afternoon of January 23, as freezing temperatures threatened to cause severe icing on the external fuel tank, the Washington Post reported. Officials said ice chunks could drop off, damaging the Space Shuttle, and also that NASA staff was conducting inspection of fuel and water pipes to determine if they had frozen shut. The Department of Defense (DOD) had classified nearly all aspects of the mission. The crew consisting of Navy Capt. Thomas Mattingly, AF Lt. Col. Loren Shriver, Marine Lt. Col. James Buchli, AF Maj. Ellison Onizuka, and AF Maj. Gary Payton would not conduct the traditional prelaunch news conference nor hold one after landing. The U.S. Air Force would not disclose how long the crew would stay in orbit or what flight path they would take on the premise it might help the USSR determine mission purpose or interfere with the mission. Previously the Washington Post had reported that Challenger would carry into orbit a sigint (signals intelligence) satellite that could intercept telemetry from Soviet missile tests. The Associated Press later had reported that the satellite could pick up radio, ground-to-space communications, and longdistance telephone calls made by microwave relay. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger would not comment on the reports' accuracy. The USAF had not filed a flight-path plan with the United Nations, and the location of two ships that would recover the solid-fuel rocket boosters was also secret. There would be no public air-to-ground communications during the flight. (W Pbst, Jan 23/85, A3)
NASA announced that Rockwell Internatl. Corp. made significant additions to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to accommodate three research experiments that would measure orbiter aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics as it reentered earth's atmosphere. Researchers would use the flight data to develop future generation space transportation systems. The most obvious change was a cylindrical housing that replaced the fintip atop the vertical tail. The new experiment pod, containing equipment for the shuttle infrared leeside temperature sensing (SILTS) experiment, was approximately 20 in. in diameter and was capped at the leading edge by a spherical dome. SILTS would obtain high-resolution infrared images of the upper (leeside) surfaces of Columbia's port wing and fuselage as the orbiter reentered the atmosphere, providing detailed temperature maps at the surface of the leeside thermal protection materials and indicating the amount of aerodynamic heating of surfaces in flight. Tape recorders would store experiment data. Infrared cameras mounted inside the dome would view Columbia's left wing and fuselage through two windows protected during launch from debris by plugs that filled the window cavities and that fell away when the experiment began about 400,000 feet above earth at reentry. Injection of gaseous nitrogen into the cavities would cool the cameras during that period. For the shuttle entry air data system (SEADS) experiment, a new nosecap had 14 penetration assemblies distributed about its surface, each containing a small hole through which local surface air pressure was measured from an altitude of about 56 miles through landing. This would allow precise postflight determination of the arbiter's attitude relative to the oncoming air-stream and the density of the atmosphere through which the vehicle was flying. The shuttle upper atmosphere mass spectrometer (SUMS) would complement the SEADS experiment by providing atmospheric density information at altitudes above 50 miles. SUMS would sample air at Columbia's surface through a small hole, located just aft of the nosecap, to measure the number of molecules of various gas species in order to determine the atmospheric density that, with vehicle motion information, would allow determination of orbiter aerodynamic characteristics at altitudes where the atmosphere was extremely thin. NASA originally developed the SUMS mass spectrometer for the Viking spacecraft that landed in 1976 on Mars and modified it to operate in the orbiter's reentry flight environment. NASA' Langley Research Center developed the experiments as part of the orbiter experiments program managed by NASA's office of aeronautics and space technology. (NASA Release 85-127)
NASA announced that a Pepsi-Cola dispensing technology would fly aboard Space Shuttle mission 51-F, scheduled for launch on July 12, provided time permitted completion of NASA qualification procedures at the Johnson Space Center. The container, developed by Pepsi-Cola USA and Enviro-Spray Systems (a subsidiary of Grow Group) at their own initiative and expense, was capable of dispensing carbonated beverages, as well as other liquids in space, because pressure within the can was automatically renewed, whenever necessary, to maintain a steady flow of liquid. Pepsi-Cola had granted NASA a license for unrestricted use of the dispensing technology for testing carbonated beverages in space, and NASA would receive the technical information necessary to fabricate its own cans. (NASA Release 85-97)
NASA announced the Lewis Research Center awarded a $10,169,016 contract to General Dynamics Corp. for management and engineering services in support of the Atlas/Centaur launch vehicle program. The contract also called for the company to provide technical management, engineering design, analysis and development, engine testing and development, and reliability and quality assurance. The cost-plus-award fee follow-on contract would begin July 1985 and continue through December 31, 1986. Centaur was a high-energy, upper-stage used with expendable boosters to deliver large payloads to geosynchronous orbit. NASA was modifying it for use as an upper stage on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 85-110)
NASA announced that Loren Shriver, pilot of Space Shuttle mission 51-C, would command mission 61-1 scheduled for launch from KSC no earlier than July 15, 1986. The pilot would be Bryan O'Connor, also scheduled to fly as pilot on mission 61-B in November 1985. Mission specialists would be William Fisher, also scheduled as a mission specialist on 51-1 in August 1985; Mark Lee, making his initial flight; and Sally Ride, who flew June 1983 on STS-7 as the first U.S. woman in space and then again October 1984 on 41-G. (JSC Release 85-027)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) were pursuing a 10-year program scheduled for completion in 1991 to improve Space Shuttle engine performance, reduce operational costs, and develop advanced engine technology for future space travel. Although the Space Shuttle propulsion system had performed well for a number of space missions, it incorporated state-of-the-art technology at the time of its development some 15 years before, so NASA believed the engine's operational life and performance levels could be improved. According to Stanley Marsik, LeRC's Space Shuttle main engine technology program manager, "The current engine represents the first generation of reusable engines. In a way, the first reusable space engine can be compared with the Model-T automobile. Now that we have experienced numerous flights with this engine, we have learned how to improve its life and performance. We now are working towards advancing the technologies necessary to support those improvements." In the age of reusable Space Shuttle engines, demands would increase for higher performance with lighter weight components, resulting in higher operating pressures and temperatures and increased mechanical vibrations and fuel flow turbulence. The system also severely taxed engine components such as turbine blades, bearings, seals, fuel ducting, and combustion chambers. Engineers were studying new high-temperature, high-strength metal alloys and other advanced materials such as new protective coatings and combustion processes. Researchers using advanced computer modeling techniques studied loads on turbine blades and fuel flow, and examined the use of hydrostatic ball bearings where a film of gas would separate the bearing from metal surfaces, resulting in no metal-to-metal contact. Engineers were developing new methods of measuring wear and deterioration, so parts would be replaced only when necessary, and studying ways to monitor engine health by means of a series of computer-connected diagnostic sensors on the engine to signal deviations from normal performance and to facilitate more economical on-the-ground maintenance. The two centers had formed ten disciplinary groups to work with some 130 different technology elements of engine design. Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Internatl., engine manufacturer, and other NASA contractors and several universities were supporting the program. (NASA Release 85-122)
NASA announced that it had selected Rockwell Shuttle Operations Co. for negotiations leading to award of the $685 million four-year space transportation system operations contract (STSOC) at Johnson Space Center (JSC). Follow-on awards could result in a total contract period of 15 years at a value of about $5.5 billion. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract that included incentive fee on sound cost management and an award fee on the basis of performance. Other team members included Bendix Field Engineering Corp., System Development Corp., Omniplan Corp., RMS Technologies, Inc., and System Management American Corp. Under the contract, Rockwell would have responsibility for six major STSOC functions: project management; maintenance and operations; sustaining engineering; flight preparation requirements and analysis; flight preparation production; and direct mission operations, testing, and support. Work would be done for such facilities as the mission control center, shuttle mission simulator, shuttle avionics integration laboratory, software production facility, central computing facility, and the mockup and integration laboratory. The selection represented NASA's consolidation into one contract of work previously performed by 16 firms under 22 contracts. Other firms submitting proposals were Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Space Information Systems Division, Grumman Space Operations Corp., and Lockheed Space Flight Co. (NASA Release 85-128)
The Washington Post reported that Fairchild Industries would sell its 50% interest in American Satellite Co. and Space Communications Co. for $105 million to Continental Telecom Inc., which owned the other half of the two joint ventures. Observers considered the two satellite communications subsidiaries Fairchild's leading growth opportunities. American Satellite of Rockville (Amsat) provided private and general satellite communications services. It transmitted regional editions of The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, and other newspapers and had won a large number of government contracts. Space Communications of Gaithersburg (Spacecom) owned and operated the tracking and data relay satellite system for NASA, provided communications to the Space Shuttle, and was building a $122.8 million communications network for the Air Force. Fairchild president Emanuel Fthenakis said the company decided to sell its interests in Amsat and Spacecom to consolidate its other businesses. "We are addressing the same market with more than one company," he said. "The main reason is to consolidate our activities and address these markets with our wholly owned subsidiaries." Analysts said the move showed Fairchild was unwilling or unable because of troubles in its other operations to invest the large amounts of capital required to continue to expand the two companies. (W Post, Aug 9/85, B1)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force completed for the first time Space Shuttle vehicle stacking at Vandenberg AFB's Space Launch Complex-6, the Marshall Star reported. Begun January 12, the stacking consisted of inert solid-fuel rocket-motor segments, an external tank, and the orbiter Enterprise. Unlike facilities at KSC where NASA stacked the Space Shuttle in the vehicle assembly building and rolled it to the launch pad, at Vandenberg NASA and the Air Force stacked the Space Shuttle vehicle on the launch mount (pad). Workers at Vandenberg rolled a mobile service tower and a shuttle-assembly building to the launch mount, then brought booster segments to the launch complex from the booster facility and lifted them into place by a mobile service-tower crane. This first vehicle stacking at the Vandenberg launch complex was part of facility-verification testing before the first Space Shuttle launch from the complex in early 1986. Col. Walter Yager, commander of the Air Force shuttle assembly task force, said minor problems had occurred, but "that's why we have facility verification. We want to ensure properly working systems before we start handling actual flight hardware." Fit and function checks, payload operations, and launch-processing simulations would complete facility verification. (Marshall Star, Feb 7/85, 1)
NASA announced it would test on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, scheduled for mid-July 1985, a Coca Cola Co. technology, developed at its own initiative and expense, to dispense its carbonated beverage in space [see NASA/Technology Transfer, May 9]. Previously it was impossible for astronauts to consume carbonated soft drinks in microgravity because there was no way to dispense the beverages. The test was part of an agreement between NASA and Coca-Cola under which the company would grant NASA a license to use the company's patented technology, a specially designed can, for unrestricted use in dispensing carbonated beverages in space. NASA would also receive the technical information necessary to fabricate its own cans. NASA added that other companies in the carbonated beverage industry were welcome to propose different technology for the same purpose. (NASA Release 85-96)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced it awarded Honeywell Inc., Avionics Division, a $14,900,000 contract for fabrication and delivery of three flight inertial measurement groups (IMG) for the Shuttle/Centaur guidance and navigation system, which maintained a fixed reference orientation for and measured acceleration of the Centaur. Work under the sole-source firm-fixed-price contract would begin in May 1985 at the contractor's plant in Clearwater, Florida. NASA was modifying the Centaur, which had launched domestic and military communications satellites and sent spacecraft to investigate planetary systems, to fit into the Space Shuttle. NASA would first use the Shuttle Centaur combination to launch the Galileo and then the Ulysses missions. (LeRC Release 85-40)
Commander Robert Overmyer landed the Space Shuttle Challenger today on a lake-bed runway at Edwards Air Force Base, after it had caused two sonic booms that triggered burglar alarms and calls to police, the Washington Post reported. Of the 15 experiments flown on Spacelab 3, 12 apparently operated successfully and two at least partially so. Among the successful experiments was photography of the Northern and Southern lights, which sent streaks of brilliant flashes at the extreme latitudes near the north and south polar regions at that time of year. Challenger's crew photographed 18 auroras. Another successful device was a laser spectrometer that for the first time measured from orbit the ozone layer that protected the earth from the sun's ultraviolet light. Crew members were able to restore two experiments that had initially been inoperable. One was an experiment to study the dynamics of droplets of fluids in weightlessness, the other an instrument that counted and measured cosmic rays striking Challenger in orbit. They were unable to deploy the wide-field camera intended to study the ultraviolet light of hot stars. The afternoon of the landing NASA personnel removed the monkeys and rats in their cages for a flight to Kennedy Space Center, where researchers would kill and dissect the rats to examine their vital organs under a microscope for changes caused by weightlessness. Physician/astronaut William Thornton said they had brought back two monkeys that were even friendlier than they were before the flight—"Those primates are part of the crew right now," he commented. During the flight, one of the monkeys experienced motion sickness for several days, requiring Thornton to feed it by hand. On May 4 the Greensboro News & Record reported that Thornton said, "Our feeding crisis is over. I wouldn't have believed the effect of a caring human hand." However, on May 14 Overmyer told reporters at Johnson Space Center that, "NASA has a problem that NASA has to solve if we're going to fly those cages again," the W Post reported. "I never dreamed that all that stuff would come out of those cages and escape into our atmosphere" [see May 2], He added that the experience with the animals "never took away the luster" of spaceflight, a sentiment echoed by pilot Frederick Gregory, an Air Force colonel who became the first black astronaut to take the Space Shuttle's controls. (W Post, May 5/85, A4, May 6/85, A3, May 7/85, A1, May 14/85, A3; Greensboro News & Record, May 4/85, A4)
NASA announced it was discussing with representatives of the Chilean Government possible arrangements for landing support for the Space Shuttle in the event of an emergency during launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The discussions were consistent with arrangements made with other countries since 1981 supporting launches from Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning provided for emergency landing options for all phases of the flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. Since the first launch of the Space Shuttle from KSC, NASA had plans for each mission for trans-Atlantic landing sites (TAL) and contingency landing sites (CLS) in addition to the primary landing sites. This was consistent with relevant international agreements relating to the rescue and recovery of astronauts in distress and return of the space vehicle. Space Shuttle launches, scheduled to begin from Vandenberg in early 1986, required one or more trans-Pacific landing (TPL) and CLS sites in the Pacific Basin. NASA had determined that Mataveri Airfield on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) could serve as a Space Shuttle TPL/CLS in the event of an emergency. A Chilean contractor was working on preliminary designs for minor improvements at the airfield, which would be necessary in the event an agreement was reached. Improvements would be in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island. Any actual improvements were contingent on final agreement with the Government of Chile. (NASA Release 85-74)
In his "National Security Launch Strategy" directive, President Reagan told NASA and the U.S. Air Force to begin a study leading to joint development of a bigger and more powerful space shuttle that could begin flying missions just before the year 2000, the Washington Post reported. In a major policy change, the Reagan Administration indicated that the Air Force should share with NASA the cost of designing and acquiring the second-generation space shuttle; NASA had borne the $10 billion cost of developing the current Space Shuttle, although the Air Force used it one third of the time. The directive also covered an agreement by the Air Force to use NASA's Space Shuttle at least eight times a year for the 10 years after 1988 and approved an Air Force decision to buy an improved version of its Titan rocket to supplement the Space Shuttle for military launches starting in 1988 and ending in 1993 [see Feb. 27]. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger said in the directive that the Air Force had decided to buy 10 Titan 34D7 single-use rockets for $2.09 billion between then and September 1993 from Martin Marietta Corp. The directive did not resolve the dispute between NASA and the Air Force over Air Force plans to sell at bargain rates obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch three weather satellites for NOAA [see Feb 25]. NASA was disappointed in the Air Force decision to buy the Titans, as it had tried to persuade the Air Force to buy an upgraded version of the solid-fuel rocket booster that helped put the Space Shuttle into orbit. Present rocket power limited Space Shuttle cargo weight, flying height, and its crossrange (limiting landings to Kennedy Space Center, Edwards AFB, and the White Sands Missile Range). The permanently manned space station planned for 1993 would require loads up to 75,000 lb. carried into polar orbit and at least 100,000-lb. loads into near-equatorial orbit at altitudes of at least 500 miles. (W Post, Mar 3/85, A12)
Jacques Louis Lions, president of the French National Center for Space Studies, announced today that Aerospatiale and the Dassault-Breguet Aviation Company under the center's auspices would work together over the next several years to build two models for the European space shuttle Hermes, FBIS Hong Kong AFP in English reported. The European Space Agency (ESA) would likely also sponsor the project, and the center would undertake negotiations with European partners who would develop the main Hermes subsystems. Aerospatiale would lead the project and assemble Hermes components in its Toulouse factories; Dassault would be in charge of aeronautical aspects. Hermes, about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle, would carry two to six astronauts and cargo up to 4.5 tons into low earth orbits. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Oct 19/85) During April: In response to a request from the Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory to acquire more information on how to predict ocean wave behavior, the Wallops Flight Facility's P-3 aircraft participated October 1984 in NASA's Seasat Imaging Radar B (SIR-B) experiment to monitor ocean waves while, 140 miles above it, the Space Shuttle Challenger produced images of the same waves with its radar. Scientists knew what caused waves to swell, but found it difficult to predict exactly how they would behave. Researchers hoped they might be able to predict through the use of satellite data the occurrence of dangerous waves before they caused serious damage to ships and coastal towns. Analysis of previous data from the SIR had indicated that a synthetic aperture radar could observe ocean waves from space, but the lack of information on the actual directional wave spectrum on the ocean at the time of the SIR observations made it difficult to obtain an accurate assessment of the radar's performance. During Challenger's eight-day flight, the P-3 underflew the spacecraft for five nights off the coast of Chile to obtain sea surface observations. Each night the aircraft flew along several hundred kilometers of the Space Shuttle's imaging radar taking sea-surface observations with its complement of remote sensing instruments. The P-3's airborne oceanographic lidar provided laser elevation profiles of the wave field and the radars (surface contour radar, radar ocean wave spectrometer, and advanced applications flight experiment altimeter) measured significant wave height and provided information on the directional wave spectrum. Because state of the sea varied over the series of flights from low seas to waves with 6-m height and 400-m wavelengths, the data sets collected should become classic and provide a basis for the quantitative evaluation of synthetic aperture radars in space. (Inside Wallops, Apr 85, 1)
The Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) office said today that the Space Shuttle Discovery would participate in June in the first SDI experiment in orbit, carrying a mirror intended to intercept and reflect a laser beam fired from earth, the Washington Post reported. In some missile defense systems, a large orbiting mirror would receive a powerful beam from a ground-based laser and reflect it to destroy an enemy missile, but in the space shuttle experiment, the laser beam would be too weak to harm the spacecraft. A small mirror would reflect the beam back to the ground so engineers could verify their ability to keep the laser pointed at the orbiting mirror. The laser would travel from an Air Force Base on Maui, Hawaii, and bounce back by a special 8-in.-diameter "retroreflector" that astronauts would place in one of the Space Shuttle's middeck side windows while the spacecraft was over the Pacific. An SDI spokesman said the laser had successfully tracked during earlier tests an airplane carrying the mirror at an altitude of 30,000 feet. The Space Shuttle flew in orbit at 100 miles and more. The test, called the high precision tracking experiment, was the first in a series that the SDI office had booked aboard the Space Shuttle. Beginning in 1987,	the Pentagon would fly two major SDI experiments each year. (IV Post, May 24/85, A8) During May: Brigadier General Robert Rankine, Jr,, U.S. Air Force, writing in Aerospace about the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), said that, "In the long term, we have confidence that SDI will be a crucial means by which both the U.S. and the Soviet Union can safely agree to very deep reductions and eventually even the elimination of ballistic missiles and the nuclear weapons they carry. This does not represent a shift from the basic deterrent strategy of the U.S., but represents a new means for enhancing deterrence. ". . . A ballistic missile defense capability has the potential of increasing deterrence and adding to stability, by increasing substantially the uncertainties in the success of nuclear attack by an enemy, thoroughly confounding his targeting strategy, thus significantly reducing or eliminating the utility of preemptive attack. The system need not be perfect to accomplish this objective, but most meet three important criteria: —effective against the systems and countermeasures that exist or could be deployed, —sufficiently survivable that it would not encourage an attack on the system itself . . . —effective at lower cost than any proliferation or countermeasure attempts to overcome it. ". . . Some of the opponents of the Strategic Defense Initiative," Rankine said, "have argued that the research and technology program currently under way is inconsistent with the ABM treaty and conflicts with arms control in general. Quite to the contrary, the initiative it totally consistent with current U.S. ABM treaty obligations. The initiative contemplates only research and experimentation on a broad range of defense technologies to provide the basis for a decision in the future whether or not to develop systems which would provide an effective ballistic missile defense capability." Rankine then described the technical scope of SDI and said the program was broken into five major program elements: surveillance, acquisition, tracking and kill, assessment; directed energy weapons; kinetic energy weapons; systems analysis and battle management; and an assortment of other high-priority technologies that did not warrant separate program elements. Rankine concluded that the goal for SDI had not changed since the President's March 1983 speech proposing the system, when he "challenged all of us in the scientific community to create a means for rendering ballistic missiles impotent and obsolete." (Aerospace, Spring 85, 2)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press briefing, noted that the fourth Space Shuttle orbiter, Atlantis, would join the fleet in the spring to fly its first mission in 1985 and that, despite being well into the Space Shuttle's operational phase, NASA would continue to improve performance, procure space parts, and enhance reliability. In support of Presidential efforts to cut government spending, NASA would slow space station definition and development efforts, cancel the advanced composite structures program in aeronautics, and not initiate any new projects in the space science and applications program. (NASA release Feb. 4/ 85, NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/85)
Peoples Republic of China President Li Xiannian today made a three-hour visit to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the JPL Universe reported. JPL Director Dr. Lew Allen welcomed him, then said, "We are aware of the ongoing discussions between our governments regarding future space cooperation . . . We look forward to cooperative scientific investigations." Xiannian then viewed JPL's newly revised multi-media presentation, "Welcome to Outer Space," which had been translated into Chinese. After the show, Allen presented the president with a color photograph of Saturn and its moons; Dr. Taylor Wang—the first Chinese-American in space—gave him a photographic collage showing Wang in space during his May Space Shuttle flight and his drop dynamics module equipment. Xiannian completed his visit with a tour of the Spacecraft Assembly Facility where he heard about the Galileo mission and saw a model of the spacecraft as well as actual pieces of its hardware. (JPL Universe, July 85, 1)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded ASEA Robotics Inc. a $1,143,622 contract to build a robotic development prototype system to be installed in the Robotic Applications Development Laboratory (RADL) and serve as KSC's control center for robotics, Spaceport News reported. KSC currently had two labs for robotics research: Lab A was a test facility for training devices, sensor and end-effector development, and small robotic projects; Lab B functioned as a control center made up of complex work cells and "smart systems" (independent control systems integrated into one coordinated system) for large robotic applications. The objective of the new system was to permit engineers to combine existing and new technology to create advanced independent and semiindependent machines and machines with independent decision-making capabilities or a "computer brain," which could accomplish more on their own without step-by-step instructions from human supervisors. The initial thrust of the new system would be to develop the technology and techniques needed to automatically load and unload hazardous fuels aboard space vehicles and payloads during prelaunch ground operations. Future challenges included application of these refueling techniques to other fuels such as cryogenic propellants. RADL would have an electrically driven articulated robot composed of a six-axes arm and interchangeable end-effectors or "hands," a computer with user-friendly software, and a vision tracking system. The facility would serve as the focal point for combining robotics hardware, algorithms, software, sensors, and control systems. Leon Davis, a development engineer and electrical lead for the Robotic Control Systems, said of the new system, "This is not a manipulator that is teleoperated by a man, but a robot with a computer brain capable of memorizing the contours and panels of its intended subject and carrying out its functions autonomously." Because NASA would be asking KSC to design processing facilities for new-generation launch vehicles such as the second generation Space Shuttle and the heavy lift launch vehicles, KSC would need these state-of-the-art robotics to provide the most efficient and effective processing methods. Hazardous, time critical, and repetitive Space Shuttle and payload operations all had potential uses for robotics. A special feature of the system was a "real time" tracking system using "closed-loop" responsive adaptive control commands, feedback, and error signals. "Adaptive control" meant that the robot altered its path automatically in response to sensory feedback from its environment. The KSC robot's servo-controls and software utilities would allow its arm to operate adaptively to control positions and orientation of all six axes, not only the end-effector as found in standard applications. An electrically driven, servo-controlled robot had several advantages over hydraulic robots, the major one being that smooth motion, speed, and trajectory controls were possible when the robot handled loads up to 200 lb. As Davis said, "We really don't have applications for hydraulic robots. Hydraulic robots can leak, proving a potential hazard to the tile and other sensitive areas of the orbiter." KSC's robotics research would progress in four phases: phase one was the development of the robotic arm in static work cells; phase two proposed advancing the robotic capabilities to operate in dynamic work cells; phase three would include off-line programming using 3-D graphics and simulated work cells; and phase four entertained the possibility of employing artificial intelligence. Possible future capabilities of robots were three-dimensional scanning; higher order processing; artificial intelligence; sonic, laser, and other ranging systems; and "touch" and mobility systems. (Spaceport News, Nov 7/85, 6) Langley Research Center
NASA announced that the governments of Chile and the U.S. signed agreements concerning use of Mataveri Airport on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) as an emergency landing site for the Space Shuttle. The intergovernmental agreements provided the basis for contingency planning for launches of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base beginning in March 1986. This planning was consistent with arrangements already in place to support launches from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning had to provide for emergency landing options for all phases of a flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. The Vandenberg launches would also have a requirement (analogous to those from KSC) for one or more trans-Pacific landing sites in the Pacific Basin. Although the probability of a contingency Space Shuttle landing was extremely remote, identification and preparation of suitable contingency landing sites was consistent with prudent operational planning. A Chilean contractor had prepared designs, in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island, for improvements at the air field that were necessary to support a Space Shuttle landing. These improvements included an extension of the existing runway and associated lighting system, construction of a storage building, and enhancement of certain permanent and temporary navigation equipment in the area. The modifications would not affect the historical treasures for which Isla de Pascua was known. As part of the agreement, the two countries would undertake enhancement of the existing program of scientific cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, thereby building upon a long and successful relationship of technical cooperation in this arena. (NASA Release 85117)
Some high school student semifinalists in the Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program, sponsored by NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, would meet at Lewis Research Center (LeRC) March 25 and 26 to present before a panel of LeRC scientists and engineers their proposals for candidate experiments to fly aboard future Space Shuttle missions, the center announced. LeRC personnel would evaluate and suggest improvements to the experiments. The program was a nationwide competition to stimulate the study of science and technology by engaging students in projects to develop actual payload experiments for upcoming Space Shuttle flights. The 37 students from Ohio, Michigan, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, and Wisconsin would hear a presentation by NASA astronaut Robert Springer (Lt. Col. USMC), slated to fly aboard Space Shuttle mission 51-H scheduled for launch in late 1985, and a discussion by Brian Vlcek, a previous year's finalist from Parma, Ohio, on his winning experiment entitled "inducing a geotropic-type reaction in radish roots with chemical stimuli." The meeting would close with a tour of LeRC where the students would see such facilities as the 500-foot deep, zero-gravity facility and a propulsion systems laboratory where researchers tested full-scale aircraft engines under actual flight conditions. Initially students from 10 geographical regions around the country had proposed over 2,000 biology, chemistry, and astronomy experiments. Interdisciplinary teams of teachers, scientists, and engineers had evaluated the proposals to select each region's semifinalists. As of the Space Shuttle 51-C mission in January 1985, NASA had flown 10 student experiments in space. (LeRC Release 85-17)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
NASA's newest Space Shuttle orbiter, Atlantis, arrived about 5:00 p.m. April 14 at KSC after a two-day flight from California, the Marshall Star reported. KSC workers removed the Atlantis from the 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) and towed it to the processing hangar, where others would reconfigure it for its maiden flight, mission 51—J, scheduled for September. The SCA made a brief stop at Ellington Air Force Base, Texas, during the journey to KSC. (Marshall Star, Apr 17/85, 2)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis, scheduled October 3 for its maiden voyage, would deploy two defense satellite communications system (DSCS-III) satellites to support all three military services and to carry a single channel transponder used to transmit emergency messages from the president to nuclear forces, the Washington Post reported the Federation of American Scientists said on September 9. The group said the classified mission could be determined by anyone including the Soviets, who carefully scrutinized public documents, and that it was revealing the payload because keeping the mission secret "inhibits public awareness and discussion of U.S. military activities in space." The group indicated it found reference to the satellites in various military publications, the most recent of which was a December 28, 1984, issue of Defense Daily that said two DCSCs would "be launched together next year on a single space shuttle mission, apparently on the Atlantis mission . . ." (W Post, Sept 10/85, A5)
For the first time since the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz project, liquid-hydrogen rocket fuel flowed through the lines at Kennedy Space Center's launch pad 39-B, the Spaceport News reported. Nearing its January 1, 1986, deadline for completion of pad B renovations and improvements, NASA was entering final work stages including functional testing for such installations as the new 100-foot-tall flare stacks that would replace the old burn pond for disposal of vented gaseous hydrogen. NASA planned first use of pad B for the 51 —L Space Shuttle mission scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986. One of the flare stacks, 26 inches in diameter, would vent off and burn gaseous hydrogen from the Space Shuttle's external tank and the orbiter fuel cells service system; the other, 18 inches in diameter, would handle hydrogen from the Centaur upper stage, the facility storage tank, and the mobile launcher platform. Also new to the complex were two rooms on the rotating service structure, one of which was designed for storage of equipment used in the payload changeout room in order to avoid the necessity for temporary removal of the equipment from the site for each launch. The other was a new clean room/ suit changing room. Another major new item was the rolling beam that would supply liquid hydrogen to the Centaur upper stage. Plans called for use of the Centaur upper stage during the Galileo and Ulysses missions scheduled for May 1986. Work began on pad B renovations about seven years previously; total cost would be approximately $150 million. (Spaceport News, June 21/85, 4) July 2b: Chilean foreign Minister Jaime del Valle announced that Chilean and U.S. delegations reached agreement on extending the Easter Island airfield for Space Shuttle emergency landings, FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish reported. Del Valle said Chile received favorable answers from the U.S. government to two major questions raised by Chile and that he would recommend the Chilean president approve the project. Earlier Del Vhlle had said that a possible agreement with NASA on the extension of Mataveri Airport would not imply the surrendering of Chilean sovereignty over the airfield nor would it constitute the establishment of a foreign military base on Chilean territory. Del Valle was quoted as saying, "On the eve of the beginning of formal negotiations, I want to reaffirm to the country that the agreement proposed by the United States refers exclusively to the emergency landings of space shuttles of the type that are currently in operation. It is appropriate to note that the possible emergency landings at Easter Island include only those isolated flights originating in California and those taking off from Cape Canaveral, which take a different orbit." Del Valle concluded the earlier statement by saying the "cultural, archeological, and ecological structure of the island will be preserved." (FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish, July 2/85, July 26/85)
Space Shuttle mission 51-F was aborted today at three seconds before liftoff when the orbiter Challenger's onboard computer automatically shut down the main engines, Spaceport News reported. Seconds after main engine start, main engine No. 2 lost redundancy to operate the chamber coolant valve. NASA's ground rule restricted launching without an operating backup system in that area of the main propulsion system. Although the valve did assume its proper position after a command from a backup system, the loss of redundancy resulted in a major component failure flag being sent to the orbiter's computers. Challenger Commander Gordon Fullerton later thanked the Kennedy Space Center team on behalf of the crew, saying the team acted quickly and professionally and that at no time did the crew feel apprehensive. In answering a Washington Post reporter's question later, Fullerton said, "We all have mixed emotions here, but we're thankful the system worked the way it should. It was the longest three seconds I've ever experienced." Launch operations manager Thomas Utsman said that crews would strip parts of the malfunctioning engine and that engineers had identified four different parts that could have failed when they should have been pumping fuel from the hydrogen tank into the engine chamber. When the liquid-fuel engines ignited, valves that fed fuel into the chambers were fully open so engines could attain speed instantly. Just before liftoff, the valves were partially closed to cool engines slightly and prevent too much fuel from entering the chamber. The valve on main engine No. 2 failed to close partially, signaling the computer to shut down the system. The first Space Shuttle abort occurred June 26, 1984, when an onboard computer shut down two of Discovery's three engines four seconds before liftoff. That abort triggered an investigation that led to a complete overhaul of Discovery's main engines. NASA had to move Discovery back to the Vehicle Assembly Building where its cargo was removed and placed aboard another orbiter that flew into space two months later. "We don't think the engine valve itself failed the way a valve failed the [other] time we had a launch abort," Space Shuttle program manager Robert Lindstrom said. "I really believe there's a fair likelihood we'll get off again in another week." The delay did have an impact on the mission's objectives. The infrared telescope in Challenger's cargo bay could be operated successfully only in a completely dark sky. Had the flight left on schedule, the sky would have been dark for most of the following seven days until a new moon. NASA had scheduled the next Space Shuttle launch using the orbiter Discovery for August 24. It was not immediately clear how the Challenger's abort would affect that mission. (Spaceport News, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 13/85, A3)
When the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-F landed today, it successfully concluded the third mission of the European-developed space laboratory, Spacelab 2, which NASA used for the first time in its pallet-only configuration, NASA reported. All Spacelab subsystems but one provided excellent data, and NASA verified for the first time two new Spacelab systems, the "Igloo" and the instrument pointing system. NASA would fly many of the Spacelab 2 instruments on future missions, so the 51-F mission provided opportunities not only for scientific data collection but also for engineering checkouts of the new equipment. Since instruments are brought home, engineers could evaluate and refurbish them to improve their performance or modify them to meet different scientific objectives in response to results from prior flights. Through Spacelab 2's four ultraviolet and visible light instruments, researchers observed a sun that, although it was in a fairly quiet phase of its activity cycle, displayed sunspots, filaments, granules, spicules, and prominences. These solar features changed over periods as brief as five to ten minutes and from orbit to orbit, day to day. The solar ultraviolet universal polarimeter (SOUP) started its program late in the mission after an unexplained shutdown and startup. Thereafter, the instrument performed almost perfectly, observing the strength, structure, and evolution of magnetic fields in the solar atmosphere. Scientists were confident that despite abbreviated operations SOUP data would be the best and longest run of solar granulation data ever collected. Although loss of altitude and propellant during initial Space Shuttle ascent jeopardized part of the plasma depletion experiment, planners managed to schedule four of the eight anticipated burns, two over Millstone Hill, Massachusetts, and one each over Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and Hobart, Australia. Preliminary data indicated that the burns did produce "holes" or troughs of depleted plasma that persisted in the ionosphere for more than an hour. The crew observed resultant airglow after the nighttime burns, and there were reports of visual observations from the ground. The Hobart site reported the reception of low-frequency cosmic radio emissions through the window the burn temporarily opened. In the properties of superfluid helium in zero-gravity experiment, the cryostat performed up to expectation, maintaining a temperature low enough to keep the helium in the superfluid state. Temperature was readily controlled, and the cryostat recovered well from temperature increases. These findings were important to the use of superfluid helium as a cryogen on future missions. During the gravity influenced lignification in plants experiment, pine seedlings, oats, and bean sprouts grew in self-contained growth chambers. The crew daily monitored chamber temperatures and photographed the chambers early and late in the mission. The oat and bean seeds germinated in orbit, and sprouts grew to a height of five to six inches as expected. The pine seedlings also showed normal growth. Researchers would analyze the plant tissues to determine whether there was any difference in the production rate of lignin between plants grown in space and in a control group grown in a ground laboratory. (NASA Prelim Spacelab Mission Science Report, Aug 6/ 85; ESA release Aug 7/85)
USA Today reported that its debate for that day would explore the pros and cons of U.S. manned space missions. In its editorial, USA Today said, "Human brains can adapt to change. Machines cannot. Without men and women in space, there would be no one to even try to fix the Navy's stranded satellite" [Navy communications satellite carried on the Discovery 51-D mission], ". . . Space is our last frontier. Without humans aboard to ride rockets to the stars and beyond, man will never embrace what he has envisioned," the editorial concluded. USA Today guest columnist Geoffrey Keller, a professor of astronomy at Ohio State University, wrote that one of the values of the manned space program was that it would help to lengthen the useful life of expensive space telescopes (for example, the Hubble Space Telescope), by permitting astronauts to replace worn-out telescope parts and to make telescopes more powerful as new and more efficient cameras were invented and installed. In an opposing view, James Van Allen, a professor of physics at the University of Iowa, wrote that nearly all of what he considered the really important and durable products of space technology were "achieved by much-less-expensive unmanned spacecraft, operating automatically and under cornmand control from ground stations, often for many years in earth orbit or in the far reaches of the solar system. ". . . The public acclaim for the Apollo program has left a permanent imprint on NASA and has, in effect, committed it to an overriding emphasis on further development of manned space flight," Van Allen continued. "This emphasis is simultaneously NASA's greatest strength and its greatest weakness. Manned space flight, with all its mythological foundations, has assumed the aura of a religion. The space shuttle and the proposed permanently manned space station are primarily embodiments of this religion," he wrote. But, he added, "the relevant results to date are far too meager to justify such hyperbolic expectations and such enormous expenditures. Meanwhile, the proven applications of space technology are languishing for lack of resources." (USA Today, Apr 16/85, 8A)
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to industry to develop a space platform providing five years of on-orbit services to NASA payloads while allowing the developer to market it to commercial users, an innovative approach considered a first step toward creating a closer partnership between government and industry in space. Industry would finance, develop, own, and operate the platform with first use planned in late 1988 and would be free to market the platform (totally separate from NASA's plans for a government-developed, permanently manned space station) for materials processing or other manufacturing activities. NASA stipulated that the platform be capable of providing services for four future projects: the extreme ultraviolet explorer (EUVE), the x-ray timing explorer (XTE), a zero-gravity payload, and an as yet unidentified project. The Space Shuttle or other launch vehicle would place the commercial platform in orbit. Commercial payloads would reimburse the government for use of the orbiter and facilities. (NASA Release 85-7) Johnson Space Center
measure galactic and extragalactic contributions to the diffuse ultraviolet background radiation, and develop and demonstrate an advanced Get Away Special carrier system capable of providing data and power services to Space Shuttle attached sounding rocket class instruments (GSFC);
NASA announced it awarded a $145.8 million contract to General Electric Co.'s Valley Forge Space Center, Philadelphia for development of the upper atmosphere research satellite (UARS) observatory. Scheduled for October 1989 deployment from the Space Shuttle, the satellite would carry 10 scientific instruments into a 373-mile circular orbit. Valley Forge Center would design the observatory system, design and fabricate an instrument module compatible with the NASA standard multimission modular spacecraft (MMS), integrate the instrument module with the MMS and flight instruments, test the observatory system, integrate the observatory into the Space Shuttle, and support postlaunch flight operations. The UARS, with its remote sensing instruments providing essentially global coverage, would for the first time generate data for understanding the composition and dynamics of the upper atmosphere, important to solving many questions about the earth's weather and climate. For example, the observatory would provide previously unavailable data on the nature of natural and human effects on earth's ozone layer. GSFC would provide UARS project management for NASA's office of space science and applications. (NASA Release 85-32)
Western European cabinet ministers in a two-day meeting in Rome agreed to participate in the 1992 U.S. launch of a permanently manned space station, the European Space Agency (ESA) announced. The ministers also increased the ESA budget and approved funding for Ariane 5, making clear their intent to pursue independent European space activities, but failed to decide on a French-sponsored plan for a small space shuttle (called Hermes). ESA would base its participation in the U.S. space station on an Italo-German project called Columbus, with an estimated $2-billion project cost. Although W. Germany, Britain, and Italy had made funding commitments, France had not announced its project share. The ministers' decision ended controversy over European cooperation with the U.S., which had resulted from an earlier U.S./European cooperative effort that ended negatively when a $750 million investment in the 1973 Spacelab produced little significant research or technological spinoffs, the Washington Post reported. ESA also announced its annual expenditures would increase 70% to almost $1.3 billion by 1990. (ESA release Feb 4/85, Jan 31/85; W Post, Feb 1/85, A23) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED PMI \3 lf INTENTlONAtlT BIAN*
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)
Hughes Communications Inc., manufacturer and owner of the Syncom 4 satellite launched August 27 from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, today declared it a failure due to a faulty cable between the satellite's UHF radio transmission system and its broadcast antenna, the Washington Post reported. Failure of the $85 million satellite, known as Leasat 4 after its lease to the Navy, pushed satellite insurance losses to $234 million in a single week and to about $570 million for the past 18 months. Satellites insured for $84 million and $65 million were also lost that week when Arianespace blew up a malfunctioning Ariane rocket. (IV Post, Sept 17/85, All)
In response to numerous comments regarding the appropriateness of Sen. Jake Gam's (R-Utah) flight on the Space Shuttle, Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) wrote in a letter to the Washington Times that Garn had as good a background in aviation as any member of Congress and his was a long, deep, and sincere interest. "Of all the members of this body that I know, he is the least motivated by any desire for publicity. "Why is it wrong for a member of Congress, the body that is responsible for authorizing and funding the whole space program, to engage in flight if for no other reason than to get a better idea of how the whole operation works?" Sen. Goldwater concluded that he would defend the desirability of Sen. Garn's flight, as he would be able "to give the rest of us in Congress who vote the money a better idea of how the whole operation is going." (W Times, Mar 20/85, 7A)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
NASA officials said they might alter Space Shuttle launch countdown procedures to avoid the type of last-second problem that forced postponement of mission 51-F earlier in July [see Space Transportation System, Launch Schedules, July 12], the NY Times reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, said in an interview that "We want to minimize the chances of a needless shutdown. There may be a way to soften up some of our criteria. "Before you take off on an airplane the pilot normally tries all his flaps and hydraulics," Moore said. "We don't have a chance to do that on the launch pad right now, and we want to perform those kinds of checks." Moore indicated new procedures being considered for the countdown included increasing the amount of time allowed for the Space Shuttle's computers to verify the correct functioning of the engine valves and broadening the criteria under which they were meant to operate. Moore added that criteria for safety would not change. The new procedures would add "no risk" to crew members, he said. The consideration of new procedures likely reflected growing confidence in the Space Shuttle as well as concern about foreign competition for launches. NASA officials said Space Shuttle launches must proceed smoothly and regularly if the program is to be a commercial success and that the current schedule called for one launch a month, eventually going to one every two weeks. (NYT, July 29/85, A8)
The successful landing test on October 30 of a new nose-wheel steering system on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A meant that the orbiter Columbia would resume Space Shuttle landings on the concrete runway at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) when it returned following mission 61-C, the Washington Post reported. All Space Shuttle landings since April had been at Edwards Air Force Base, where the long desert runways allowed pilots to roll to a stop without excessive brake use. At KSC crosswinds tended to push the orbiter toward the edges of the narrow runway after the spacecraft touched down, which pilots countered by making "preferential" use of brake assemblies on the landing gear under the Space Shuttle's wings. By braking on one side or the other, pilots kept the orbiter on the runway. But a landing in April shredded three of the orbiter's tires and burned out a brake assembly. NASA built the new nosewheel steering mechanism into the orbiter so the pilot could steer the spacecraft without using his brakes. Challenger Commander Henry Hartsfield said after the Challenger landing that he was "very pleased" with the assembly, but recommended one more test on the concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. (W Post, Nov 22/85, A21)
NASA expected the Space Shuttle's nose wheel steering capability, previously used only on an experimental basis, would achieve operational status by the fall, the Space News Roundup reported. NASA had attributed brake damage to the orbiter Discovery following the STS 51-D mission in part to crosswinds at KSC, which required the orbiter's commander to use the main gear braking system for differential steering. Nose wheel steering would allow Space Shuttle commanders to use the brake system for stopping orbiters rather than for braking and steering combined. A nose wheel steering capability was in the Space Shuttle design, but used only on an experimental basis. NASA had spent the last year upgrading the system to operational status. In addition, NASA instrumented the Challenger to provide better landing condition data and planned to add instrumentation to the landing gear system of the Discovery. In the 17 Space Shuttle missions to date, NASA had used 68 individual brake systems with 27 receiving no damage, 27 receiving slight damage, and 14 receiving significant damage in which either one or more stators or rotors overheated or suffered other problems. Until the nose wheel steering capability became operational, NASA intended to choose on a flight by flight basis between Kennedy Space Center and Edwards Air Force Base as the primary end of mission landing site. (JSC Space News Roundup, June 14/85, 2)
NASA announced that astronauts Paul Weitz, Dr. Kathryn Sullivan, and Dale Gardner would support NASA activities at the 36th Paris Air Show at Le Bourget from May 31 through June 9 [see Space Station Program, Mar. 22], Weitz, then chief of astronaut appearances at Johnson Space Center, was a member of the first Skylab crew in 1973 and later commanded the first flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger in April 1983. He had logged 793 hours in space. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED i m ..JNWiTIOlunj Sullivan, an astronaut since 1978 with 197.5 hours in space, served as a mission specialist on the October 1984 Space Shuttle mission 41-G and was the first American woman to perform an extravehicular activity or space walk, during which she and astronaut David Leestma conducted a 2.5-hour demonstration of the potential of refueling satellites in space. Gardner, an astronaut since 1978 with 337 hours in space, had flown on the August 1983 Space Shuttle mission STS-8, the first night launch and landing using the orbiter Challenger, and in November 1984 on the 51-A mission, during which the crew retrieved two communications satellites that had failed to achieve proper orbits after launch from an earlier Space Shuttle flight. NASA refurbished the satellites for reflight. During the Air Show, the astronauts would make numerous public appearances, participate in media interviews, and assist NASA's marketing efforts at its exhibit in the U.S. pavilion. (NASA Release 85-72)
NASA today rolled the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger to launch complex 39B two miles from where NASA had installed the orbiter Columbia for mission 61-C, the first time a pair of orbiters had been on the launch pads at the same time, the Washington Times reported. Columbia was on Pad 39A until repair of a faulty power unit that aborted a launch attempt December 19 [see Space Transportation System/Launch Schedules, Dec. 19]. NASA had scheduled Challenger on mission 51-L for launch on January 22. (IV Times, Dec 23/85, 4A) Solid-fuel Rocket Boosters
Robert Cooper, director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), said in testimony delivered in late March before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee research and development subcommittee that a space plane capable of flying to anywhere on the earth within half an hour to intercept enemy bombers or perform space spy missions might be possible within the next 10 years, the Washington Times reported. The U.S. Space Shuttle, which had limited ability to maneuver in space, was put in orbit only after a lengthy and complicated rocket launch. So the U.S. Air Force wanted a "transatmospheric vehicle" that would be able to quickly reach and return from space like an ordinary aircraft. Cooper said a recent breakthrough in so-called ramjet technology might make possible an aircraft capable of taking off from a runway and reaching speeds of Mach 25 (times the speed of sound), the velocity necessary to escape earth's gravity. Cooper noted the plane would weigh about 100,000 lb., take off from and land on a 10,000-foot runway, and probably use hydrogen as a fuel. Only a small amount of rocket power would be required to "deorbit" the plane, he said. DARPA proposed to build two full-scale model ramjet engines for testing on the ground. "There are a number of very interesting technical problems here . . . none of them insurmountable. They're all within our grasp," Cooper said. Cooper explained that the ramjet combustion providing the extra boost took place only when the air flowing through the jet engine chamber was at supersonic speeds. Ordinarily, to get air flowing at this speed through the entire length of the chamber, the aircraft itself had to be moving at Mach 6. However, "a way has been found/' he said, "to use a subsidiary scheme for driving the air through the engine up to supersonic speeds, even though the vehicle on which the engine is attached is sitting on the runway." By slightly varying the geometry of the engine, it might be possible to fly the aircraft from takeoff to Mach 6, and "with slight variations" fly from Mach 6 to 14 and then to Mach 25, Cooper said. The Air Force and Navy were interested in the engine, development of which marked a resurgence in hypersonic speed research that had been "put on a back burner" in the late 1960s, Cooper commented. (W Times, Apr 2/ 85, 3A)
Sudden squalls almost on top of the launch pad early today forced postponement for at least a day of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the Washington Post reported. A series of unforecasted thunderstorms blew in from the mainland directly across the flight path, and dark thunderheads surrounded the launch pad for five miles in almost every direction. NASA aborted the launch five minutes before liftoff. NASA officials were concerned not only about the Space Shuttle climbing through rain and lightning but also about the crew's ability to see the KSC runway in case they had to make an emergency landing the early minutes of the flight. Rain could damage the orbiter's tiles, and lightning could harm its computers and guidance systems. NASA rescheduled Discovery's launch for between 7:57 and 8:11 a.m. EDT August 25. Among the factors necessitating that launch window were the position of the satellite planned for salvage and timing of deployment of three communications satellites. If an August 25 launch was impossible, there were launch opportunities the following three days. NASA had announced earlier that highlights of the eight-day mission included an attempt to repair and salvage the Leasat/Syncom IV-F3 satellite and deploy it for normal operation, and deployment of the ASC 7/PAM-D for the American Satellite Co., the AUSSAT //PAM-D satellite for the Australian government, and the Leasat IV-F4 satellite for the U.S. Navy. The physical vapor transport of organic solids (PVTOS) experiment sponsored by 3M Corp. would also fly on the mission. PVTOS was the second of some 70 experiments the 3M Corp. planned to conduct aboard the Space Shuttle over the next ten years. On the 51-1 mission, solid materials would vaporize into a gaseous state to form thick crystalline films on selected substrates of sublimable organics. Researchers at 3M would study crystals produced by PVTOS for their optical properties and other characteristics that might ultimately have important applications to 3M's businesses in electronics, imaging, and health care. The company's first experiment, flown in November 1984, dissolved materials that led to a solid crystalline product. (NASA Release 85-118; W Post, Aug 25/85, A3)
The U.S. Senate passed by voice vote H.R. 1714, the NASA Authorization Bill for FY 86, NASA's Legislative Activities Report noted. As passed, the bill embraced the concept of a budget freeze at the FY 85 level of $7,510 billion; however, it also provided for three specific augmentations that totalled $142 million, accounting for a FY 86 growth of 1.9%. Among the authorizations for research and development were $200,000,000 for the space station, $477,200,000 for space transportation capability development, and $608,400,000 for physics and astronomy. Spaceflight, control, and data communications authorizations included $941,500,000 for Space Shuttle production and operational capability; $1,700,100,000 for space transportation operations; and $745,300,000 for space and ground network, communications, and data systems. Among the authorizations for space transportation facilities were $14,000,000 for construction of an orbiter modification and refurbishment facility at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), $3,600,000 for construction of a thermal protection system facility at KSC, and $6,500,000 for modification of enhanced life support systems testing at Marshall Space Flight Center. (NASA Legislative Activities Report, June 27/85, 1)
In their last full day aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51-B, the crew concluded an array of experiments and prepared for their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Answering questions radioed from reporters at Johnson Space Flight Center, the astronauts reported progress not only in working out space station construction techniques, but also in developing a gravity-free pharmaceutical factory to be based on the proposed space station. Payload specialist Charles Walker of the McDonnell Douglas Corp. was in charge of the experiment for development of a space-based factory for purification of a human hormone produced by genetically engineered bacteria. Astronauts on previous flights had tested the basic purification technique, called continuous-flow electrophoresis in a gravity-free environment; the current experiment simulated an actual production run of the hormone, which might prove useful in treating certain forms of anemia. During the questioning, astronauts Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring and Maj. Jerry Ross acknowledged that they were extremely fatigued after each of their spacewalks and that their hands were stiff and numb after the practice assembly, manipulation, and disassembly of a 45-foot-long truss and a pyramidal module. Nevertheless, the two deemed the exercise a success. "We don't know yet what this will mean for a future space station," Spring commented, "but it's a start. Personally, it was really exhilarating for me out there, face to face with the universe." (NYT, Dec 3/85, C3)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) would transfer spacecraft tracking and data acquisition operations from its Beltsville Tracking Station to its Wallops Flight Facility by early 1986, consolidating the operations to support balloon, sounding-rocket, and aeronautical-flight research. Diminishing need for ground stations due to the new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) necessitated the realignment. TDRSS would consist of three communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit, providing global coverage by earth-orbiting satellites and replacing the worldwide network of ground stations. NASA had launched the first TDRSS satellite in April 1983 and would launch the second about February 20. GSFC would phase out or transfer to other agencies most of its tracking stations. In addition to Wallops, however, GSFC would maintain ground stations at Bermuda and Merritt Island, Florida, to support Space Shuttle launches from KSC. The White Sands, New Mexico, station was the ground terminal for orbiting TDRSS satellities (NASA Release 85-11)
Rep. Norman Mineta, (D-Calif.) introduced legislation today for the planning and construction of an expansion of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum at Washington Dulles Airport, the Congressional Record reported. When introducing H.R. 3403, Mineta said, "This legislation is proposed to solve two major problems confronting the Air and Space Museum. First, as my colleagues know, this is perhaps the most popular museum in the world. The public's demand for exhibits and information concerning our aviation history is enormous, and growing. We need the additional facilities to respond to this demand. "But why Dulles? Why not build the new facility in downtown Washington? The answer is simple: there is no site large enough for the needs envisioned and of paramount importance, there is no other site adjacent to a major airport. "An airport site is critical because of the second problem we are trying to solve, which is how to display objects of the scale of the space shuttle or other modern aircraft. The museum needs to be at Dulles Airport because that is the only site to which these exhibits can be transported and displayed. "In particular, this legislation authorizes the transfer to the Smithsonian of land at the airport. This bill authorizes a total of $2.4 million in funds for planning of the new museum, to be appropriated in the 1986 to 1988 period. "In addition, the bill authorizes the appropriation of $42.6 million in Federal funds beginning in 1989 to finance half of the cost of actually constructing the museum. These Federal funds would not be available unless and until a private fundraising effort has raised an identical amount." (Cong. Record, Sept 20/85, E4165)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, testifying today before the U.S. House HUD and independent agencies appropriations subcommittee on NASA's FY 86 budget request, said that orbiter processing constraints at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) made it difficult for NASA to consider adding Space Shuttle flights to get the year's planned commercial launches back on schedule, Aerospace Daily reported. When asked by Chairman Edward Boland (D-Mass.) if reports were true that NASA was considering launching three commercial satellites on Deltas rather than the Space Shuttle to get the Space Shuttle's manifest back on schedule, Beggs responded that it was an option the agency "had to look at" but one that probably would not be exercised. He said NASA talked to several Space Shuttle customers about flying payloads on Deltas and some were interested. Another option NASA considered was adding another Space Shuttle flight to the manifest, but orbiter processing constraints posed problems. "We just can't push the orbiters through the processing facility quickly enough," he said, although NASA still "may be able to squeeze another launch" into the year's manifest. He pointed out the hardware for another flight was available and NASA proposed building a third orbiter processing facility high bay and Space Shuttle tile facility at KSC with FY 86 funds. (A/D, Apr 3/85, 1)
NASA launched Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today through the worst weather of the Space Shuttle program, the NY Times reported. After two postponements in three days because of bad weather and a computer failure, Discovery barely got off the ground before the darkening clouds moved over the launch pad and the rain descended in torrents. "We could see large holes in the system 50 or 100 miles across so we prayed for the breaks that would let us thread the needle when the time came," launch director Robert Sieck said later. "We had two things in our favor: There was no lightning in the cloud cover, and most of the rain was south of the launch pad, not right over it." Launch directors gambled that rain would not be falling on the pad at liftoff time, which was delayed three minutes to make sure the gamble was the right one. As heavy rain fell on the press site three miles to the west, Discovery roared away from the pad through a hole in the clouds and sped into the air 10 minutes before the pad was pelted with rain. Commanding the flight was Air Force Col. Joe Engle, who commanded the second Space Shuttle test flight in 1981 and on August 26 turned 53. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Covey was pilot; mission specialists were John Lounge, Dr. James van Hoften, and Dr. William Fisher. A malfunction encountered two hours into the flight forced the astronauts to deploy a day early one of the three satellites in the orbiter's cargo bay. During a cargo inspection by remotely controlled cameras, a shield that was to protect Australia's AUSSAT 1 from direct exposure to sunlight stuck in a partly open position. An astronaut then used the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm to nudge the sunshade completely open so they could release the spring-loaded satellite. Any delay of more than six hours could have resulted in radiation damage to the exposed satellite's electronics. Less than five hours after deploying the Australian satellite, Discovery's crew deployed ASC 1 for the American Satellite Co. The second deployment marked the first time a Space Shuttle crew deployed two satellites in one day. (NYT, Aug 28/85, D18)
Astronauts aboard the Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F spent an extra day in space gazing at the sun after the instrument pointing system was back in order, the Washington Post reported. The sudden recovery on August 4, as a result of a lucky radio command transmitted on a whim after a jolting rocket firing, of a fourth solar telescope called a solar optical universal polarimeter added to the science data. Most of the August 5 sun observations used that telescope after NASA had considered it a failure. The telescope initially recorded images of sunspots, dark splotches that erupted through the visible surface of the sun when underlying magnetic fields became convoluted, the Washington Times reported. The astronauts turned the telescope on the sunspot again on August 5, and the TV image was so clear scientists on the ground reported that they could see changes in its penumbra, a surrounding halo-like feature made up of jets of gas streaming out from the dark central area. (W Post, Aug 6/85, A5; W Times, Aug 6/ 85, 2A)
Tile work on the orbiter Challenger had remained the "pacing item" in meeting NASA's next scheduled Space Shuttle mission, 51-E, set for no earlier than February 20, Aerospace Daily reported. Randy Stone, 51-E lead flight director, said at a press briefing that NASA would make an assessment at KSC and that he didn't know "what the slip will be or if there is one." Stone had indicated work on the orbiter originating from adhesion problems with thermal protection tiles was progressing well; however, workers still needed to attach over 300 tiles before NASA could move the orbiter to the Vehicle Assembly Building for mating with the external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters. If all went well, NASA would launch Challenger February 20 from KSC and land it there at about 9:21 am EST February 24. (A/D, Jan 30/85, 1)
NASA announced it reached agreement with the Department of Defense (DOD) on a pricing and reimbursement policy for DOD use of the Space Transportation System during the period FY 89 through FY 91. The agreement established an average price of $60 million (in 1982 dollars) for each DOD launch, an average which was based on the estimated cost to fly and an exchange of launch and range support services between DOD and NASA. The price reflected a fixed-base component of $30 million for each planned flight and an incremental component of $30 million for each actual flight. The annual fixed-based component total—$270 million a year, based on DOD projections of nine equivalent flights—would be paid regardless of the number of actual flights, while the $30 million incremental component would be paid for each actual flight. By combining a fixed annual charge with a low variable cost per flight, the agreement insured that NASA would be able to cover its funding needs and DOD would continue to rely on the Space Shuttle as DOD's primary space launch vehicle. (NASA Release 85-169) Scientific Research
Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) qualification tests had shown the Star 30C apogee kick motor, designed to place satellites in orbits around the earth and manufactured by Morton-Thiokol Inc., was ready for production, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sverdrup Technology Inc., operating contractor of AEDC's propulsion test facilities, had conducted qualification checks in one of AEDC's high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated altitude of about 100,000 feet. Test objectives were to demonstrate component structural integrity and to determine ballistic performance. Sverdrup temperature conditioned the motors and then test fired them while they spun about their axial centerline to simulate spin stabilization during firing in space. The Star 30C, designed to be carried by the Space Shuttle, was the propulsion system for the RCA C-STAR satellite. Once in space, it would ignite and carry the satellite to its designated orbit. (AFSC Newsreview,. Mar 29/85, 6)
The first test of a Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) component on June 19 ended in failure when crew members of the Space Shuttle Discovery found themselves 180° out of position to receive an Air Force signal beamed at them from Maui, Hawaii; another beam of laser light was sent on June 21 from the same spot, and it successfully bounced off a reflecting mirror on Discovery, which was flying at 17,500 miles per hour and 230 miles high, the Washington Post reported. It was not clear why Discovery was out of position for the first attempt or why the crew had not realized it in time to correct it. Flight directors at Johnson Space Center took the blame for what the newspaper called easily one of the worst navigating mistakes in more than 20 years of American manned space flight. After the successful attempt, the Air Force noted the test was not intended to solve any of the most difficult problems of setting up an SDI defense system, nor was it the first laser tracking test. Air Force Lt. Col. Thomas Meyer, manager of the laser test program, said the experiment was more a test to see how the atmosphere distorted the laser beam than a test of the beam's ability to track the Space Shuttle, as atmospheric distortion could limit the usefulness of ground-based lasers against targets in space. In the June 21 attempt, the laser beam "painted" a blue-green light on the nose of Discovery for at least two-and-one-half minutes, three times longer than the minimum time set by the Air Force. So tight and steady was the beam that it never wavered from the nose of orbiter, which measured 110 feet from nose to tail. "We were able to pulse the beam and change the size of the beam from a fine point a quarter of an inch across to a beam 30 feet across at the point where it tracked the shuttle," Meyer said. "We did everything we wanted to do." Discovery's crew observed from the port windows the beam shining on them, which they could do without danger to their eyes due to the low power output of the four-watt beacon. "We demonstrated today that we can track a fast-moving target with a laser on the ground," Meyer said. "Our next step is to perform the same kind of test with rockets fired to an altitude of 260 miles to see if ground-based lasers can stay with them all the way to altitude." A far more difficult and important goal than tracking objects with lasers was the Pentagon's plan to develop more powerful lasers as weapons. The Defense Department would test a 2-million-watt laser soon at White Sands Missile Range, and it was building a 5-million-watt laser. (W Post, June 20/85, A3, June 22/85, A3)
National Space Transportation System manager Dr. Glynn Lunney, who was a member of the Space Task Group that inaugurated U.S. manned space flight, announced he would leave NASA in the near future, the Johnson Space Center Space News Roundup reported. Lunney, whose career almost exactly spanned the period of U.S. efforts in space, began his government service in 1958 with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, NASA's predecessor, at Lewis Research Center. He then moved to the Space Task Group and with it to Houston when it became the Manned Spacecraft Center. Later he became head of the mission logic and computer hardware section, chief of the flight dynamics branch, flight director for the Gemini program, and, in July 1968, one year before the first manned landing on the moon, chief of the flight director's office. He then served as special assistant to the manager and then manager of the Apollo spacecraft program. With the advent of the Space Shuttle program, he became manager of the Space Shuttle payload integration and development program responsible for directing the planning and implementation for all payloads and payload carriers in that program. Since 1981 he served as manager of the National Space Transportation Systems Program with responsibility for overall systems management and integration of all elements of the program. Among the awards received by Lunney were the Lawrence Sperry Award, the Arthur S. Fleming Award, the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award, the Allan D. Emil Memorial Award, the W. Randolph Lovelance II Award, three NASA Group Achievement Awards, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, an Outstanding Leadership Medal, Senior Executive Service designations, and an honorary doctorate of laws from the University of Scranton. Lunney was a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (JSC Space News Roundup, Apr 12/85, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced preliminary scientific results from Spacelab 3 flown on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-B launched April 29, 1985. Researchers and participants in the seven-day flight gathered in December at the Center to present their initial findings. "The mission has made some major contributions in the physical and life sciences," said Dr. George Fichtl of MSFC's Systems Dynamics Laboratory. "We have gained a lot of insight for future Spacelab and space station research. And I think we can now say that space research is becoming routine." Initial results from the three Spacelab 3 crystal growth experiments were very promising, Ficthl noted. The two triglycine sulfate crystals and the single mercuric iodide crystal grown in the space laboratory were at least as good as the best crystals grown to date on earth. And they might actually be better, although additional testing was necessary to confirm this, Fichtl said. "This is of major significance, because normally we must grow between one and two thousand crystals on earth to get just one crystal that is equal to the quality of those grown on Spacelab 3. Mercuric iodide crystals have application in X-ray detectors, and triglycine sulfate crystals are used in infrared detectors," he said. In addition, the flight proved the reliability of the methods used to grow the crystals. Triglycine sulfate crystals were grown from a solution as part of an experiment provided by Alabama A&M University. The mercuric iodide crystal grew using a vapor transport process in an experiment provided by EG&G Energy Measurements Inc. The third crystal growth experiment, provided by France and which also used mercuric iodide, performed as expected and added to researchers knowledge about the process of crystal nucleation, a process difficult to study on earth because of gravity-induced convection. The Drop Dynamics Module, a fluid physics experiment developed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, enabled researchers to do some experiments not possible on earth. Results confirmed some of the theories on how drops behaved when rotated, the first opportunity to test theories posed centuries ago including those by Isaac Newton. The experiment also proved that using sound waves was a viable technique for manipulating liquids in a microgravity environment, which had direct application to containerless materials processing in space. The technique allowed processing of materials without incurring the contaminating effects of the container. The experiment showed that the "acoustic bottle" or "crucible of sound" containing the droplet had much better characteristics than originally theorized. Drop dynamics experiments confirmed theories on how drops behaved when rotated slowly; however, experiment data showed violation of some basic theories relating to the behavior of drops rotated at higher rates. It was found, for example, that drops tended to transition (change) to a new shape at rotation rates lower than predicted. "All this tends to indicate that some of our theories may need to be modified," Fichtl said. Researchers for the Geophysical Fluid Flow Cell Experiment reported that all 102 hours of data looked good, confirming existing theories of convection, and were expected to lead to a better understanding of the dynamics of stellar interiors and planetary atmosphere. However, the research team noted that at higher heating rates—such as those that might be found on the sun— the data showed some significant departures from that anticipated. After the mission, researchers developed computer models of some of this new information. The Atmospheric Trace Molecules Spectroscopy (ATMOS) experiment, sponsored by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, for the first time simultaneously measured the concentrations of chemical compounds associated with carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and other chemical cycles in the atmosphere. This would provide better insight into the chemical processes that governed the distribution of minor and trace gases in the atmosphere between 10 and 100 kilometers. The instrument recorded concentrations of gases as low as parts per 100 billion, the first time such sensitive measurements were made, and detected and measured traces of nitrogen pentoxide, a compound previously undetected in the atmosphere. Results from the Research Animal Holding Facility showed that the apparent case of space adaptation syndrome in one of the monkeys supported the contention that this species would be a good model for future studies of vestibular adaptation in microgravity. Results from studies of the largest group of rats flown aboard a single spacecraft showed their hind muscles became 11 to 36% smaller and the bones were less strong after their flight. (MSFC Release 85-73) UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
Scientists at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory's (AFGL) Space Physics Div. developed a computer program that predicted the electrical effects of the highly charged polar space environment on spacecraft. These effects could range from the production of noise in circuits to system failure in extreme cases, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Called Potential of a Large Object in the Auroral Region (POLAR), the code simulated in three dimensions the electrical interaction of the Space Shuttle or any other space vehicle with the polar space environment in the region from 100 to 600 miles above earth. Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base would orbit through the polar region, and the polar charging code could provide important data for the design of large space structures such as space stations. Lockheed Corp. used POLAR to predict the effect of charging on the Space Shuttle in low-altitude polar orbits with payloads funded by the Air Force Space Test Program Directorate and other Air Force and NASA programs. RCA performed calculations with POLAR for the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program vehicles. NASA's Spacelab 2 mission scientists used POLAR to predict the electrified gaseous environment, or plasma, of the Space Shuttle when the Plasma Diagnostics Package, a free-flying satellite, deployed. And NASA's LAGEOS Satellite Project Office would use POLAR to study charged particle drag on this laser reflecting satellite. POLAR was a successor to NASCAP (NASA Charging Analyzer Program), the computer code AFGL developed with NASA to model charging of Air Force satellites at geosynchronous altitude. The European Space Agency (ESA) had used that code to design weather and TV relay spacecraft, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used it to design the Galileo satellite. POLAR would incorporate data derived from future spacecraft flights and would become a computer-aided design tool for the construction of the advanced extravehicular mobility unit, the manned maneuvering unit, the NASA-proposed space station, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 20/85, 7) Transatmospheric Vehicle
During a news conference today at Johnson Space Center, Space Shuttle mission 51—F commander Gordon Fullerton said the Challenger's crew members could not endorse either the Coca-Cola or Fepsi-Cola they carried into space for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Both drinks were warm, fizzy, and full of froth whenever the crew tried to drink them. "They both failed miserably, mainly because we had no refrigerator. Warm cola is not on anybody's favorite list of things . . . They just weren't at the right temperature and we had no desire to drain the cans the two drinks came in," Fullerton said. He added that, although the crew suffered no gastric distress from drinking the two colas, "I just can't extrapolate to any great desire to want them." When reporters asked the seven crew members if they would forsake the fruit juices they usually drank for the colas if the colas were refrigerated, they all shook their heads. "The drinks we have on board now are quite attractive," said astronaut Anthony England. (W Times, Aug 15/85, A8)
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
NASA announced it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB, originally scheduled for October 15, 1985, until no earlier than January 29, 1986. NASA and Air Force officials had conducted in December 1984 an extensive review of Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch-facility readiness, the Department of Defense (DOD) payload, and impact of the orbiter Challenger tile problems on the Space Shuttle program schedule. They had decided to delay launch to maintain the current Space Shuttle manifest and to insure adequate margin in development of the DOD payload for the initial Vandenberg launch. NASA and the Air Force agreed that the orbiter Discovery would be delivered to Vandenberg in early September 1985 instead of May; NASA would use Discovery for two flights from KSC in mid-1985 to accommodate the impact of tile problems on the schedule and would deliver other Space Shuttle flight hardware (filament-wound cases and external tank) as soon as possible to Vandenberg to provide maximum schedule flexibility for the earliest launch. The Air Force had corrected problems with pipe welds and cleanliness at the Vandenberg launch site and was conducting ground systems tests with the orbiter Enterprise in preparation for initial checkout. NASA had delivered an external tank and solid-fuel rocket booster skirt ahead of schedule. NASA was completing the remainder of the 1985 Space Shuttle manifest with commercial and DOD payloads and would release a manifest covering August 1985 through 1989 in the near future. In reporting the delay, the Washington Post noted that Vandenberg was the only base from which Space Shuttles could fly into north-south orbits crossing the poles, an orbit ideal for surveillance and other earth-watching spacecraft because they could fly over the entire globe once every 18 days. (NASA Release 85-4; W Post, Jan 9/85, A9)
NASA announced that, during mission 51 —L scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986, it would release from the Space Shuttle a free-flying payload called Spartan-Halley to observe Halley's Comet. Scientists believed that comet exploration was a search for the beginnings of earth, because comets were the most unaltered samples of the early solar system. Spartan-Halley was the only NASA satellite dedicated solely to observing Comet Halley. During these observations, January 24 through 31, the comet would be in its most active period as it headed towards its closest approach to the sun on February 9. The objective of the Spartan-Halley mission was to measure from earth orbit the ultraviolet spectrum of Comet Halley using twin spectrographs designed and built by the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics. Spartan-Halley's cameras and instruments would analyze the active comet, looking for hydrogen and oxygen atoms and carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur molecules. If the spacecraft detected these elements, it might indicate more complex compounds could be present in the ice and dust that made up the comet's nucleus. Goddard Space Flight Center developed Spartan-Halley, a modified Spartan-2 spacecraft, to be a research carrier. The spacecraft consisted of the spectrographic instrumentation, attitude control cameras (which also provided science photography), a microprocessor, associated electronics, a sunlight baffling system, and a service module. The January mission would be the first for the Spartan-2 type carrier, a completely reusable spacecraft to be reflown later on several other missions. Following completion of the January mission, the Space Shuttle's robot arm would retrieve Spartan-Halley and store it in the cargo bay. (NASA Release 85-161)
NASA announced the astronaut crews for two upcoming Department of Defense (DOD) Space Shuttle missions, including the 1st from Vandenberg AFB. Robert Crippen (Capt., USN) would command mission 62-A, scheduled for launch no earlier than Jan. 29, 1986, from Vandenberg. Other crew members named were Guy Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), pilot; and mission specialists Dale Gardner (Commander, USN), Jerry Ross (Maj., USAF), and R. Michael Mullane (Lt. Col., USAF). Crippen had flown with John Young on the orbiter Columbia's maiden flight in April 1981 and was commander of STS-7, 41-C, and 41-G. Dale Gardner had served as a mission specialist on STS-8 and 51-A; Mullane on 41-D. Karol Bobko (Col., USAF) would command mission 51-J, scheduled for launch September 1985 from KSC. Ronald Grabe (Lt. Col., USAF) would serve as pilot; David Hilmers (Maj., USMC) and Robert Stewart (Col., USA) as mission specialists. Bobko had served as pilot on STS-6 and would command 51-E scheduled for launch in March; Stewart had flown as mission specialist on 41-B and had been the 2nd person to fly the manned maneuvering unit on that flight. (NASA Release 85-25)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that NASA would sponsor an exhibition July 22 through July 30 at the 1985 National Scout Jamboree at Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia. The jamboree, celebrating scouting's 75th anniversary, was expected to draw more than 35,000 U.S. and international scouts and leaders and many thousands of general public participants. The NASA exhibit, for which LaRC was serving as lead coordinator, would include information on subjects ranging from current aeronautics research to the Space Shuttle and man's future in space. A 100-seat theater would have video presentations and live programs throughout each day. Astronaut Frederick Gregory, a former scout and long-time scouting enthusiast, would participate in the jamboree's opening program on July 24 and would talk with scouts in the NASA exhibition area on that day. NASA would sponsor July 24 through 28 model rocket launch demonstrations and presentations on earning the Space Exploration merit badge. (LaRC Release 85-38)
Japan nominated three astronaut candidates, one a woman, to fly in January 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, a UPI bulletin in NASA Current News said. The one selected to fly would become the first Japanese in space. Those selected were Takao Doi, a researcher at a NASA center; Mamoru Mori, assistant professor of nucleonics at Hokkaido University; and Chiaki Naito, an assistant at Keio University's Medical School in Tokyo. Japan's National Space Development Agency selected them from among 533 applicants. The Japanese astronaut would conduct a 12-minute experiment during Columbia's one-week mission. The other two candidates would serve as backups. The three would take further medical and space simulation tests at Johnson Space Center and then undergo training before selection in May 1987 of the astronaut to fly on the mission. (UPI bulletin in NASA Current News, Aug 7/ 85) Launch Vehicles
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B today launched satellites for Mexico and Australia, the Washington Post reported. The crew launched Mexico's Morelos B in the morning, just hours after liftoff. Morelos B was a Hughes 376 satellite, a standard design used by many foreign national and private companies, Kennedy Space Center's Spaceport News said. It would provide telephone, TV, and wire services to Mexico through a total of 22 transponders. A PAM-D payload assist module then boosted the satellite to geosynchronous orbit 22,300 miles above earth. The satellite would drift, unused, until it reached it final stationary position in 1989. Mexican officials chose to store Morelos B in orbit because launch cost for the satellite could increase to four times the amount that Mexico paid to NASA for today's deployment. Payload specialist Rudolfo Neri Vela, the first Mexican astronaut, was onboard to observe satellite deployment. In June 1985 crew in the orbiter Discovery deployed the first Morelos satellite. At 8:20 p.m. the Australian satellite AUSSAT 2 spun out of the Atlantis's cargo bay. "We got a good deploy," said mission specialist Sherwood Spring, who supervised the satellite's spring ejection. "It looked like it might have gone a second early," he added. AUSSAT2, also a Hughes 376 satellite, was the second of three operations satellites for the government-owned Australian National Satellite System. It had eleven 12-watt transponders and four 30-watt transponders to provide domestic communications to Australia's 15-million population. Australia would also use the satellite to improve maritime and air traffic control communications, relay digital data for business purposes, provide standard telephone communications, and direct satellite to home TV broadcasts. A PAM-D would also boost the satellite to geosynchronous orbit. In August 1985 the Discovery crew deployed the first AUSSAT. Mission commander Brewster Shaw had tested all systems aboard Atlantis and reported that one of four videotape recorders was not working. Mission control gave him permission to take apart an electronic cabinet to look for a wiring flaw, but Shaw said he could not see anything that was obviously wrong. Later, following directions from the ground, Shaw cycled a circuit breaker and reported, "Bingo. That seems to get power to VTR1." (IV Post, Nov 28/85, A28; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
NASA announced plans to deploy for the first time two small experimental satellites from Get Away Special (GAS) containers mounted in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger during the STS 51-B mission scheduled for launch in late April. Under the GAS program, NASA would deploy for $10,000 each the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) and the Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) in hopes of establishing an inexpensive way to deploy small satellites during routine Space Shuttle operations. Clarke Prouty, technical liaison officer for the GAS program at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said the GAS containers had been upgraded with ejection systems for the 51-B mission and that GSFC had developed a motorized door (full diameter motorized door assembly) for the can similar to the one first flown on the seventh Space Shuttle mission, which would allow the GAS payload to be exposed to space. The door assembly permitted GAS container insulation before and after satellite deployment and provided a means for keeping the satellite in the container in case of malfunction. GSFC had also adapted the spacecraft separation system used in the Delta rocket program for the GAS ejection systems. The GLOMR satellite, designed and built by Defense Systems Inc. was a data relay, communications spacecraft that was expected to remain in orbit for about a year. The NUSAT, designed, built, and tested by Weber State College, Ogden, Utah, in coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration, was an air traffic control radar system calibrator that would measure antenna patterns for ground-based radars operating in the U.S. and member countries of the International Civil Aviation Organization. NASA would first launch the NUSAT, then the GLOMR, at the end of Spacelab 3 science activities on the sixth day of the seven-day 51-B mission. Independent user ground stations would operate the satellites following deployment. The GAS program was available to anyone wishing to fly a small (for containment in 2Vi- by 5-ft area) scientific research and development experiment. The Space Shuttle had flown 29 GAS containers, including those for materials processing, life sciences, biology, seed and crystal growth, and cosmic radiation. (NASA Release 85-35)
NASA and the National Science Teachers Association announced continuation for the sixth year of the Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program, which provided an opportunity for secondary school students (grades 9-12) to write proposals for space science experiments that would develop their awareness of space and stimulate interest in science and technology. During the next year's competition, the association would select up to five students from each of eight geographic regions who, along with their teachers, would receive all-expense-paid trips to a Space Shuttle symposium at a NASA center. Later, one semifinalist selected from each region would attend a national Space Shuttle symposium at Kennedy Space Center, during which the association would award scholarships to the three students submitting the most outstanding proposals. (NASA Release 85-70)
The first in a series of laser experiments in the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program was only partly successful because laser operators were unable to lock on to a fast, high-flying rocket target, the NY Times reported. A laser station on the island of Maui succeeded in focusing a laser beam on the rocket but failed to bounce the beam off an eight-inch reflective shield attached to it, said unidentified sources. The Pentagon had announced it was preparing a new round of laser tests similar to one conducted in June when a low-power blue-green laser was reflected off the Space Shuttle Discovery. On July 16 the Pentagon issued a statement saying the first of five planned experiments was conducted in the early morning of July 14 and that "it was only partially successful due to technical difficulties not associated with the experiment." Officials in the SDI office refused to elaborate beyond that saying the Navy's Pacific Missile Range Facility launched a Terrier-Malemute rocket that traveled almost 450 miles into space and that the laser had been fired. (NYT, July 16/85, C7)
The Johnson Space Center's (JSC) Space News Roundup conducted an interview with Christa McAuliffe, selected by NASA to be the teacher in space, and her backup, Barbara Morgan. When asked to give her impressions of JSC, McAuliffe said, "Big. Wry big . . . But that's one of the messages we want to get across. There are, what, 100 astronauts in the program, but thousands of employees here . . . And we've gotten so much information. When I'm 62, I'll finally read the last piece of paper that I bring back from here." The Roundup reporter questioned the two teachers about the national attention they had received, the effect it had on them, and the possibility of moving into different careers after the flight. McAuliffe commented, "Oh, but you're talking to a teacher. I didn't choose my career so I could get monetary rewards. My God, I never would have gone into teaching ... A year of this is going to be fun and I'm enjoying what I'm doing. I see it as an extraordinary year out of my life . . . We don't see this as a stepping stone to something else. When I go into a radio or TV station, I am looking at everything that is happening and I can't wait to tell my kids what happens in a TV studio, because I have never been in one before." Morgan then said that one of the funny things that had happened since beginning their training was that, "all of a sudden we are being asked questions as if we are the experts on the Space Shuttle." McAuliffe agreed, noting that she received a phone call from a reporter asking her what she believed was the cause of a problem the previous summer with the orbiter Challenger. In answer to the question, "What message will you take to people after this experience?" McAuliffe said, "That space is for everybody. It's not just for a few people in science or math, or for a select group of astronauts. That's our new frontier out there, and it's everybody's business to know about space." (JSC Roundup, Dec 6/85, 3)
measure the response of the GAS Bridge to the Space Shuttle environment during liftoff, orbit, and landing (GSFC). RCA developed the IR-IE infrared camera, and during the mission payload specialist Rober Cenker would supervise its operation to acquire radiometric information that appeared within the field of view of the self-contained optical system. RCA hoped it might photograph storms, volcanic activity, or other natural occurrences. Middeck payloads would include the Comet Halley Active Monitoring Program (CHAMP) [see Astronomy, Dec. 17], Initial Blood Storage Experiment (IBSE), Protein Crystal Growth (PC 6), and three student experiments. IBSE, funded by Johnson Space Center and led by the Center for Blood Research, would study blood storage and sedimentation characteristics in microgravity. Rep. Bill Nelson would assist with an experiment sponsored by the University of Alabama, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Comprehensive Cancer Center to try to grow crystal proteins in space for cancer research. There would be three Shuttle Student Involvement Project (SSIP) experiments on board Columbia. In the Measurement of Auxin Level and Starch Grains in Plant Roots experiment, bean plants would be grown and frozen in space. Researchers would analyze the plant roots after the flight for auxin location and concentration and correlation with statolith in the cells. The Air Injection as an Alternative To Honeycombing experiment would investigate the feasibility of producing a high stiffness, density ratio, low-weight casting with an internal framework. And the Study of Paper Fiber Formation in Microgravity experiment would further increase basic papermaking knowledge through a drainage study of paper fiber formation in microgravity and later comparison to this same formation on earth. NASA scheduled Columbia to land on the sixth day of the flight at KSC, the first landing there since mission 51-D on April 19, 1985. (NASA Release 85107; NASA FOR M-989-61-C [prelaunch] Dec 16/85; Spaceport News, Dec 6/85, 4; Goddard News, Dec 85, 1) Shuttle Orbiter
NASA announced it had rescheduled for July 29 launch of Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger and delayed by as much as two weeks the previously scheduled September 19 maiden voyage of the orbiter Atlantis that was to carry a secret Pentagon payload into orbit, the Washington Post reported. The July 12 Challenger launch abort forced NASA to design a new schedule that maintained a Discovery blastoff for August 24, delayed another Challenger mission from October 3 to early November, and kept a November 27 Atlantis flight and a December 20 Columbia mission. Kennedy Space Center (KSC) work crews had removed three parts from Challenger's No. 2 engine that engineers suspected could have triggered computers into ordering all three engines to shut down on the launch pad. One was a valve that failed to close when it should have, a second was a hydraulic actuator that ordered the valve to close, and the third was a controller that sent commands to the actuator. "We still suspect the actuator, and nothing we've found suggests anything else," KSC spokesman Hugh Harris said. "We are replacing all three parts and continue to analyze and test the parts we remove." NASA would test fresh parts on the pad, leading to a July 23 flight readiness review. This included electronics and leak checks of parts like pumps, turbines, and valves, not a test-firing of the engines. The delay meant a July 30 flight readiness firing test for Atlantis would take place September 12, which would delay Atlantis's maiden flight from September 19 to late September at the earliest. (WPost, July 16/85, A4)
The Indian Department of Space announced today the selection of two Indian astronaut candidates, one of whom would fly aboard the Space Shuttle carrying India's INSAT-1C satellite, FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English reported. The candidates were N.C. Bhatt of the Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore, and P. Radhakrishmam of Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, Trivandrum. The chairman of India's Space Commission, Professor U. R. Rao, said the commission would select one of them to fly on the mission scheduled for July 1986. (FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English, Nov 8/85) "There has to be a difference between some senator or Arab prince and the qualified scientists who fly aboard the shuttle," said Ulf Merbold, crew interface coordinator for the D-1 mission. "We demand that the science astronaut concept be developed so that these proficient crew members can be designated for such a flight," said Hans-Ulrich Steimle, Spacelab D-1 mission manager at the German aerospace research establishment. "Instead, NASA now has become involved in running a travel office for visiting dignitaries, and this is counterproductive when you want to perform a serious science mission." German officials said they might raise the issue again when planning was finalized for a follow-on Spacelab D-2 mission targeted for 1988. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 24)
NASA and the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) announced the first sales of a product manufactured in space—tiny polystyrene spheres to serve as NBS standard reference material. The spheres could improve microscopic measurements made throughout the economy in electronics, medicine, and other high-technology areas. A chemical process developed for NASA by Lehigh University produced billions of the 10 micrometers (1/2500th of an inch) in diameter spheres during several space Shuttle flights. Earthbound processes could not yield sufficiently uniform materials in usable quantities; when produced in a low-gravity environment, the spheres grew uniformly in size and shape. NBS had packaged the spheres into approximately 600 Standard Reference Material (SRM) units priced at $384 per unit. Each unit was a 5-milliliter vial that contained about 30 million spheres in a 0.4% concentration by weight; the remainder was water. NASA and NBS shared sales proceeds equally. (NASA Release 85-106)
NASA officials confirmed a schedule calling for the next Space Shuttle orbiter to land at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Aviation Week reported, as a result of the successful hard-surface runway landing December 3 at Edwards Air Force Base by the orbiter Atlantis on mission 61-B. The landing was the first on a concrete surface since the orbiter Discovery damaged its brakes and tires while landing April 19 at KSC. NASA scheduled the orbiter Columbia on mission 61-C to land at KSC following its planned December 18 launch. Columbia was equipped with the necessary nosewheel steering system upgrades and would use steering instead of brakes as a primary control method for the KSC landing. During the December 3 landing, control inputs by mission commander Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, Jr. appeared to cause Atlantis to float slightly just before landing on the 15,000 ft. runway. The orbiter's wheels touched down approximately 2400 feet from the runway threshold, and Shaw applied only light braking during a 17,759-ft. landing roll. NASA slightly altered the Space Shuttle post-landing processing in an effort to remove Atlantis from the runway as soon as possible to allow the Air Force to reopen it for aircraft use. Normally personnel removed the orbiter's brakes in parallel with other close-out tasks before towing the vehicle back to NASA's Ames-Dryden Space Shuttle processing area at Edwards. They left on the brakes so that Atlantis could be moved to an apron area at the end and off to the side of the runway. H.W. Widick, chief of the Space Shuttle Integration Div., said a preliminary inspection of the brakes did not reveal any damage and that overall condition of the orbiter was good. (AvWk, Dec 9/85, 23)
NASA Administrator James Beggs told the U.S. House Science and Technology Committee that the agency's launch service's market position had eroded "very severely" and that he had to be "a little bit pessimistic" about NASA's ability to hold a lion's share in the future, Aerospace Daily reported. Beggs made the comment in response to a question about the need for a 5th Space Shuttle orbiter. During the previous 14 months, NASA had won five new commercial launches; The European Space Agency's (ESA) Ariane, five. Beggs said the Europeans were "coming along very aggressively" in using the Ariane 4 and 5 vehicles to improve launch capabilities and that agreement by ministers attending the ESA council meeting [see European Space Agency, Feb. 4] to further Ariane 5 development "was significant." (A/D, Feb 7/85, 1)
In a study important to the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) missile defense program, Space Shuttle crew aboard Challenger on mission 51-F briefly fired the orbiter's rocket engines while scientists in Australia attempted to analyze the effect on the ionosphere, the Washington Post reported. Challenger's engines burned 600 lb. of fuel as the spacecraft passed over an observatory in Tasmania where telescopes measured the effect of the rocket exhaust on the charged gas particles, called plasma, that made up the ionosphere. A second shorter rocket firing took place over observatories in Massachusetts. (W Post, Aug 5/85, A4)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
NASA announced it had signed with the International Space Corp. (ISC) an agreement for development of the Normal Freezing Furnace, a high-temperature furnace for producing several types of infrared semiconductor crystals in the microgravity environment of spaceflight. The furnace would produce materials through a directional solidification crystal growth process. The agreement call for NASA to fly the furnace aboard six to eight Space Shuttle missions to perfect the proposed crystal production process, and ISC would make the experimental equipment available to NASA for the agency's exploratory space processing operations. NASA anticipated that the experiments would lead to new space manufacturing techniques for producing crystal materials, thus enhancing the U.S. electronic industry's position in the highly competitive worldwide semiconductor market. (NASA Release 85-173)
Astronauts Maj. Jerry Ross of the Air Force and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring of the Army today stepped outside the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B for the second construction exercise in the weightlessness of space [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Nov. 30], the NY Times reported. To TV viewers on earth, the two appeared to manipulate with ease the heavy structures they were building, although both were sweating and breathing heavily after the first 20 minutes of work. Two hours into the spacewalk, they reported that though their hands, feet, and backs were moist with sweat, they were working comfortably. The purpose of today's spacewalk was the same as previously, to test the efficiency of techniques to build a 45-foot-high aluminum tower. However, the astronauts changed the way they worked and had the assistance of astronaut Dr. Mary Cleave, who was operating the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm. She moved the men from place to place as their work required. Later in the exercise, the Washington Post reported, Ross and Spring took turns stringing cable along the four-story metal frame they had constructed, just as future crews might lay cable for a space station. They also removed parts of the tower and replaced them with other parts, simulating a space repair. NASA officials commented after the first spacewalk on November 30 that the work had proved more taxing than expected, perhaps because the astronauts' gloves, unlike the rest of their spacesuits, were not air-conditioned and could not carry away excess heat. Most of the work had entailed repeated squeezing and twisting with the hands. Ross and Spring said after the exercise that they would not want to repeat it before having a day of rest. They indicated that the activity had left their hands so numb and fatigued that they had trouble fastening the airlock of the Space Shuttle as they reentered it. NASA officials did note they were favorably surprised by the astronauts' rapid improvement in performance as they learned from successive repetitions of the exercise. (NYT, Dec 2/85, B6; W Post, Dec 2/85, A3)
NASA announced that the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and the launch of the first Earth Observation Mission have been switched. Under the new schedule, the Space Telescope would be launched on October 27, 1986, and the Earth Observation Mission would lift off on August 18, 1986. The change was made to provide additional time for delivery of the Space Telescope from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The Space Telescope would be deployed into orbit from Space Shuttle Atlantis. It was expected to see 7 times farther and 10 times more clearly than any telescope on Earth. (NASA Release 862)
For the third time in 19 days, launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed. This time, a malfunction with Columbia's computer control failed to close an oxygen valve. Engineers were successful in closing the valve under manual control, but the additional time it was open resulted in 1,500 gallons to 3,000 gallons of oxygen entering the fuel lines to the main engine, lowering temperatures to an unacceptable level. With 15 flights slated for 1886, another attempt was immediately planned for January 7. The chief goal of the mission was to carry a $50 million communications satellite, Satcom, for RCA. When an RCA engineer announced that 8:47 PM was the cut off point for a launch that would later deliver the satellite at an optimum time, the mission was canceled. Scheduled to ride into space with NASA's astronauts and engineers was Florida's Democratic Congressman Bill Nelson, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications that oversees NASA's budget. (NY Times, Jan 7/86; W Post, Jan 7/86; P Inq, Jan 7/86; C Trib, Jan 7/86; W Times, Jan 7/86; B Sun, Jan 7/86)
Columbia, flight STS 61C, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a Space Shuttle record of seven postponements. The crew completed their mission of launching RCA's $50 million satellite into orbit, for which NASA received $14.2 million from the corporation. Ironically, after a 25day delay in getting off the ground, the Space Shuttle was told to come down a day early. NASA engineers feared that bad weather might hamper the original landing date. Already behind schedule, NASA wanted extra time to prepare the Shuttle for the next flight in March and its mission of observing Halley's Comet. The needed orbit for studying the comet would leave little room for delays of this launch. Most of Columbia's experiments were completed, but a camera device for photographing Halley's comet failed to work because a light intensifier had been inadvertently left on during the ship's seven launch delays. It was not until January 18, after a twoday delay because of poor weather, that Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California. Engineers had hoped to land the craft at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, from where it was scheduled to be launched on March 6. Therefore, an estimated five days were scheduled to be cut from its preparation time so that the critical date for observing Halley's Comet could be met. (NY Times, Jan 13/86; Jan 14/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 24/86; USA Today, Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86 W Times, Jan 13/86; CSM, Jan 13/86; Jan 21/86 P Inq, Jan 13/86; B Sun Jan 13/86; W Post Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 16/86; C Trib, Jan 13/86)
Joseph F. Sutter was appointed chairman of the NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, an advisory group to the NASA Administrator. Sutter, in 1986, had a 41year career with the Boeing Company as an aerodynamicist, received numerous awards for development of jetpowered airliners, and was nominated to receive the Wright Memorial Trophy, to be presented in Washington, D.C. He had also been appointed to the Presidentiaal Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86154)
Two hundred fiftyeight members of Congress signed a letter addressed to NASA urging them to find a second supplier for its Space Shuttle booster rockets. Congress, described as further tightening the rein on NASA, believed that competition for the sole provider, Morton Thiokol, would equate to savings. Aerojet General said it was ready to build a seamless booster, a safer design. Congress also wanted NASA to eliminate some of the rules that favored Thiokol, such as requiring any second manufacturer to purchase nozzles for the rocket from them. (W Times, Jun 6/86; WSJ, Jun 6/86; P Inq, Jun 6/86; B Sun, Jun 6/86)
The Soviet Union said that it was prepared to fill the void left by the United States and Europe for commercial space launches. Moscow revealed this fact in an announcement that also called for a World Space Organization. The Organization would oversee joint space projects that the Soviets hoped would unfold in the future. (C Trib, Jun 13/86; CSM, Jun 16/86) ''0*June 13: In a move that would greatly reduce the chances for resuming Shuttle flights by July 1987, President Ronald Reagan urged NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher to comply with all of the recommendations put forth by the Challenger commission. President Reagan also ordered Fletcher to report back to him after 30 days with details on how and when the findings would be implemented. Also, the two reportedly discussed approval of Federal funds for a replacement orbiter and the President's final decision was expected to follow after a few days. (Letter from President Reagan to James Fletcher, Jun 13/86; W Post, Jun 14/86; WSJ, Jun 16/86; W Times, Jun 16/86)
Astronaut James Van Hoften announced his resignation from NASA to enter private industry. His past achievements include two Space Shuttle Flights and the position of Assistant Professor of Civil Engineering at the University of Houston. He was the fifth astronaut to leave NASA since the January 28 accident. (NASA Release 8678; USA Today, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jul 29/86)
In response to a recent order, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher handed President Ronald Reagan a 50page report that outlined the agency's plans for implementing the Rogers Commission's recommendations. Among the items detailed were booster redesign, changes in NASA's management, review of "critical items" whose failure would lead to vehicle loss, establishment of a safety organization, improved communications, landing safety, launch abort and crew escape, flight rate, and maintenance safeguards. Fletcher also submitted a companion letter urging the President to authorize funds for replacement of the Challenger. Because of the requirements for getting the Shuttle flying again, NASA confirmed the aircraft would be grounded until at least early 1988. (Actions to Implement the Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Jul 14/86; NY Times, Jul 15/86; W `"Post, Jul 15/86; B Sun, Jul 15/86; W Times, Jul 15/86; P Inq, Jul (#15/86; C Trib, Jul 15/86)
A House Science and Technology Committee issued a report stating that Congress and the White House shared the blame for the launch schedule pressure that led to the January 28 Challenger accident. The report agreed with many of the findings laid out by the Rogers Commission, but differed by stating that the accident was not a result of poor communication through NASA management, but "poor technical decisionmaking [by them] over several years." The report concluded that NASA's management lacked the expertise needed to operate the Space Shuttle and warned the Agency not to succumb to similar pressure concerning future flights. The National Research Council, in an independent study requested by Congress, urged NASA on October 9 to limit its Shuttle flights in the 1990s to 11 or 13, not the 16 annual flights proposed by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. (Investigation of the Challenger Accident: Report of the Committee on Science and Technology, House of Representatives, Oct 29/68; W Post, Oct 8/86; Oct 10/86; W Times, Oct 8/86; NY Times, Oct 8/86)
Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that John W. Thomas, Spacelab Program Officer Manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to assume management responsibility for the Solid Rocket Motor redesign team at the Marshall Space Flight Center on May 12, 1986. The Space Shuttle Challenger accident investigation uncovered several deficiencies in the design of the solid rocket motor joint. An independent group of senior experts would also be involved in all phases of the program; they would report to NASA Administrators and review and integrate the findings and recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8658)
In a White House meeting President Ronald Reagan indicated that he would allow NASA to honor only some of its higher priority contracts for commercial and foreign satellite launches from the Space Shuttle. Regarding a new orbiter, Chief of Staff Donald Regan has reversed his stance and now favors the replacement. Regan changed his mind, he stated, because he believed that NASA would not just correct its major faults, but would bring the Shuttle up to date with current technology. In a related matter, the Senate agreed to reimburse NASA with $56.3 million for military launches, a move protested by Senator Sam Nunn, who claimed that the money would come at the expense of intelligence activities. (NY Times, Aug 8/86; W Post, Aug 8/86)
The Soviet Union recently had their version of the Space Shuttle on a launch pad for tests. Photos of the incident were taken by a U.S. satellite, and Government officials predicted that the country would begin human space flight in 1988. (B Sun, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86)
Rocket debris recovered on April 13, 40 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 560 feet of water was determined by the President's Commission to be the part of the right booster thought to be responsible for the Challenger accident. In the area where photographs had shown a plume of flame was a onefoot by twofoot hole, lending concrete evidence to the theory that the oring and/or the putty used to protect it had failed to do its job of sealing two of the rocket's four segments. (C Trib, Apr 15/86; W Post, Apr 15/86; W Times, Apr 15/86; NY Times, Apr 15/86; B Sun, Apr 15/86)
The Congressional Budget Office estimated that it would cost $5 billion to both replace the Challenger Shuttle and build more expendable launch vehicles for carrying payloads into space. NASA had planned to make all of its satellite launches from an orbiter, but changed its position after the Challenger accident. The shift was welcome news to the rocket industry, even though the companies would need two years to get ready for launch inasmuch as the rocket program, with no crew assistance, had been all but replaced in the United States by the Shuttle program. (NY Times, Mar 13/86; W Post, Mar 13/86)0** NASA and Morton Thiokol found new evidence suggesting that the putty used in joints of the solid rockets to protect the orings could have stiffened from the cold and prevented the oring from sealing. They also noted that the putty could have cracked and exposed the oring to hot gases. Adequate data measuring the effect of cold on the putty did not exist. Dr. William Graham notified the Presidential Commission of these findings. (WSJ, Mar
NASA announced another test of a Space Shuttle engine to take place later in that week. The purpose was to collect additional data to be added to the previous test of the same engine, that ran for 250 seconds, at the National Space Technology Laboratory. (NASA Release 8697)
NASA located a video tape concerning the Shuttle mission 51E Flight Readiness Review (FRR) that contained twoandonehalf minutes of discussion on previous oring erosion. Because there was no requirement to record audio or video of FRR's, no cataloging of the tape was made. The Presidential Commission was provided with the tape but informed NASA that no new information was on it. (NASA 8677)
NASA released transcriptions of the prelaunch intercom tape of the 51L, Space Shuttle Challenger, for public consumption. The tape was about an hour long, beginning when the crew first entered the craft to two minutes and five seconds before liftoff. It contained nothing that was relevant to the';0*accident and was not provided to the Presidential Commission in support of the investigation. Because the intercom channel provides a private mechanism for exchanging spontaneous comments and recording information of a personal nature, NASA had not released these transcripts previously. Because of media inquiries, however, the prelaunch tape was transcribed. (NASA Release 86135; 86137; 51L Transcript Folder; NY Times, Oct
The Wall Street Journal reported that a Reagan administration interagency group would soon recommend that NASA discontinue commercial and foreign launches. NASA objected to the idea because of the likely permanent loss of the business to foreign competitors. The group also recommended a replacement for the Shuttle Challenger and a greater supply of expendable launch vehicles, but did not suggest how these costs could be met. (WSJ, Apr 3/86)
In a part of NASA's strategy to return the Space Shuttle safely to flight, Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator, announced the new management and operations structure for the National Space Transportation System (NSTS or Space Shuttle program). The changes were aimed at establishing clear lines of communication in the information transfer and decision making processes. The management change, which also moved control of the operation to Washington, D.C., was directed by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly and followed recommendations made by the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology and the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. As part of the restructuring, Arnold D. Aldrich, who joined NASA in 1959, was named Director, NSTS, and Richard H. Kohrs and Robert L. Crippen were named his deputies. Truly stated that "the formation of this program management organization is one of the most positive steps NASA has taken in the last several months to strengthen the Shuttle program and return to flight status." (NASA Release 86159; W Post, Nov 6/86; NY Times, Nov 6/86)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
NASA disclaimed an April 2324 twopart article in the New York Times that accused the organization of ignoring audits and safety standards, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle program. According to NASA, some of the examples mentioned in the article "are related to activities of several years ago and have since been corrected or are being corrected." Moreover, "NASA has always considered audits to be a necessary management tool to be used in conjunction with other management processes...during the existence of NASA prior to and since the Inspector General Act, management has used its own internal audits to uncover and correct deficiencies and to strengthen internal controls." In addition, NASA has been responsive to external audit reports through tighter management." Indeed, says NASA, $749.3 million in savings, cost avoidances, and cost recoveries were realized from 19781985 because of internal and external audits. NASA also noted that many of the audit reports dealt with research and development projects into which new technologies had to be figured, making for an uncertain budget Other allegations: Various violations of law and Federal codes have occurred within NASA. The Agency predicted that Shuttle cargo would cost around $100 per pound but actual cost was closer to $5264 per pound; the Shuttle was not equipped with the amount of hardware for test purposes that was available to the Apollo program; in financing a Government guaranteed loan for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System program (TDRSS), NASA wasted $1 billion; NASA lost $2.4 million of equipment in In defense, NASA noted that the original estimate for Shuttle cargo was $160 per pound and the most recent was $615 per poundbesides, cost per pound was only a partial indicator of the Shuttle's utility; the Shuttle program did not parallel the Apollo program in regard to safety test hardware, but introduced longer periods of testing, not substandard safety precautions; the $1 billion said to have been wasted in the TDRSS program was in fact attributable primarily to significant interest cost increases; the lost equipment was a 1950's state of the art computer that by 1983 was so obsolete that no one else would take ithence the machine was dismantled and disposed of; ties to graft at NASA have to do with individual misconduct, such as that by Lewis Research Center and Marshall Space Flight Center officials, who were prosecuted in Federal court, indicating that the internal NASA investigation process was working well. (NASA Release 8652) 0** A statement by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly noted that the remains of the crew of the Space Shuttle Challenger were soon to be transferred, but no positive determination of the cause of the accident had yet been made. The three approaches pursued were the examination of remains, direct examination of the wreckage, and analysis of photography and radar to determine forces imposed on the vehicle. An examination of the remains revealed no new information, and the wreckage examination was hampered by the amount of damage done at water impact. Photo and radar analysis, he hoped, would lead to a determination of the magnitude and the direction of the forces imposed on the cabin during and after breakup. (NASA Release 8653)
NASA extended a oneyear, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86184) 'J0** The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to a 10year, $99 million contract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the personnel, equipment, and supplies necessary to carry out duties at the Slidell Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86185) During 1986: The Space Shuttle Challenger accident and the subsequent investigation and recovery activities headed the list of prominent events for NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of note: Voyager 2 encountered the planet Uranus in January, continued with its journey and was expected to reach Neptune by 1989. A new baseline configuration was drafted for the Space Stationa major milestone for development. NASA and the Department of Defense initiated a joint AeroSpace Plane research program concerning vehicles capable of horizontal takeoff and landing, singlestage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle, and Dr. James C. Fletcher, for the second time, became Administrator of NASA. Two books concerning NASA endeavors were published in 1986. Joseph P. Allen's EnteringSpace deals with an astronaut's journey into the last frontier, and William E. Burrows' Deep Black looks into space espionage and national security. (NASA Release 86177)
A section of debris recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in March was found to be the part of the right booster rocket suspected as the cause of the Challenger accident. Although the piece was a section opposite the flame seen coming from a joint in the rocket, it contained part of the joint. Recovery of the section could both aid investigators and assist engineers in their redesign. (B Sun, Apr 2/86; W Post, Apr 2/86; NY Times, Apr
President Ronald Reagan issued an executive order through his press secretary that established a commission to investigate the Challenger accident. According to the order, the ad hoc commission would review the circumstances surrounding the accident, develop recommendations for corrective or other action0*based on the findings, and submit a final report to the president and to the NASA Administrator. (The White House Executive Order establishing the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 3/86)
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced four key appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet the goal of getting the Space Shuttle back to full operation. Dr. Judson A. Lovingood was named Associate Director for Propulsion Systems, with responsibility for propulsion projects for the Space Shuttle Main Engine, Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility, and Marshall Centerassigned payloads and Spacelab payload integration. John P. McCartney was named Director, Propulsion Laboratory to oversee research and development, engineering, and technical direction of propulsion systems design, and analysis related to launch and space vehicles. Dr. George F. McDonough was named Director,'E0*Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with responsibility for research and development in structural design and analysis of launch and space vehicles, analysis dynamics behavior, specification of dynamicsrelated design criteria, and analysis of atmospheric and environmental processes. (NASA Release 86164)
Richard G. Smith, Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, announced his retirement. He plans to join the private sector with General Space Corporation. His achievements span 35 years in the space program and include work with the rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal; management of',0*the Saturn Rocket program at Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Headquarters, Director of the Skylab Task Force, and he is the recipient of awards for his contributions to Apollo, Skylab, and Space Shuttle programs. Smith had earlier warned that investigation into the Challenger accident would result in a mass exodus from NASA and later added that the investigation damaged the reputations of many officials. (NASA Release 8689; W Times, Jul 11/86; W Post, Jul 11/86; NY Times, Jul 11/86; LA Times, Jul 11/86
Because of the Challenger accident and the absence of any Shuttle activity, NASA was expected to announce layoffs at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where 800 to 1,000 employees would lose their jobs. For the same reason, Martin Marietta said that 700 to 800 of its workers would be laid off, by October 3, from its plant that produced Shuttle fuel tanks. (W Post, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 5/86)
A fullscale Spacehab module mockup intended to double the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle middeck was delivered to NASA's Ames Research Center by Spacehab, Inc. The mockup was intended as a test bed for artificial intelligence, robotics systems, and human performance. Spacehab planned to build three of the modules over the next three years. Another corporation, Sverdrup Technology, was chosen for a $45 million support services contract in which they would provide test complex services for Space Shuttle main engines and engineering and laboratory and data work for NASA and 18 other Government agencies. NASA also planned a program that would develop software tools for writing computer programs in ADA, a language used by the Department of Defense for missioncritical computers. The project was expected to run for three or four years and cost $200 million. (Def News, Jul 7/86)
For the sixth time, launching of the Shuttle Challenger was scrubbed, this time because of a stuck fuel valve in one of the main engines. (CSM, Jan 9/86; W Times, Jan 9/86; NY Times, Jan 9/86; P Inq, Jan 9/86)
James R. Thompson, vice chairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, said that NASA officials could be "walking on the edge of a cliff" if they did not correct flaws in the solid rocket booster. Previous problems, he noted, simply were not taken seriously enough; he then added that NASA could say conclusively that the right solid rocket booster had caused the Shuttle accident. The task force, said Thompson, focused on four factors of the joint in the booster rocket: the tendency of the joints to rotate during liftoff; the impact of subfreezing temperatures on the orings; defects in the putty used to protect them; and slight damage to the orings during assembly. James Kingsbury, director of Science and Engineering Directorate disagreed with Thompson's findings because the rockets had performed well on 24 previous flights. (USA Today, Apr 9/86; W Post, Apr 9/86; P Inq, Apr 9/86)
The Presidential Commission's investigation of the Challenger accident, said the Chicago Tribune, had nearly concluded that cold weather led to reduced elasticity of the rubber seal in the rocket booster and the subsequent leak of gasses. Engineers from Morton Thiokol, the rocket booster manufacturer, objected to the cold weather launch, but officials higher up in that company gave NASA the go ahead. (NY Times, Feb 20/86; C Trib, Feb 20/86; W Post Feb 20/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the $10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year 1987, a 40 percent increase from fiscal year 1986. Fletcher, according to NASA officials, planned to meet with President Ronald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of years of underfunding. The increased funds could support the Civil Space Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military aeronautics research program; and the Xray Astrophysics Facility, advanced technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 billion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov
Unpublished test results done for the Presidential Commission studying the Challenger accident showed that cold weather on the morning of the Challenger launch made failure inevitable. Other findings by the commission concluded that a second joint on the righthand booster rocket ruptured seconds after the Challenger breakup, suggesting that the joint was unduly fragile; reusable booster rockets ballooned about twohundredths of an inch after each previous flight, and segments of the ill fated rocket did not match well; a breach of the bottom of the external tank led to a structural failure but the nose cone of the booster rocket crashing into the fuel tank was not responsible for the final breakup; and the Shuttle did not explode, but rather a hydrogenoxygen flash fire caused it simply to fall apart. (NY Times, Apr 30/86)
Dr. Dale D. Myers became Deputy Administrator for NASA; he succeeded Dr. William R. Graham who left NASA to become Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Myers had served as an atlarge member to the NASA Advisory Council and before that as president and chief operating officer for Jacobs Engineering Group. Other achievements include positions as Undersecretary for the U.S. Department of Energy, vicepresident of Rockwell International, president of North American Aircraft, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, and vice president/program manager for both the Apollo Command/Service Module Program and the Space Shuttle Program at Rockwell International. (NASA Release 86149)'?0*October 21: Several senior staff changes were made at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to include: Robert C. Goetz, from Deputy Center Director to Technical Assistant to the Center Director; Clifford E. Charlesworth, from Director of Space Operations to Special Assistant to the Director; Henry O. Pohl, from Division Chief to Director of Engineering; William R. Kelly, from Director of Center Support to Director, Administration; Dr. Wayne R. Young was named Deputy Director for Administration; Paul J. Weitz, from Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office to Technical Assistant to the Center Director. (NASA Release 86151)
Lawrence B. Mulloy, a manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, in charge of the solid rocket motors that were held responsible for the Challenger accident, announced his retirement after more than 30 years of Government'-0*service. He was among those who opted for liftoff of the illfated Shuttle and was repeatedly faulted for this judgement by William P. Rogers, chairman of the commission investigating the accident. He was the third Marshall manager to retire since the accident, following William R. Lucas and George B. Hardy. (W Post, Jul 17/86; P Inq, Jul 17/86; B Sun, Jul 17/86)
Initial investigation, and tape review of the Challenger accident, pointed to the right solid fuel rocket booster and showed a leak near one of its seams. An apparent rupture between two sections of the rocket emitted flames that soon found their way to the external fuel tank, igniting the volatile contents. Meanwhile, salvage operations recovered two large objects believed to be part of the Shuttle from the ocean floor, but most of the craft was still unaccounted for. NASA planned to bring in a recovery vessel equipped with a remotecontrolled robot and (#cameras. (WSJ, Feb 3/86; NY Times, Feb 3/86; W Post, Feb 3/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an independent panel to review NASA's management practices, especially the decisionmaking process on the morning of the January 28 Challenger accident. The review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that Shuttle flights would likely resume by July 1987, with an optimum of seven launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his "highest priority." Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told members of Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would investigate the transfer of two Morton Thiokol engineers, Allan McDonald and Roger Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently' 0*objected to the Challenger launch on the morning prior to its deadly flight and later detailed their scenarios before Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow be involved with the reassignments. The subcommittee advised NASA to reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened to severely reduce NASA's budget for new space programs if the agency did not undergo some drastic changes. (Department of Housing and Urban Development Independent Agencies Appropriations for 1987, May 13/86; W Times, May 14/86; W Post, May 14/86; WSJ, May 14/86; NY Times, May 14/86; P Inq, May 14/86; C Trib, May 14/86; B Sun, May 14/86)
The steering problem that halted the Shuttle Columbia's launch in December of 1985 was traced to a tiny electrical component that led ground computers astray. (W Times, Jan 3/86; NY Times, Jan 3/86)
NASA officials provided investigators with new evidence challenging the theory that the Challenger accident was triggered by failed rocket seals caused by cold weather. They presented prelaunch photographs showing a flaw in the suspected oring on the right side booster, a possible correlation to the fact that workers assembling the booster were hampered with a misshaped rocket segment. New tests on the orings conducted at Morton Thiokol's plant demonstrated that they sealed properly to temperatures at 10 degrees below zero. Also, the Challenger, according to meteorologist Irving P. Krick, sustained wind shear of 125 to 150 miles per hour just prior to the accident, which would have been similar to "flying into a tornado." (W Post, Mar
Space Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to be ferried atop a modified Boeing 747 and transported to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California where it was expected to remain until early November. Testing would closely parallel that done at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), in Florida, in preparation for the first West Coast Space Shuttle launch. Upon arrival, Columbia would be moved to the launch pad and mated with a set of solid rocket boosters and an external tank for integrated vehicle testing, including the loading of cryogenic propellants in a "wet" countdown demonstration test. Prior to the move, processing at KSC would include installation of the main engine, auxiliary power units, and orbital maneuvering system pods, in parallel with structural inspections, approved modifications, and ferry flight preparation. (NASA Release 8640)
A Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope for studying gamma ray sources in the universe was the basis for a $93,000 contract awarded to Martin Marietta. By housing the telescope inside of a Space Shuttle external liquid hydrogen tank, which is normally discarded just before the Shuttle achieves orbit, Martin Marietta deemed it possible that the unit could also be set into orbit. Telescope components would be carried in the cargo bay and assembled inside the emptied tank by astronauts, who could enter via an existing 36inch aft manhole port or through tank modifications. The satellite could then be pressurized to provide the needed environment for gamma ray detection technique; the rays would be converted to positrons and electrons that travel the length of the telescope emitting light. Gamma ray astronomy is essential to understanding the evolution of stars and the universe and the physical processes occurring in pulsars, quasars, and black holes. (NASA Release 86111)
The Peoples Republic of China announced that it was nearing human space flight and was in the process of choosing astronauts for its planned Space Shuttle. It had built and was using an extensive training center and had solved many of the problems space has to offer, such as maintaining life support. No date was given as to when a craft would be built. (W Post, Sep 1/86; W Times, Sep 1/86)
In a response to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the establishment of the Office of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance and the appointment of George A. Rodney, from Martin Marietta Corporation, to head the office as Associate Administrator. Objectives of the office were to ensure a program that monitored equipment status and designed validation problem analysis and system acceptability in Agencywide plans and programs. Rodney's responsibilities were to have oversight of safety, reliability, and quality assurance functions related to all NASA activities. (NASA Release 8687; W Post, Jul 9/86; W Times, Jul 9/86; B Sun, July 9/86; P Inq, Jul 6/86)
The President's Space Shuttle Commission gathered in private before beginning its formal investigation into the disaster. Headed by former Secretary of State William P. Rogers, the Commission planned to weigh all of the evidence and make a recommendation, with assistance from NASA, after 120 days. (USA Today, Feb 5/86)
NASA scientists were searching for ways to clean up the orbiting debris left from nuclear powered satellites and wreckage from antisatellite weapons testing. Considering the high speed of orbiting craft, scientists reported that even a fleck of paint could be dangerous, the probable culprit that caused a cracked windshield in the seventh U.S. Shuttle flight. Because slightly larger objects could result in catastrophic damage, the planned Space Station sacrificed some valuable weight to armor crew quarters. (W Times, Oct 13/86)
NASA extended a $1.32 billion contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company for processing services at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The contracted price, however, did not reflect the schedule changes brought on by the Challenger accident; the changes would be handled through contract amendments. NASA also awarded contracts at $500,000 million each to five different firms for the study of designs for second generation solid rocket boosters. The companies were required only to submit concepts for a newly designed rocket. (LA Times, Sep 6/86; WSJ Sep 8/86)'80** NASA cleared a site at Wallops Island, Virginia, for use by Space Services, Inc., a new rocket company, to launch its Conestoga rocket. The company planned to put cremated remains of 10,000 people on a satellite that was to orbit the Earth. (P Inq, Sep 9/86)
An Energy Department analysis released to Representative Edward Markey stated that radioactive releases resulting from a Space Shuttle accident carrying a plutoniumpowered satellite could cause 367 cancer cases and contaminate 367 square miles of land. The former estimate hinged on people staying in the launch site area for more than a year. (W Post, May 19/86; C Trib, May
The cause of the faulty engine valve that was responsible for Shuttle Columbia's sixth delay was discovered to be a 5inch thermometer that was broken during fuel loading. After engineers removed the thermometer, they were hopeful for a launch later in the day, but feared that overcast weather might cause yet another delay. (W Times, Jan 10/86; W Post, Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86)
Speaking to NASA employees, Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an intense safety program to include reassessment of Shuttle management structure, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for aborting Shuttle flights, and recertification of all critical Shuttle parts. He noted that "the business of flying in space is a bold business," and added, "We cannot print enough money to make it totally riskfree. But we certainly are going to correct any mistakes we have made...and we're going to get going ahead just as soon as we can." When the Shuttle Program resumes, he continued, the first Shuttle would be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards Air Force Base, in California. (USA Today, Mar 26/68; W Post, Mar 26/86; WSJ, Mar 26/86; NY Times, Mar 26/86; W Times, Mar 26/86)
A student photography experiment, "CAN DO," from the Charleston County School District, South Carolina, scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle Columbia March 6 was rescheduled for April 524. The goal of the experiment was to observe Comet Halley from NASA's highflying Kuiper Airborne Observatory aircraft, a converted C141. The aircraft was scheduled for several highaltitude flights over New Zealand, a part of the southern hemisphere where the Comet would be most visible. Students from other schools, both in the United States and abroad, were to participate in the program by photographing the Comet from the ground and comparing their pictures with those taken in flight. The pictures taken at ground level would assist professional astronomers because most large observatory telescopes are not designed to view large objects, and resolving the fine detail in Comet Halley's tail could be enhanced with the much wider overall view from a standard camera lens. (NASA Release 8635)
The results of a study conducted by Geologists Dr. Matthew Golombek and Dr. Laurie Brown suggested that the northwest Mojave Desert had shifted about 25 degrees clockwise because of periodic, violent earthquakes some 16 to 20 million years ago. Golombek reported that "results of magnetic studies of volcanic rocks taken from 19 sites suggested that the movement was caused by shear (the Earth's tectonic plates sliding past or over one another) from the Pacific Plate sliding along the fault past the North American Plate." Magnetic minerals had once lined up parallel with the Earth's magnetic field to the North, but the study found minerals now pointing 25 degrees to the east, and it was determined that tectonic movement had rotated the rocks. (NASA Release 86160; LA Times, Nov 30/86) 'D0*November 26: NASA selected the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS), a launch vehicle that fits in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle, to carry three probes for planetary missions. Despite earlier plans for alternative launch vehicles following cancellation of the Shuttle/Centaur Upper Stage and the Challenger accident, NASA felt an urgent need to reestablish its planetary program. The probes scheduled for launch in 1989 and 1990 included the Galileo, a joint mission with Germany that would circle Jupiter and measure electromagnetic fields and plasma particles; the Magellan, which would orbit and map Venus using radar; and the Ulysses, a joint mission with the European Space Agency designed to orbit and study the poles of the sun. These three were the first missions for orbit around bodies other than Earth that would employ the IUS. The IUS boosters were manufactured by Boeing to launch three scientific missions. They were to have launched the General Dynamics hydrogenfueled Centaur rockets, but the highly volatile boosters, thought possibly unsafe for human space flight, were grounded after the Challenger accident. Because of its less powerful rocket, the Galileo needed to slingshot Venus in order to reach Jupiter, as opposed to flying directly to the planet. The added time for the mission was expected to run $50 million. (NASA Release 86161; NY Times, Nov 27/86)
NASA planned to shift its original plan of carrying a mixture of scientific, military, and commercial payloads and give greater emphasis to the military when Shuttle flights resumed. The military, they added, always had top priority and five to seven of the flights slated for next year were devoted to them. NY Times, Mar 24/86)
James R. Thompson, vicechairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, announced that the cause of the disaster would be pinpointed within a month. Although the right booster rocket, which would be a tremendous help, was still unrecovered, and tapes from the crew compartment shed no light, Thompson noted that photographic evidence and other data already available would eventually yield the answer. He also stated that
The Federal Aviation Administration has become increasingly concerned with the problem of inadequate airline maintenance. Because they maintain a 17hourperday schedule and are involved in repeated takeoffs and landings, commercial jetliners are prone to numerous mechanical breakdowns. Although "modern jets are designed to fly despite even serious defects" and although U.S. carriers employ an army of airline mechanics repairing planes in between scheduled flights, several U.S. carriers were fined by the Federal Aviation Administration last summer for a "series of maintenancerelated transgressions." The National Transportation Safety Board was considering whether a crash of a Midwest Express Airline jet in September 1985, in which 31 people were killed, was caused by poor maintenance. Some airsafety experts expressed fear that airline companies had become too cost conscious about safety; still, maintenance error ranked third behind pilot error and bad weather as a cause of fatal airline crashes. (WSJ, Jan 3/86) 0*January 6: NASA renamed two planetary missions scheduled for flight in 1988 and 1990. The mission to map the planet Venus, previously known as Venus Radar Mapper and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in April 1988 and arrival at Venus in July 1989, was renamed Magellan. The Magellan spacecraft, attached to a CentaurG upper stage, would map the entire surface of the planet Venus for the first time, using a syntheticaperture radar instrument. The spacecraft would orbit the planet about once every three hours, coming as close as 250 kilometers from the The mission to map the planet Mars, previously known as the Mars Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in August 1990 and arrival at Mars in August 1999, was renamed Mars Observer. The Observer spacecraft, adapted from an existing productionline type of Earthorbital spacecraft to reduce costs, would map the planet Mars to determine the global elemental and mineralogical character of its surface and to investigate the Martian climate, both present and past. The Magellan and Mars Observer projects were managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 861)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident released its report, two hundred pages, plus appendices, that recommended reorganization of NASA's management structure. Other changes cited by the Commission included more rigid quality control, reorganization of the lines of communication in the NASA chain of command, a larger role for NASA astronauts in Shuttle matters, and a Shuttle escape system. By the time these conclusions were announced, the report had been sent to the printers; it was scheduled to be on President Ronald Reagan's desk by June 9. (Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident; W Post, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; B Sun, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86; WSJ, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86)
As further testimony was heard by the President's Commission, NASA manager Larry Mulloy stated that objections made by Morton Thiokol engineers to halt liftoff seemed illogical, but added that had he known that all of the company's engineers held the opinion, he might have changed his mind. Other testimony given by NASA officials conceded that they argued against the idea of cold weather being detrimental to a launch, but had little data to demonstrate this, and insisted that this opposition in no way pressured Morton Thiokol management to reverse the recommendation of its engineers. (Official Transcript Proceedings Before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 26/86; NY Times, Feb 27/86; C Trib, Feb `"27/86; LA Times, Feb 27/86; W Post, Feb 27/86; P Inq, Feb 27/86; (#W Times, Feb 27/86; WSJ Feb 27/86)
Astronaut Sally K. Ride was named Special Assistant to the Administrator for strategic planning, where she would be responsible for reviewing NASA's goals and objectives for near'40*tolongterm planning. Ride was a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle flights and a member of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86114)
NASA planned to proceed with construction of a second horizontal test stand for redesign and recertification of the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Motor (SRM) at the Morton Thiokol, Inc., Wasatch facility in Utah. The newer test stand would more'>0*closely simulate the stresses on the SRM during an actual launch and ascent. (NASA Release 86146; W Times, Oct 17/86)
The Presidential Commission questioned NASA scientists regarding faulty orings as a cause of the Challenger accident. The panel learned that these seals could indeed malfunction in cold weather and also that erosion (not the result of cold0*weather) had occurred in 6 of 171 seals on previous flights. Morton Thiokol, the firm responsible for manufacturing the orings, had raised concerns about launching the Shuttle in cold weather, but NASA engineers concluded that the backup ring would function if the primary seal failed. Released NASA documents also showed concern expressed by engineers, who, three years prior to the accident, concluded that the mechanism for sealing segments of the solid rocket booster could fail and result in "loss of mission, vehicle, and crew." One risk analysis received by NASA from an outside agency estimated the chances for an accident involving the boosters as 1 in 35. NASA's safety advisory board stated in their 1985 annual report that 18 Shuttle flights per year were "very optimistic" because these launches were anything but routine. However, "the requirement to launch has not been a prerequisite," said acting NASA Administrator Dr. William R. Graham, "The prerequisite has been safety." (Official Transcript Proceedings before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 11/86; P Inq, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; B Sun, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; CSM, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; C Trib, Feb 12/86; Feb 14/86; Feb 13/86; WSJ, Feb 12/86; USA Today, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; NY Times, Feb 13/86; W Post, Feb 13/86)
The President's Commission began probing into the Space Shuttle Challenger accident as it took statements from NASA officials Dr. William R. Graham, Acting Administrator; Jesse Moore, Associate Administrator; Arnold D. Aldrich, Space Shuttle Manager; Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager; and Robert B. Sieck, Director, Shuttle Operations. As several possible reasons into the cause of the accident were explored, Moore emphasized0*that space flight would always be dangerous. (NY Times, Feb 7/86)
NASA engineers settled on a design for the Shuttle's new booster rockets, and beginning in early 1987, four fullscale tests were planned. John Thomas, manager of the booster design project at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, predicted that the tests would run smoothly and that Shuttle flight would resume in February 1988. (C Trib, Oct 28/86)
Thomas L. Moser, Director for Engineering at NASA's Johnson Space Center, was appointed as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight to investigate the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8616)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. was awarded a contract to replace the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost in the Challenger accident. Plans called for a replacement spacecraft and followon satellites to keep the TDRS system operational through the end of the century. As of this date, one TDRS was in geosynchronous orbit near Brazil over the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 8670; WSJ, May 30/86)
Astronaut Owen K. Garriott planned to leave both NASA and government service during the current week. His past achievements include a 2month stay in space aboard Skylab and the 10day Spacelab 1 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 8675)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced assignments to the NASA 51L Data and0*Design Analysis Task Force. The task force was to collect and analyze information to support a thorough review of all aspects and potential causes of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release
Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a Senate subcommittee and testified that the $7.7 billion budget for NASA was "barely adequate" and could further delay Shuttle flights while possibly stripping the private sector of some 25,000 jobs. He also said that the currently designed Space Station was intended to be built using four Shuttles. With only three Shuttles, the Station would need to go back to the drawing board. The Senate appeared to be looking at a civilian sponsored space program for commercial launches as a way to reduce costs. (W Post, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
Recovery operations for the Space Shuttle Challenger crew cabin were completed. Scattered debris and the remains of all seven crew members were located in an effort that was hampered by heavy seas, high winds, and reduced underwater visibility. Final forensic work and future planning in accordance with family requests were expected to finish shortly thereafter. (NASA Release 8646; C Trib, Apr 21/86; NY Times, Apr 21/86)
Astronaut Paul J. Weitz was named deputy director of the Johnson Space Center (JCS), Houston, Texas. Past achievements include participation in the first astronaut visit to the Skylab, serving as commander of the sixth Space Shuttle mission, and serving as technical assistant to the JSC Director. (NASA Release
After more than a year of study by NASA centers and contract teams, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced a baseline configuration for the permanently crewtended Space Station that would guide preliminary design activities for the remaining eight months of the Phase B studies. The contract called for development of the Space Station to begin in October 1986, ending with a permanently tended habitable station in 1994. A total of 14 Space Shuttle flights were thought to be required for Major features of the design included two vertical keels 361 feet long and connected by upper and lower horizontal booms 146 feet long (the Space Station measured 503 feet at its widest point); two 44.5foot long, 13.8foot interior diameter U.S. supplied modules, with external interconnects for laboratory functions and crew quarters for eight members and two smaller logistics modules to alternate between the ground and the station; modules located near the station's center of gravity to provide the best possible microgravity environment for experiments, with raft patterns having four nodes and two tunnels to serve as module interconnects; internal module pressure of 14.7 per square inch and 80/20 nitrogen/oxygen mixture ratio to approximate sea level Earth atmospheric conditions, with a closed loop environmental control and life support system where oxygen and water could be recycled and nitrogen and food could be resupplied; hybrid solar power system with 75 kilowatts of power, where 25 kilowatts would be provided by photovoltaic system and the remaining 50 by the solar dynamics system; five locations on the structure for placing attached payloads and a facility for servicing free flying spacecraft and platforms with a telerobotic servicer; polar platform with useful payload on single Shuttle launch and a coorbiting platform to support astrophysics and materials processing; gaseous hydrogen/oxygen propulsion system for altitude control (assembly would be at 220 nautical miles and operational altitude at 250 nautical miles minimum); metric as standard unit of measurement; and inclusion of international elements into the overall design, including the Canadian Mobile Servicing Center and hardware provided by Japan and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 8661; NY Times, May 15/86; W Times, May 15/86)'!0*May 15: NASA and Boeing Aerospace Company entered into an agreement concerning materials processing experiments. Crystals of a size and quality impossible to create on Earth would be attempted aboard three Space Shuttle flights. Working with the University of Alabama, Boeing agreed to fund the experiments, including a chemical vapor transport crystal growth furnace installed in the galley area. These crystals were expected to be of the type valuable in the commercial production of semiconductor and electrooptic devices. The experiments would underscore NASA's commitment to the development of commercial endeavors in space, and would continue with the Space Station. (NASA Release 8662)
For the second time in two days, launch of the Shuttle Challenger at Cape Canaveral, Florida, was postponed because of bad weather. Meanwhile, NASA began conducting tests at Edwards Air Force Base in California to determine the effect of rain on insulating tiles and readied a sophisticated instrument landing system, hoping to minimize the weather factor in launches and landings for future orbiter flights at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (W Times, Jan 27/86; USA Today, Jan 27/86; P Inq, Jan 27/86; C Trib, Jan 27/86; B Sun, Jan 27/86)
The United States Space Foundation outlined plans to provide a focal point that would raise funds for a replacement of the Space Shuttle Challenger. The Challenger 7 Fund reached out to individuals and organizations for contributions while hoping that Congress would authorize the replacement. (NASA Release 8618)
The Challenger accident forced NASA to reconsider expendable launch vehicles as a means for putting satellites into space. Believed to have been rendered obsolete by the Shuttle, these rockets were once again deemed necessary for meeting the growing schedule of launches. The change of position0*notwithstanding, NASA and the Department of Defense appeared ready to request another orbiter. (B Sun, Feb 27/68)
NASA officials said that resuming Space Shuttle flight by
TRW, Inc. was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for design and delivery of the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), a reusable, remotely operated propulsion vehicle for hauling satellites from one orbit to another. The OMV's primary uses would be spacecraft delivery, retrieval, boost, deboost, and close proximity visual observation beyond the operating range of a Space Shuttle. The OMV, "space tug," was also to be made to adapt for use in Space Station activities. (NASA Release 8681; WSJ, Jun 26/86; LA Times, Jun 27/86)')0** The first flight of an aircraft with both a digital jet engine control system and a mated digital flight control system took place at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility with a modified F15. The integration of engine and flight control (Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control) between the system's computers could increase performance 2 to 10 percent. (NASA Release 8682)
Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June
NASA opted to use the deactivated Minuteman facilities'<0*at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for longterm storage of debris recovered from the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Large concrete covers were to be placed over the tubes for a weather tight seal, concluding NASA's primary activities related to the analysis and disposition of recovered hardware. (NASA Release 86141)
Documents released by the Roger's Commission investigating the Challenger accident revealed that the Space Shuttle Columbia had narrowly avoided a severe mishap on January 6 when it came within 31 seconds of launch after 18,000 pounds of liquid oxygen had been inadvertently drained from its external tank. The mistake would have left the ship without enough fuel to obtain orbit; the error was blamed on fatigue among the ground crew, who were pursuing a rigid schedule. (NY Times, Aug 6/86; W Post, Aug 6/86; W Times, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
NASA and SPACEHAB signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish cooperation for the latter's efforts to develop and market payload bay habitable modules, truncated metal cylinders that would be additions to the orbiter's crew department and connected by tunnel adapters. These modules, designed to increase the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle, would serve as additional living and work space for the astronauts by providing an additional 1,000 cubic feet. Another MOU, signed by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), was intended to give NASA access to Synthetic Aperture Radar data from the first European Remote Sensing Satellite for Government research purposes at the Fairbanks, Alaska, station0*that NASA was developing in connection with its Navy Remote Ocean Sensing Satellite System Scatterometer (NROSS). The data received from the ERS1 satellite, engineers hoped, would enhance NASAsupported polar ice research, NROSS, the Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation and Shuttle Imaging RadarC. NASA was then to exchange its Scatterometer and radar imagery for other ERS1 data of interest. The ERS1 was scheduled for launch in 1989. (NASA Release 866; 867; B Sun, Jan 17/86)
NASA got back tapes from IBM that were recovered from the Atlantic Ocean six weeks after the Space Shuttle accident and revealed that the Challenger crew had no knowledge of events leading to the catastrophe. IBM engineers, who were simultaneously researching tape restoration, were called upon and after isolating the computer zeros and ones, NASA engineers began the job of translating the data into a facsimile of human voice. W Post, Jul 18/86; NY Times, Jul 18/86; B Sun, Jul 18/86)
Only 74 seconds after liftoff, the Space Shuttle Challenger, flight STS 51L, exploded at about 10 miles above the Earth, killing all seven crew members. It was the worst accident in the history of space exploration and the first time American fatalities occurred during space flight. Slow motion film of the launch revealed a thin flame between the left booster rocket and the Shuttle's main fuel tank, causing engineers to speculate that hydrogen from a ruptured tank ignited upon contact with air heated by the rocket motors or directly by the motors themselves. It was hoped that investigation of the debris that fell into the Atlantic Ocean could lend a better understanding of the accident. All crew tended spaceflight was halted until a thorough investigation was completed, stunting the ambitious space program that promised to bring the richest lode of scientific data ever imagined. (W Post, Jan 29/86; W Times, Jan 29/86; NY times, Jan 29/86; B Sun, Jan 29/86; P Inq Jan 29/86; C Trib, Jan 29/86)
Another NASA launch ended in failure as a $30 million0*Delta rocket carrying a $55.7 million weather satellite was destroyed shortly after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. An order to destruct by remote control came when the rocket's main engine failed and it tumbled off course. This was the first mishap for the Delta rocket, praised as NASA's most dependable launch vehicle, in 9 years and 43 consecutive launches. The four most used vehicles for launching satellites (the Delta, Titan 3D and Atlas Centaur rockets and the Space Shuttle) were all put on hold, grounding the agency for an undetermined amount of time. A short circut was the leading suspect the Delta loss. (W Times, May 5/86; May 6/86; W Post, May 5/86; May 6/86; WSJ, May 5/86; May 6/86; NY Times, May 5/86; May 6/86)
The Peoples Republic of China moved to fill the void left by the United States and Europe for commercial space launchings as it negotiated with two U.S. firms. Hughes Aircraft Company expressed an interest in working with China to establish a launch base in the Hawaiian islands. Peking, at the same time, announced an agreement it had made with the U.S. company Teresat, Inc., for putting two of their satellites into orbit in 1987 and 1989 at a price ranging from $20 million to $25 million, about 15 percent less than what Ariane and the Space Shuttle charged. Teresat, however, would first need to locate an insurer for launches and secure approval from the State Department. China claimed its program was capable of 10 to 12 launches per year. (W Post, Jun 16/86; CSM, Jun 16/86; WSJ, Jun 17/86; C Trib, Jun
A panel of scientists and engineers, established at the behest of the Roger's Commission, endorsed NASA's redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket, but urged the Agency to increase its test schedule and to consider alternative designs. NASA's efforts had been limited by confining any redesign to plans that incorporated the rocket segments already ordered before the Challenger accident. Because the chosen design could prove inadequate and because NASA would begin investigating second generation booster rockets, all alternative design changes, the panel concluded, were in need of study. (P Inq, Oct 14/86; W Post, Oct 14/86; NY Times, Oct 14/86)
USA Today reported that 40yearold Karen Kofoed, a reporter for the Camden CourierPost, was the first journalist to apply to be part of a crew aboard a Space Shuttle into space. As of January 6, only 20 of the 4000 reporters who requested applications had submitted the completed forms, which were due by January 15. The contest for the first journalist in space was administered for NASA by the Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communications at the University of South Carolina. (USA Today, Jan 6/86)
NASA announced that it had postponed three launches: the Ulysses mission to investigate the poles of the sun; the Galileo mission to orbit Jupiter and send a probe into the planet; and the Astro1 mission, an ultraviolet astronomy laboratory mounted in the Shuttle's payload bay that was to examine quasars, "hot" stars, galaxy centers, and Halley's Comet. The Ulysses and Galileo missions were scheduled for launch from a Shuttle in May, but both launches were dependent on certain relative positions of Jupiter and Earth, occurring only once every 13 months. The Astro1 had to be launched in the MarchApril timeframe in order to observe Halley's Comet, and with that opportunity gone no new date was requested. The delays were caused by the January Space Shuttle accident. (NASA Release 8611; NY Times, Feb 11/86)
Debris brought to shore on March 19 was determined to be part of the right booster rocket from the Challenger accident. The white outer skin of the pieces were discolored from excessive heat, and the suspected oring, officials said, may lie inside of one 4footbyfoot piece of wreckage. (W Times, Mar 21/86; USA Today, Mar 21/86)
White House officials announced that top members of President Ronald Reagan's cabinet were in favor of halting commercial launches aboard the Space Shuttle, a move that would cost NASA $850 million in revenue. White House spokesman Larry Speaks argued that eliminating the launches would stimulate the private aerospace industry, reluctant to compete with NASA in the past, to quickly fill the void. Another reason for the reduced number of launches, he noted, was the increasing backlog of scientific and military payloads. Focus on those two types of missions exclusively would ease the immediate need for a fourth At the same time, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge said that he intended to ask Congress for $2.6 billion in order to acquire a fleet of rockets that would reduce both the backlog of 21 payloads and the Pentagon's dependance on the Space Shuttle. He added that no Space Shuttles would be launched from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base until 1992, a saving to tax payers of $1 billion. (W Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug 1/86; W Post, Aug 1/86; B Sun, Aug 1/86; NY Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug
James R. Thompson, of Princeton University's Plasma Physics Lab, nationally recognized propulsion expert, and former NASA propulsion engineer, was named vice chairman of the NASA task force inquiring into the Challenger accident. His appointment was in support of the Commission assigned by President Ronald Reagan to perform the investigation of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8620)' 0*March 3: NASA announced a comprehensive project to evaluate the implications of the Challenger accident on the space program. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions had been postponed, NASA announced that the Shuttle Discovery would be modified so that it could launch spacecraft with a Centaur upper stage rocket. The Challenger accident left only the Shuttle Atlantis with the capability for carrying Centaur payloads. These decisions were made by the Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. William R. Graham, on the recommendation of the Headquarters Replanning Task Force, headed by Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, set up to study program alternatives in the wake of the accident. Other matters considered by the task force included: (1) the requirements for all aspects for an orbiter to replace the Challenger as well as the lost Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) launch vehicle and its support structure attached to a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost with the Shuttle; (2) new launch schedules for the remaining three Shuttles; (3) an additional launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base; (4) the role of expendable launch vehicles for commercial use; (5) the retention of ground communications because only one TDRS, instead of two, was in orbit to link spacecraft to earth because of the accident; (6) and identification of monetary losses other than those from the destroyed equipment. In the meantime, customers who had hoped to launch their satellites from the Space Shuttle were being forced to examine other alternatives. With launch schedules certain to fall far behind and military and scientific communities getting first priority, commercial interests would have either to put their projects on the back burner or use NASA's rival, the European Space Agency's Arianespace company, for more expensive launches. With NASA's announcement that its Shuttle program would be put on hold for 1218 months, Shuttlelinked businesses were searching for other options as well. (NASA Release 8622; C Trib, Mar 3/86; B Sun, Mar 4/86; USA Today, Mar 4/86)
The InterAgency Consultative Group (IACG) on Halley's Comet encounter was scheduled to meet March 49 in Moscow and March 1214 in Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Germany. Formed in 1981, the IACG comprised representatives from NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), the Soviet Union's Intercosmos Council, Japan's Institute for Space and Astronautical Studies (ISAS), and the International Halley Watch. ESA's Giotto, the Intercosmos Council's VEGA 1 and 2, and the ISAS Suisei (Comet) and Sakigake (Pioneer) spacecraft were launched in the previous 15 months to observe the Comet's passage around the Sun. NASA's Launching of a Spartan UV telescope and an Astro UV telescope to observe the Comet from Earth orbit was terminated because of the Challenger accident. But NASA's PioneerVenus spacecraft (launched in May 1978) had already completed five of its seven planned weeks of viewing the Comet, and the International Cometary Explorer spacecraft (launched in August 1978) was scheduled to monitor Halley's solar wind upstream. (NASA Release 8619; P Inq, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Mar
Hearings before the House of Representatives investigating the Challenger accident began on this date. Testimonies were given by William P. Rogers, Dr. James C. Fletcher, various NASA personnel, various personnel from Morton Thiokol, Inc., and various personnel from the military and industry. The hearings were to take place June 10, 11, 12, 17, 18 and 25, 1986 and July 15, 16, 23, and 24, 1986. (Investigation into the Challenger Accident: Hearings before the Committee on Science and Technology House of Representatives, 1986)
Following a speech in Washington, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge told reporters that the Space Shuttle would not fly again until early 1988. The Air Force, he said, would use the expendable launch vehicles being developed as often as possible and that NASA's goal was to have military and nonmilitary payloads on a 5050 schedule. For reasons of security, Aldridge had hoped President Ronald Reagan would authorize funds for a new orbiter, but sources revealed that the President would hold back any decisions concerning the space program until after NASA began implementing some of the recommendations from the Roger's Commission. (W Post, Jun 24/86; W Times, Jun 24/86; NY Times, Jun
NASA launched its first successful rocket since the Challenger accident, a Delta rocket from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Carrying two payloads for the Strategic Defense Program, one satellite would attempt to track down and intercept the other. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, manufacturer of the rocket, viewed the event as a stepping stone that might lead to the company's entry into commercial launches. NASA had two more Delta rockets in its inventory, one committed to a U.S. Government weather satellite identical to the one lost in May and the other to an Indonesian weather satellite. (NASA Release 8632; WSJ, Sep 8/86, P Inq, Sep 6/86; NY Times, Sep 6/86; Sep 8/86; W Post, Sep 6/86; C Trib, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 6/86)
Testing of recently installed weather protection structures was scheduled for August 19 at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida with Space Shuttle Atlantis. The $3.3 million system of sliding and folding doors and seals would cover previously exposed, lower portions of the orbiter and greatly reduce risk to the heat protection tiles, subject to damage from heavy rains, hail, and windblown debris. (NASA Release 8695)
The U.S. Marine Corps salvage operation for the 51L Space Shuttle accident, which involved the Freedom Star, the Liberty Star, and the Independence vessels, came to an end after a sevenmonth effort. It was the largest ocean recovery operation in history and at its peak involved 22 ships and 6,000 personnel, as well as numerous aircraft. The search yielded 45 percent of the Challenger, 50 percent of the external tank and solid rocket boosters, 95 percent of the SpartanHalley spacecraft, 35 percent of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, and 90 percent of the Inertial Upper Stage. (NASA Release 86121; C Trib, Aug 29/86; B Sun, Aug 29/86; W Times, Aug 29/86; W Post, Aug 31/86)
NASA scientists halted design of additional shielding for two nuclear powered satellites. The shield, they ascertained, would help only during the first two minutes of launch and would actually become a detriment after that. The Interagency Nuclear Safety Review Panel would not give launch approval for the scientific missions until 1999, but NASA officials saw a good chance for approval of launching the radioisotope thermoelectric generator powered satellites from the Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Dec 15/86)
Top officials at Rockwell International, builder of NASA's orbiters and closely tied to the Shuttle program, testified that they believed cold weather had made launch of the Challenger unsafe. The President's panel concluded that NASA's launch decision process was flawed because criteria for approval should not have been changed at the last minute. The New York Times concluded, "The picture emerging from the inquiry into the loss of the Space Shuttle is one of chronic failure in the space agency and its contractors to communicate lifeanddeath problems up the chain of command." (W Post, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Feb 28/86; C Trib, Feb 28/86; WSJ, Feb 28/86;
The scheduled launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed, this time because of inclement weather at landing sights in Spain and the Sahara Desert. The weather situations in these distant areas were of concern to engineers at the Kennedy Space Center because the sites provided emergency landing in the event of an engine failure during the first few minutes of flight. This fifth delay, four in three weeks, raised questions concerning the NASA's ability to launch 15 scheduled Shuttle flights during 1986. (W Post, Jan 8/86; NY Times, Jan 8/86; USA `"Today Jan 8/86; P Inq, Jan 8/86)
Shuttle director Richard H. Truly announced NASA's interest in an improved, secondgeneration solid rocket motor design for study by the National Space Transportation System program manager. Among the requested changes were asbestosfree insulation, alternate case and propellant design, and modified burn rate for improved performance. Outside geometry and interfaces with other Space Shuttle elements would not be affected. He added, however, that the tentative schedule for launching a Shuttle in early 1988 would not be contingent upon this newly designed booster rocket. (NASA Release 8694; NY Times, Jul 21/86)
Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge restated at a conference of the Aviation Space Writers that the USAF would like to purchase a new rocket that could lift medium weight satellites. The rockets, which the service calls "medium lift vehicles," were needed to launch 12 NAVSTAR navigation satellites scheduled for Shuttle flights. He also informed the conference of an interest in larger rockets, "complementary expendable launch vehicles," (an updated Titan rocket) for putting the Pentagon's heaviest satellites into orbit. (B Sun, May 14/86; NY Times, May 13/86; May 20/86)
Further investigation into the Challenger accident opened a number of theories into the booster rocket's failure. One pointed to bad fuel segments, perhaps caused by cold temperatures. "Propellants can crack the way you crack a cookie. When they crack...it allows you new sites where gases can be generated," opined Herman Krier from the University of Illinois. Another theory suggested that improper handling had produced hairline cracks while fuel segments were cast or during launch preparation, or that installation of badly joined seams between the fuel segments caused uneven burning. It was noted that workers ignored standard operating procedures. A third theory looked into the possibility that a solidrocket booster nozzle had burned through, as had nearly happened on a previous flight. Still another theory cited cold weather or vibrations resulting from launch as a possible culprit for a failure in the suspected seam that joined two fuel segments. Other theories speculated that the external tank experienced over heating, leading to expansion of its contents and rupture of the tank, or even direct burnthrough from the 5,900 degrees exhaust leaving the rocket booster or that there might have been a preexisting hole in the tank. However the hydrogen came to leak, it was ignited by the heated air surrounding it or by the thin flame from the solid NASA Engineers thought, in that point in the investigation, that cold weather had no adverse affect on either the solid fuel or the seals, but were concerned with the possibility of leakage between segments of the rocket motors because deterioration of these seals had been noted on previous flights. Back up seals, they added, performed adequately. (P Inq, Feb 5/86; Feb 10/86; W Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; CSM, Feb 5/86; C Trib, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; NY Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 7/86; Feb 9/86; B Sun, Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; WSJ, Feb 6/86)
NASA signed an agreement with the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company (3M) allowing the company to fly 62 materials processing experiments aboard future Shuttle flights. The microgravity experiments in organic and polymer science were to be conducted on a spaceavailable basis, and NASA would have use of 3M's experiment equipment for scientific investigations. (UPI, Dec 9/86)
NASA announced that Aaron Cohen would be appointed as Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, and that Jesse W. Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that position to be Special Assistant to the General Manager, NASA Headquarters. Since 1962 Cohen had served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then in the Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of the Engineering and Development Directorate, and then as overall Director of Research and Engineering at the JSC. Moore came to NASA in 1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science. From there he was appointed Director of the Space Flight Division; Director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division; and Deputy Associate Administrator and acting Associate Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86138; NY Times, Oct 3/86)
NASA ruled out a recommendation to supplement its Shuttle flights with untended launch vehicles for building the Space Station. The combination would accelerate assembly by up to nine months, said Space Station manager John Dunning, but the time savings would be offset by a 10 to 40 percent increase in potentially dangerous space walks. Using expendable launch vehicles, he went on, would also require an orbital maneuvering rocket to keep the parts in place. (NY Times, Dec 28/86)
NASA released a list containing 748 critical parts of the Space Shuttle that could lead to disaster if they did not function properly. All of these components lacked a backup system and were therefore placed in the "Criticality 1" category. Unlike the fuselage or heatshielding tiles, for example, 617 of the0*critical parts could be covered by backup equipment, but engineers waived the measure as they felt confident that failure of them was unlikely. Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation System, said, "We are reviewing in detail all the items on the Critical Items list." (Nat Sp Trans Sys: Critical Items List; W Post, Mar 18/86; W Times, Mar 18/86; B Sun, Mar
Dr. James C. Fletcher became NASA's administrator for the second time. His first term in this position ran from April 1971 to May 1977. During the interim, he held the William K. Whitford Professorship of Energy Resources and Technology at the University of Pittsburgh and headed his own consulting firm. Past achievements include positions as research physicist with the United States Navy Bureau of Ordinance, research associate at Harvard University, instructor at Princeton University, positions in the private sector with Hughes Aircraft Company, RamoWooldridge Corporation and Space Electronics Corporation, and president of Space General Corporation. He also developed patents in sonar devices and missile guidance systems and has been associated with the President's Science Advisory Committee. After being sworn in, Fletcher announced that Space Shuttle flight would not resume for another 12 to 18 months and promised to fully review NASA's quality control program and decisionmaking process. He also noted that the 70 percent reduction in quality control staff for which NASA was recently criticized was "misleading" because "inhouse" work such as the Moonlaunched Saturn rockets were no longer a responsibility. A full Senate0*approved his nomination on May 6. (NASA Release 8660; B Sun, May 13/86; W Post, May 13/86; WSJ, May 13/86; NY Times, May 13/86)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command and former NASA astronaut, was appointed Associate Administrator for Space Flight. The new position called for Truly to head the Space Shuttle program and to direct NASA's Design and Data Analysis Task Force, which reviewed the Shuttle Challenger's January accident. He succeeded Jesse W. Moore in both of these roles. (NASA Release 8615; WSJ, Feb 20/86; NY Times, Feb 20/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; B Sun, Feb 21/86)
A NASA study found that the part of the booster rocket that was suspect in the Challenger accident had reached a temperature of only about 29 degrees Fahrenheit at the time of liftoff, 9 degrees cooler than the surrounding air. Both NASA and Morton Thiokol engineers, the study noted, had knowledge of0*the ring's susceptibility to damage in 50degree temperatures. A member of the President's Commission pointed out that NASA officials should have been aware of this as earlier temperatures were in the 20s and the orings would not heat up quickly. (W Post, Feb 24/86)
Dr. William R. Graham told a congressional committee that the suspected orings in the Challenger accident should be modified or redesigned. The manufacturer of the rocket boosters had submitted 43 possible modifications to NASA since February, and changes to the fleet, said Graham, would cost about $350 million. This was the first time any official from NASA had indicated a need for improving the seals since the January 28 The acting administrator also noted that recovery from the accident could cost the Nation $3.2 billion and replacing the Challenger would run another $2.8 billion. Not replacing the Shuttle, he warned, would restrict the fleet to military use and service flights. (Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Space Science Applications, Mar 11/90; P Inq, Mar 12/86; W Post, Mar 12/86; USA Today, Mar 12/86; W Times, Mar 12/86)
In a statement released by the White House Press Secretary, President Ronald Reagan announced "two steps that will ensure America's leadership in space exploration and utilization." His first target was the building of a fourth Space Shuttle beginning in fiscal year 1987, deemed necessary for accomplishments in space (especially the Space Station). He also announced that NASA would ease out of the business of launching commercial satellites by allowing the private sector to assume the responsibility, which, he said, would eventually be done "better and cheaper." NASA, he stressed, should focus solely on the exploration of space. (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Statement by the President, Aug 15/86)
United Technologies Corporation proposed implementing the launch propulsion and guidance system used in NASA's Space Shuttle for an untended space vehicle. The guidance system, they averred, would allow untended rockets to deliver much heavier'B0*payloads at a cheaper cost than the Shuttle. Operation, they claimed, would begin about three years after NASA approved the plan. (AP, Nov 8/86)
The first Soviet Space Shuttle, expected to be launched in 1986, would likely look very similar to U.S. orbiters, said scientists. Photographs of a scale model Soviet space plane that splashed down in the Indian Ocean revealed a miniature American Shuttle. Plans for the plane were easy for scientists to obtain as the program was never top secret and sources noted that the Soviets had often copied Western aircraft in the past. On a similar note, a report concerning the secretive launch from, presumably, the Soviet Union in summer 1985 concluded that an antisatellite weapon had gone up. Radar tracked debris that had orbited the Earth before burning up in the atmosphere, and researchers quickly deduced that the metallic scrap had come from a satellite on which the weapon was tested. The illegal launches were the first such unannounced flights by the Soviet Union since `"testing of orbital thermonuclear weapons. (W Times, Jan 21/86; (#WSJ, Jan 21/86)
In a data gathering activity in support of the Challenger accident investigation, destacking of solid rocket motors to gather information and assess the preflight conditions in and around the field joints was scheduled for early April. Inspections would focus on the field joint orings, putty used in the joints, rocket motor case ovality or "roundness," with any assembly damage, clevis gapopening resulting from stacking, and the degree of propellant slumping that occurred as a result of vertical stacking. Any relevant data from the destacking inspections that might be useful to the investigation was to be assembled by the NASA 51L Data and Design Analysis Task Force and provided to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8637)
NASA announced to Congress plans for modifying the Space Station that Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher predicted would be finished by 1994. The new design cut the amount of space walks during construction in half, increased the amount of living and laboratory space, and kept all human aspects concerning the project at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The Space Station, according to plans for assembly, would need 17 Space Shuttle flights between 1993 and 1994. In the meantime, Congress approved legislation, based on a
NASA announced that it would terminate further development of the $1 billion Centaur Upper Stage for launching other spacecraft on board a Space Shuttle. The Shuttle 51L accident prompted major safety reviews and safety criteria, which the Centaur, even after modifications, could not meet. Under Richard H. Truly's direction, NASA initiated efforts to examine alternatives for those national security missions that had planned to use Centaur. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions were dependant on such a launch, other options for launching them from the Shuttle with a Titan rocket were being considered. (NASA Release 8680, W Times Jun 20/86; W Post, Jun 20/86; WSJ, Jun 20/86; NY Times, Jun 20/86; CSM, Jun 23/86)
NASA said it had canceled 18 Space Shuttle missions over a 5year period for Spacelab because of the Challenger accident. The agency further stated that it planned to release a list of other scrubbed missions. (W Post Sep 1/86)
NASA announced plans for extending operations to five of its ground tracking stations located at Ascension Island in the southeast Atlantic, Santiago (Chili), Guam, Hawaii, and western Australia. Closing dates for these stations was moved up and was conditional on the February 1988 launch by the Space Shuttle of a second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS); a TDRS was destroyed during the Challenger accident. Two TDRS's could provide 85 percent coverage of an orbiting spacecraft, compared with the 50 percent coverage provided by ground stations. (NASA Release 86157)
For the first time since the Challenger accident, astronauts boarded a Space Shuttle; they took part in a mock countdown at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on the Atlantis. Computers halted the drill 25 seconds short of simulated engine firing, but officials deemed the test successful. (W Post Nov 19/86; NY Times, Nov 19/86)
The White House accelerated its search for a permanent head of NASA to replace James M. Beggs, indicted in December on fraud charges unrelated to the agency. Beggs was on an unpaid leave of absence during the time of the Challenger accident; Deputy Administrator William R. Graham was Acting Administrator. Beggs was later acquitted of all wrong doing and the Justice Department apologized for the erroneous charges. (W Post, Feb 7/86; Bus Wk, Feb 17/86)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
NASA announced that the three Space Shuttle main engines are undergoing acceptance testing at its National Space Technology Laboratories in Mississippi. The Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International performed the tests. The engines tested were to be used in the next Shuttle mission, STS26, scheduled for launch in June 1988. The tests were to be completed in December 1987. (NASA Release 87130; CSM, Sept 5/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and General Kabbaj, the Inspector of the Royal Moroccan Air Force, signed an agreement permitting the United States the use of Morocco's Ben Guerir Air Force Base for emergency landing of the Space Shuttle. The facility would be ready for such an emergency in February 1988. (NASA Release 876)
The first fullscale test of the redesigned Space Shuttle booster since the Challenger accident was labeled a spectacular success by all who watched it. The firing of the 126foot Shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains, witnessed by 300 officials from NASA and Morton Thiokol, Inc., the company that designed the booster rocket, was the first of six fullscale tests. Also present at this test were the five astronauts scheduled to fly the Space Shuttle in June 1988. (B Sun, May 28/87; NY Times, May 28/87; W Post, May 28/87)
NASA announced that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle launch had again been rescheduled, this time for June 1988. The 4month delay was caused by the need to perform further tests on the liquidfuel main engines and because of needed redesigning and testing of the Shuttle's rocket boosters. The postponement caused a decrease in the number of crew tended flights planned for 1988 and 1989. NASA said that three Spaceh)0*0*0*Shuttles, instead of the five originally planned, would be flown in 1988 and seven, instead of the ten planned, would be flown in 1989. The reductions in Space Shuttle launches, NASA believed, would further slow U.S. efforts to regain primacy in space exploration and utilization. (LA Times, May 21/87; NY Times, May 21/87; B Sun, May 21/87; W Post, May 21/87)
In an effort to reduce reliance on the U.S. Space Shuttle, NASA would rely more heavily on untended rockets, declared Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. He said that the primary goal was to "accelerate the deployment of the Nation's backlog of spacescience missions." NASA hoped to launch as many as five satellites and space probes by untended rockets by 1992. WSJ, May 18/87)
NASA announced that a more detailed examination of the results of the December 23 cold weather testfiring of the redesigned booster rocket revealed that an outer ring which anchors the booster's nozzle came apart during the test. The nozzle steers the Space Shuttle during the first two minutes of flight. The setback forced NASA to cancel the June 2, 1987, launch of the Space Shuttle. NASA officials said they were confident the launch would be delayed about three months, since the critical elements of the booster rocket, the redesigned field joints, functioned perfectly during the test. (B Sun, Dec 30/87; NY Times, Dec 30/87; WSJ, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87; W Times, Dec 30/87)
NASA said it had completed negotiations with Rockwell International Corporation for a new Space Shuttle. The new space vehicle, to replace the Challenger lost in the 1986 accident, was expected to be delivered in April 1991. The cost of the new Space Shuttle was estimated at $1.3 billion. (C Trib, Aug 2/87; H Post, Aug 1/87; LA Times, Aug 1/87; B Sun, Aug 1/87)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, at Headquarters in Washington, D.C., selected 29 life sciences investigators for space flight study. According to Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, Director of NASA's Life Sciences Division, the first phase of the study, the definition phase, which is expected to begin in the early fall of 1987 and last less than a year, would be followed by selection of investigators for actual flights aboard the Space Shuttle. Chosen investigators could participate in future Space Shuttle missions anytime between 1991 and 1994, or even later. (NASA Release 8754)
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
Because of complications encountered in the nozzle fabrication process, NASA moved the test of the flight configuration of the redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) to middle or late December 1987. (NASA Release 87151)
NASA selected five crew members for STS27, a Department of Defense Space Shuttle mission. The five crew members, scheduled for launch on Atlantis in early fall 1988, included Robert L. Gibson (Cdr., USN), Commander; Guy S. Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), Pilot; and Mission Specialists Richard M. Mullane (Col., USAF), Jerry L. Ross (Lt. Col., USAF), and William M. Shepherd, (Cdr., USN). (NASA Release 87139; LA Times, Sept 16/87; USA Today, Sept
NASA announced that secondary payloads for the next Space Shuttle mission would include five microgravity experiments, life sciences, atmospheric science and infrared communications experiments, as well as two student experiments. (NASA Release 87144)
In a major organizational shift, NASA announced the adoption of new postChallenger era commercial activity policies. The released decision memoranda, covering the new policies, were signed by Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers. The new policies resulted from the report of the Commercialization of Space Reviewh)0*0*0*Task Force and covered such general activities as joint endeavor agreements, microgravity research, secondary payloads on the Space Shuttle, expendable launch vehicles, and commercial activities. According to the new policies, the Office of Commercial Programs would henceforth determine, in coordination with concerned Headquarters offices, whether NASA should participate in any proposed joint program. Responsibility for programs utilizing the microgravity environment was transferred from the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology to the Office of Space Science and Applications. Secondary payload space would be carefully allocated by the Deputy Administrator and implemented by the Office of Space Flight to accomplish specific NASA objectives. To encourage and facilitate as much as possible the private domestic access to space, NASA's Office of Space Flight would contract private industry for launch of Expendable Launch Vehicles. Finally, the Office of Commercial Programs would, to the fullest extent possible, facilitate the utilization of space for commercial purposes. (NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Responsibility for Programs Utilizing the Microgravity Environment, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Secondary STS Payloads, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV's) Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; LA Times, June 13/87)
NASA announced that the longdelayed mission to Jupiter, originally scheduled for 1982, would be launched in 1989. The 5,870pound untended Galileo spacecraft was to be launched from the Shuttle Discovery. After the Challenger accident, NASA decided to use less powerful rockets than the originally planned Centaur rockets, which are fueled with volative hydrogen. The substitution required an "audacious" rerouting of the spacecraft in order to use the gravitational force of Venus and Earth to propel Galileo toward The Galileo mission was expected to reach Jupiter in 1995. Upon reaching Jupiter, the spacecraft was to release a 737pound probe that would penetrate the atmosphere of the giant gaseous planet. h)&0*0*0*In addition, the spacecraft was to spend two years orbiting Jupiter and making flybys of its four largest moons. (CSM, Dec 3/87; LA Times, Dec 3/87; USA Today, Dec 3/87; W Post, Dec 3/87)
Two firms, General Dynamics, San Diego, California, and Martin Marietta, New Orleans, Louisiana, were chosen by NASA for liquidfueled rocket booster design studies. The liquidfueled rocket boosters could be used on the Space Shuttle and future launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87138; H Chron, Sept 17/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced NASA planned to develop an advanced solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8747)
NASA announced that its scientists had joined with scientists from the Brazilian Institute for Space Research and from U.S. and Brazilian universities and institutes to conduct a 45day study of tropospheric (part of the atmosphere closest to Earth) chemistry in the atmosphere over the Amazon River Basin tropical rain forest during the wet season. NASA's program of global tropospheric experiments to study the chemistry of Earth's atmosphere and its interaction with land and oceans began in the 1980's. NASA used the Space Shuttle in 1981 and 1984 to measure tropospheric carbon monoxide with a gas filter radiometer. In July and August 1985, NASA's Amazon boundary layer experiment (ABLE) documented the importance of biosphereatmosphere interactions in determining chemical processes in the troposphere over undisturbed rain forests. The second ABLE experiment, begun in midApril 1987, was to study how tropical forests affect the gas exchange, chemistry, and budgets of several key gases in the troposphere. A NASA Electra aircraft, stationed in Manasus, Brazil, in the center of the Amazon River Basin, was expected to measure atmospheric trace gasses and aerosols during a series of flights. The results from the experiments aboard the Electra aircraft and from several investigations carried out at ground sites would be evaluated by the team of scientists late in 1987. NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications in Washington, D.C., was responsible for the tropospheric chemistry program. Langley's Atmospheric Sciences Division, with logistical support from the Bionetics Corporation in Hampton, Virginia, managed the ABLE project. (Nasa Release 8766)
NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, announced that more than 400 modifications were planned for the Space Shuttle program. Speaking at a news conference called to discuss NASA's recovery from the effects of the Challenger accident, which killed all seven Shuttle crew members, Truly emphasized the Agency's commitment to "a trueh)0*0*0*enhancement to safety." Included among the safety modifications listed were better brakes, more efficient engines, and eventually an escape system for the Shuttle crew. However, it was pointed out that the escape system probably would not be ready for the next planned Shuttle flight in February 1988. (UPI, Jan 20/87; LA Times, Jan 21/87; NY Times, Jan 21/87; P Inq, Jan 21/87; W Post, Jan 21/87)
NASA announced that it had established a team to review launch decision processes used for NASA expendable launch vehicles and the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the review, which was to be completed by July 3, 1987, was to ensure consistent approaches and risk evaluations for all NASA launches. Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, and Robert L. Crippen, Deputy Director of the National Space Transportation System Operations, were selected as cochairmen of the team. (NASA Release
NASA announced that its fiscal year 1988 budget request did not include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 million for the launching of the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. The Agency said it planned to launch the spacecraft in 1992 from the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8732; LA Times, Mar 14/87; NY Times, Mar 15/87)
Carver Kennedy, Vice President for Space Services at Morton Thiokol, Inc., said that engineers successfully testfired the company's redesigned Space Shuttle booster rocket, planned for use when NASA resumed Shuttle flights in June 1988. (WSJ, Dec 24/87; W Post, Dec 24/87; W Times, Dec 24/87)
The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful than the American Space Shuttle. According to the Soviet Tass News Agency, the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central Asia, fired correctly but a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a "twostage multipurpose launch vehicle" capable of putting into orbit more than 100 tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could carry. (LA Times, May 17/87; C Trib, May 18/87; W Times, May 18/87)
NASA announced that the allowable endofmission landing weight for Space Shuttle orbiters would be increased from 211,000 to 230,000 pounds. The increase means that roughly 19,000 pounds more payload can be carried aloft. The new capability was made possible by structural analysis and additional review of forces encountered by the orbiter during maneuvers shortly before landing. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly said that this new capability would add considerable flexibility and efficiency to NASA's Space Transportation System. (NASA Release 87168; AvWk, Nov 9/87; W Post, Nov 10/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher issued a statement in response to Senator William Proxmire's request in Congress to abolish the Space Station program. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the Space Station proposal has been repeatedly debated in Congress and each time has received bipartisan congressional support. He stressed that by abolishing the Space Shuttle program, the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new scientific and technological advances and would "provide infrastructure for future exploration of the solar system by manned spacecraft." (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in Response to Senator Proxmire's Statement Asking for Abolishment of the Space Station, August 27, 1987)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force signed a pricing agreement, establishing reimbursement policies for Department of Defense (DoD) flights on the Space Shuttle and NASA flights on DoDprocured expendable launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87147)
NASA selected five American principal investigators and five Italian scientists for a joint U.S.Italian Tethered Satellite System (TSS1) project. The TSS1, a deplorable subsatellite to be 'tethered' to the Space Shuttle via a retractable cable, was expected to lift aboard Columbia in the fall of 1990. (NASA Release
The NASA Advisory Council recommended that the space agency acquire a diversified fleet of expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) to preserve the Space Shuttle for missions requiring unique capabilities. (NASA Release 8730)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and European Space Agency (ESA) Director General Reimar Luest announced that the Space Shuttle would be used for the launch of the joint NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the Sun in October 1990. At the same time, they announced that the launch, also from the Space Shuttle, of the Galileo mission to Jupiter had been moved up to October/November 1989. Since the distance to the Sun is considerably shorter than to Jupiter, the Ulysses spacecraft would begin to transmit data in 1994, a year earlier than the Galileo spacecraft. (NASA Release 8751) 0*0*0*April 6: NASA selected Boeing Computer Services Company, Seattle, Washington, for negotiating a technical and management information system contract in support of the Space Station program. (NASA Release 8752)
NASA released a report, requested by the U.S. Congress, on the extendedduration Space Shuttle orbiter. The report examined key aspects of a program that would allow the Space Shuttle to perform Earthorbital missions for as long as 16 days. An extendedduration orbiter, according to the report, would be of great benefit for space science and technology. It also could prove useful in developing experiments and crew procedures in preparation for the Space Station era. (NASA Release 87174)
An apparent technical problem forced the cancellation of the test firing of the redesigned 126footlong, 1.2millionpound Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, Development Motor9 (DM9), to be used in the first postChallenger flight. The failed test took place at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was cancelled one second before ignition. This was the second of at least five fullscale tests planned to check the operation of the booster's redesigned oring joints. The first fullduration test firing of a redesigned motor took place on August 30, 1987. (NASA Release 87183; P Inq, Dec 20/87; W Post, Dec 20/87)
Officials at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, reported that NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory would leave on October 31, 1987, for New Zealand on a monthlong mission to study the supernova SN1987a. Scientists aboard the Kuiper would make eight research flights to study the supernova, located 170,000 light years away. Supernova SN1987a is the closest supernova to Earth since the invention of a telescope some 400 years ago. (NASA Release 87162; AvWk, Nov. 9/87)h)#0*0*0*November 3: NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs James T. Rose announced new program initiatives to encourage and expand commercial space activity. Rose told some 270 executives from across the country, meeting for a threeday workshop in Nashville, Tennessee, that the new programs will build on earlier NASA commercial development policies. According to Rose, the agency already had awarded $50,000 grants to 206 small businesses for feasibility studies in this area. One of the program initiatives announced by Rose called for 28 percent space allocation for commercial secondary payloads aboard the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 87/165; NY Times, Nov 5/87; Tennessean, Nov 4/87; W Times, Nov 5/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
NASA announced plans to study the feasibility of building an untended rocket to carry heavy materials for use in Space Station construction. The proposed concept calls for a space freighter capable of carrying more than three times as much cargo as the Space Shuttle. The vehicle would use the same type of solid fuel boosters as the Space Shuttle. NASA surmised that such a vehicle, whose estimated costs were put at $1.5 billion, could be delivered in 1993. (H Chron, Aug 6/87; H Post, Aug 6/87; W Times, Aug 6/87; USA Today, Aug 6/87)
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced that the next Space Shuttle orbiter would be assembled in Palmdale, California. He gave costs and schedule factors as the reasons why this site was chosen over Califonia's Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 87100; H Chron, June 18/87)
A report sent to President Ronald Reagan by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle would have an escape hatch. But a decision on the rocket assist system necessary to eject the crew safely in emergency had not yet been made. The escape hatch was one of many significant changes made in the Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch in June 1988. Twentyone major changes were made in the Shuttle's main engines alone, in order to increase operating life, safety, and reliability. These and other changes listed in the NASA report to the White House reflected recommendations made by the Rogers Commission, following their H&investigation of the Challenger accident. (C Trib, July 2/87; LA Times, July 1/87; NY Times, July 1/87) During June: General Dynamics Corporation said that it would build 18 rockets over the next 5 years to launch communicationsh)0*0*0*satellites. According to a company spokesman, General Dynamics would spend $100 million to start production of the AtlasCentaur rocket. General Dynamics became the third U.S. company, together with McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, to attempt to move into launch vehicles production after the Challenger accident. (WSJ, June 16/87)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced NASA had completed negotiations with Rockwell International to build a replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. The new orbiter would contain existing structural spares, but would also feature the latest technology evolving from the current returntoflight activities. The new Space Shuttle orbiter was expected to be ready for use within 45 months. (NASA Release
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
NASA announced that White Sands Space Harbor, New Mexico, was designated an alternate endofmission landing site for Space Shuttle missions STS26 through STS28. The new site was to be used for a Shuttle landing when conditions at Edwards Air Force Base in California precluded landing. (NASA Release 87 189)
NASA and West Germany signed a cooperative Earthh)!0*0*0*observation agreement. Under the agreement, West Germany, together with Italy, was to provide an Xband synthetic aperture radar (XSAR) to fly with the spaceborne imaging radarc (SIRC) on the Space Shuttle. The SIRC will allow the Shuttleborne imaging radar mission to view a site from different angles and at different radar frequencies. An advanced XSAR was expected to combine later with the NASA Earth Observation System to fly on a NASA polar platform, providing a third frequency to the combined mission. (NASA Release 87149)
President Ronald Reagan's proposed fiscal year 1987 budget called for a 12.7 percent increase in NASA funding. The intent of the increase in the NASA budget was to resume the Space Shuttle flights, which had been suspended after the Challenger disaster. The President's budget also called for nearly $767 million for work on the crewtended Space Shuttle. No funds were included for the untended rockets program, despite recommendations by several expert panels that NASA was overdependent on the Space Shuttle. (NY Times, Jan 6/87)
NASA announced that the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite would be launched on a Delta expendable launch vehicle in early 1989 rather than on the Space Shuttle in July 1988, as originally planned. The change in schedule was caused by the backlog of science payloads awaiting launch on the Space Shuttle as a result of the Challenger accident. Designed to study the "Big Bang," COBE would be launched into a 560statutemile, sunsynchronous orbit from Vandenburg Air Force Base in California. Because of the switch from the Shuttle to Delta, COBE would be reduced in weight from 10,500 pounds to 5,000 pounds and in size from 15 feet to 8 feet in diameter. Scaling down the spacecraft would also require that COBE be redesigned. (NASA Release 871)
NASA announced that Morton Thiokol Space Division, a NASA contractor, would test fire the first redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor on August 27, 1987. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound development motor (DM8) would be fitted with 250 instruments to measure acceleration, pressure, deflection, thrust, strain, temperature, and electrical properties. (NASA Release 87125)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers announced that James T. Rose had been selected as Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, effective October 5, 1987. He would be responsible for NASA's commercial programs, the use of space by the U.S. private sector, the use of NASA technology by private industry, and NASA's support of innovative research by small business firms. James T. Rose joined NASA in 1957 as a research engineer for the Vanguard Program experiments. In 1962 he became head of the Manned Spacecraft Center's Mission Planning Office for the Gemini flights. From 1964 to 1974, Rose held a series of key positions at the McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. He returned to NASA in 1974 as Director, Space Shuttle Engineering, in the Office of Space Flight. From 1976 to 1986, he was Director of McDonnell Douglas' Space Manufacturing Initiatives. In June 1987, he again returned to NASA to become the Director of Space in NASA's Office of H&Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 87145; Huntsville Times, Oct 1/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain and strengthen the existing Space Shuttle processing arrangement at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, with Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida. The decision was recommended by a senior review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. The group was chaired by Roy S. Estess, Deputy Director, National Space Technology Laboratories, Mississippi, and included representatives from NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 8726)
NASA announced that two Shuttle crew escape systems would be tested in November at the Naval Weapons Center in China Lake, California, using dummies and Navy volunteers. NASA is toh)$0*0*0*make a decision early in 1988 on whichif eitherof the two systems would be installed aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. One of the escape systems involved the installation of twofootlong tractor rockets that would extract the astronauts through an open hatch. The other system consisted of a telescoping slide pole that would extend through the hatch for the crew members to slide down, away from the disabled spacecraft. The crew would be connected to the rocket or the slide pole with a lanyard. Neither system would be of use in a Challengertype explosion that occurred without warning. But either could function in the event of a main engine failure aborting the mission during launch. Both systems require the Shuttle to be equipped with a hatch that can be blown off the spacecraft in an emergency. (NASA Release 87170; H Chron, Nov 13/87; H Post, Nov 13/87; NY Times, Nov 14/87)
The Soviet Union launched into orbit a Soyuz TM3 with two Soviet cosmonauts and a Syrian space traveler aboard. The liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome, in Soviet Kazakhstan, was the Soviet Union's third crewtended space launch since the U.S. Space Shuttle explosion on January 28, 1986. The Soyuz TM3, piloted by Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Alexandrov, was scheduled to dock with the Soviet Mir space station after two days of orbiting around the Earth. The Syrian space traveler, Lieutenant Colonel Mohammed Faris, was the second Arab in space. The first was the Saudi Prince Sultan bin Salman, a nephew of Saudi Arabia's King Fahd. Prince Sultan bin Salman was a payload specialist aboard the (#U.S. Shuttle Discovery in 1985. (H Chron, July 22/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
Five aerospace firms were awarded contracts by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, to develop preliminary advanced solid rocket motor designs for the Space Shuttle. The five firms receiving the awards were Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, Sacramento, California; Atlantic Research Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia; Hercules Aerospace Company's Aerospace division of Salt Lake city, Utah; Morton Thiokol Inc., Brigham City, Utah; and United Technologies Chemical System Division, San Jose, California. The results of the preliminary studies would determine whether NASA will pursue the design, development, test and production of an advanced motor for Shuttle flights in fiscal year 1989. (NASA Release 87120)
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
NASA announced that 5 civilians and 10 military officers were selected as new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. Of the 15, 7 were chosen as pilot astronaut candidates and 8 as mission specialist candidates. The elite group also included the first Black woman, Dr. Mae C. Jemison, to be chosen for the program. (NASA Release 8793; NY Times, June 6/87; LA Times, June 6/87; H Chron, June 6/87)
NASA announced that Morton Thiokol, Inc., the builder of the booster rocket that caused the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion, voluntarily accepted a $10 million reduction in fees and agreed to take no profit from $409 million worth of work required to fix future rockets. The company also agreed to replace the rockets lost in the accident. The agreement between Thiokol and NASA negated any lawsuits growing out of the January 28, 1986, accident that destroyed the Shuttle and killed the crew of seven. (C Trib, Feb 25/87; W Post, Feb 25/87; B Sun, Feb 25/87; WSJ, Feb 25/87)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
NASA set a target launch date of September 29 for STS26, the next Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of the launch date followed an updated assessment of the projected impact of Hurricane Gilbert on mission control and training facilities at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. In connection with the announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said, "NASA's decision to set this launch date is based on over two years of persistence and dedication by NASA and contractor personnel, culminating in the STS26 flight readiness review held at the Kennedy Space Center on
Engineers at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah concluded that a design flaw had led to the failure of a previously untested Space Shuttle booster part during a fullscale test firing December 23. NASA officials delayed the flight schedule after they discovered that a portion of the booster's nozzle assembly, which guides the vehicle, had fallen apart during testing, a month Engineers finished taking the booster motor apart and recovered all six missing pieces of the failed nozzle part. Known as the outer boot ring, the failed part anchored the booster's nozzle to a flexible rubbery "boot" that allowed the nozzle to swivel. One purpose of the boot ring was to shield the metal and rubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intense heat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster's nozzle was deliberately moved to the maximum seven degreessome three degrees beyond what would be required during a normal Shuttle flight. NASA was looking into the possibility that the extreme steering might have caused the boot ring to come apart or A group of officials at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, developers of the original design test requirements for an extreme swiveling of the nozzle, studied whether the maneuver should be repeated in future tests of whatever design is adopted, or whether a less severe maneuver would be an adequate test under the more stringent, postChallenger standards. The test failure would probably force a delay of 6 to 10 weeks in the resumption of Space Shuttle flights, delaying the STS26 flight of Discovery to no earlier than August 1988. (NASA Release 87190; UPI, Jan 4/88; W Post, Jan 5/88; NY Times, Jan 6/88) 0*January 11: Speaking at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics supported Aerospace Sciences Conference, Ross M. Jones, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, presented a proposal to launch very small, low cost scientific probes to various destinations in the solar system by using Earthorbiting electromagnetic launchers or railguns. Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong electromagnetic forces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities, were being developed by the U.S. military for use both on the ground and in space. (NASA Release 884; M News, Jan 11/88; W Times, Jan 11/88; LA Times, Jan 11/88; LA Star News, Jan 12/88)
Defense Shuttle mission to an expendable launch vehicle. (Payload Flight AssignmentsNASA Mixed Fleet, Aug 1988; NASA Release 88120) During August: A Cray YMP, the fastest supercomputer in the world, arrived at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and underwent acceptance tests in the Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) Facility. The NAS was established as a national facility available to leading U.S. research institutions through a national network. It had longterm support from Congress to use the fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress in U.S. aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics, and chemistry. Supercomputer systems were complementing and extending aerospace research being done in wind tunnels and highvelocity (4,000 to 15,000 mph) shock tunnels. The new YMP central processor would not only solve old problems four times as fast as existing systems, but also would be used to investigate flow phenomena that could not be investigated currently by wind tunnels or computers. Another important application of the NAS supercomputer system would be the modeling of air flows for hypersonic vehicles such as the National AeroSpace Plane and the Space Shuttle. '!0*Ames was the first customer to take delivery of this new supercomputer, expected to be fully operational by January 1989. (ARC Release 8880)
The fifth and final test of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, prior to resumption of Shuttle flights, was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126footlong, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), underwent a full duration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. The motor was extensively flawed to demonstrate the failsafe characteristics of the redesign. (NASA Release 88113; AP, Aug 18/88; UPI, Aug 18/88; NY Times, Aug 19/88; W Post, Aug 19/88; WSJ, Aug 19/88; USA Today, Aug 19/88; W Times, Aug 19/88; B Sun, Aug 19/88 )
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, inaugurated its Mark III Hypercube parallel supercomputer, the result of a 5year research and development effort at the JPL Center for Space Microelectronics Technology and the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). The Mark III spearheaded the arrival of massively parallel supercomputing. Its first module, placed online at the Caltech computer network, contained 32 nodes, or processing units, which together had a peak speed of about 512 million floating point operations per second. Three more 32node modules would be added during the next nine months to form a 128node hypercube with a peak speed of 2 billion floating point operations per second. The Mark II Hypercube was being used for scientific, engineering, and defense research applications, including analysis of NASA multispectral space imaging data; analysis of NASA synthetic aperture radar images taken from the Space Shuttle; and simulation of the Strategic Defense System. (NASA Release 8888)
NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles through fiscal year 1993. Two interplanetary missions were planned for launch in 1989: Magellan, a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative project with Germany to survey Jupiter and its moons. The Hubble Space Telescope also maintained the flight assignment date of June 1989. Astro1, a Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in the ultraviolet spectrum, was being reconfigured to enhance the study of Supernova 1987a and was slated to fly on STS35 in November 1989. Two additional Spacelab missions were assigned flights for September 1990a Spacelab Life Sciences mission in March and the first Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS1)0*mission. The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in the projected schedule for a March 1990 launch, and the Ulysses mission to study the Sun and its environment remained at the projected
An engineer who, only hours before the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch the spacecraft in cold weather was named a winner of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award. Roger M. Boisjoly, a former engineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.the manufacturer of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor blamed for the Challenger accident that0*killed seven crew memberswas honored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for attempting to halt the launch and for his attempts to have the flawed rocket redesigned. The AAAS, in an announcement, cited Boisjoly "for his exemplary and repeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as an engineer by alerting others to life threatening design problems on the Challenger Space Shuttle and for steadfastly recommending against the tragic launch." Boisjoly was to receive the AAAS award during February 14 ceremonies in Boston. (LA Star News, Jan 27/88)
The fourth fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor7 (QM7), underwent a fullduration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. After a preliminary examination of the fired motor, NASA and Morton Thiokol officials declared the test an apparent success. The exercise involved the first use of a new test stand at Morton Thiokol. One remaining fullduration test, Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), would be conducted in July, prior to the next Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 887; NY Times, Jun 15/88)
The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
NASA submitted to the Congress its acquisition plan for the Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The plan contained NASA's strategy for a full and open competition to introduce an ASRM into the Shuttle system. NASA contended that a new booster design would result in substantive improvements in flight safety, reliability, and performance over the current SRMs produced by contractor Morton Thiokol. The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advanced version of the segmented boosters currently in use in the Shuttle program. The new boosters would have a more reliable field joint design and would be more powerful than the current SRMs, providing for a 12,000pound increase in the Shuttle's payload capacity. Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttling the Space Shuttle's main engines during the period of maximum dynamic pressure, thereby reducing or eliminating about 175 "criticality 1/1r" failure modes for the Shuttle system. An important aspect of NASA's ASRM acquisition plan was the proposal that the boosters be developed in a new Governmentowned contractor operated (GOCO) facility and that the contract be subjected to competitive bidding. In response to protests by Morton Thiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, led by Senator Jake Garn, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility of building the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. The overall cost to develop the ASRM was estimated at just under $1 billion, including modern tooling and equipment, plus $200$300 million for construction of facilities. Under the current production schedule, the first ASRMs would be flight certified by 1993. Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the ASRM at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 8854; UPI, Apr 18/88; AP, Apr 19/88; USA Today, Apr 19/88; W Times, Apr 19/88; NY Times Apr 20/88; W Post Apr 20/88; WSJ, Apr 20/88; )
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
A segment of a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was test fired at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah in a test of the solid rocket motor nozzle joint. The overall test objective was to evaluate performance of the redesigned solid rocket motor casetonozzle joint that had an insulation adhesive defect and damaged oring in order to determine the failsafe performance of the redesigned joint. The redesigned casetonozzle joint included 100 added radial bolts, adhesively bonded insulation surfaces, and an added "wiper" oring designed to keep the adhesive on the insulation surfaces during assembly. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. (NASA Release 8823)
NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
A Wet Countdown Demonstration Test (WCDT) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's External Tank (ET) was conducted following several unplanned holds as a result of problems with ground support equipment. The WCDDT, carried out with Discovery deployed for launch at the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39B, consisted of loading the ET with liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen in mock preparation for a Shuttle launch. (NASA STS26 Press Kit)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
NASA issued the newest update of its mixedfleet manifest, reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles (launch vehicles) through fiscal year 1993. The manifest reflected changes made to accommodate a slower than expected resumption of Shuttle flights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve the launch windows for three major planetary missions. Among the major changes made was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch from
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on the agency's proposed 1989 budget. He stressed that 1989 would be a crucial year for NASA, a year that would "make or break" the Nation's space program. The proposed budget included funds to increase the rate of Shuttle flights in 1989 in order to "fly off" the backlog of vital defense and science missions. A build up of funding for Space Station hardware development was also requested. Dr. Fletcher testified that the requested additional funds for the Space Station were the minimum necessary to avoid the disbandment of development teams and the indefinite deferral or cancellation of that program. He also warned that if funds for advanced technology were not approved, the necessary technological foundation for future achievements would not be built, and the goal of longterm U.S. space leadership would "become an idle dream." (1989 NASA Authorization Hearings Before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 8831; AP, Mar 22/88; W Times Mar 23/88; LA Times Mar 23/88)
NASA announced that it would remove and inspect the liquid oxygen turbopumps aboard the Shuttle Discovery, a move that was expected to delay Discovery's launch beyond the scheduled date of August 4. The pumps will be inspected to ensure that critical bolts in the devices are properly tightened and have not been stripped. Delays resulting from the inspection are expected to push back Discovery's launch date until late August. (UPI, Apr 2/88; W Post, Apr 3/88; USA Today, Apr 4/88; P Inq, Apr 4/88)
The third fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was carried out at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126foot long, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor6 (QM6), underwent a fullduration horizontal test firing of two minutes. The test, tentatively labeled a success, was the third of five test firings to be carried out prior to the scheduled resumption of Shuttle flights in August 1988. (NASA Release 8851; MSFC Releases 8843, 8844; AP, Apr 20/88; UPI, Apr 20/88; NY Times Apr 21/88; W Post, Apr 21/88; USA Today, Apr 21/88; W Times, Apr0*21/88)
After an aborted first attempt on August 4, a 22second flight readiness firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines was conducted on the launch pad at the Kennedy Space0*Center's Launch Complex 39B. The first FRF attempt had been halted inside the T10 second mark because of a sluggish fuel bleed valve on the number 2 main engine. The faulty valve was replaced prior to the FRF. (AP, Aug 10/88; UPI, Aug 10/88; NY Times, Aug 11/88; W Post, Aug 11/88; WSJ, Aug 11/88; CSM, Aug 11/88; W Times, Aug 11/88; B Sun, Aug 11/88; P Inq, Aug 11/88)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was rolled out to Launch Pad 39B for a scheduled launch in late November of STS27, a classified Department of Defense mission. (NASA Release 88171) '&0*November 6: A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched into orbit aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle. Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988)
NASA selected a telescoping pole as the egress method for the Space Shuttle's new crew escape system. The escape system, to be carried on all future Shuttle flights, would provide crew escape capability from the orbiter during controlled, gliding flight following failures or difficulties during ascent or entry where landing at a suitable landing field could not be achieved. Tests conducted in February and March, using a fixed pole extending through a hatchlike opening in a C141 aircraft, demonstrated that the pole would provide adequate orbiter clearance in an emergency egress situation. The telescoping pole system had been chosen over an alternative tractor rocket extraction system. (NASA Release 8850; JSC Release 88014; AP Apr 8/88; NY Times, Apr 8/88; W Post, Apr 8/88; USA Today, Apr 8/88; LA Times, C Trib, Apr 9/88; Apr 8/88; P Inq Apr 8/88; H Post, Apr 8/88; H Chron, Apr 8/88)
The fifth firing in a series of Transient Pressure Test Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program. For this test, flaws were intentionally cut into both the test article's field joints, the casetonozzle joint, and other components of the redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify the structural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability of the redesigned field and casetonozzle joints. (MSFC Release on
NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope from February 1990 to an earlier date of December 1989. The earlier date was made possible following reassessment of a variety of factors, including payload requirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during the period. (NASA Release 88143)
Morton Thiokol announced that it would not bid on a $1.5 billion contract to build the proposed Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). Instead, Thiokol officials stated they would concentrate on building the current generation of redesigned solid rocket motors, currently undergoing final testing prior to the resumption of Space Shuttle flights in September. (UPI, Jun 6/88; AP, Jun 6/88; NY Times, Jun 7/88; WSJ, Jun 7/88; LA Times, Jun
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
NASA commemorated the second anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. At the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, workers preparing to resume Shuttle flights paused to pay silent tribute to the Challenger crew by halting all activity at 11:38 a.m., the time of the Challenger lift off from launch Pad 39B on January 28, 1986. Flags around KSC and at NASA Centers throughout the country were lowered to half staff while workers stood silent for 73 seconds, the length of the fatal Challenger flight. Just before the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S. McCartney spoke to workers over a television circuit and loudspeakers saying: "As we make preparations to return the Space Shuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to remember the men and women of the Challenger crew." (UPI, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 29/88; C Trib, Jan 29/88;
A series of powerful explosions destroyed the Pacific Engineering & Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring over 350 people. The plant was a major supplier of the ammonium perchlorate oxidizer used aboard the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motors and other military and civilian boosters. The explosions produced flames that shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 footwide crater at the facility site. Seismographs at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 200 miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two of the blasts registered at 3.0 and 3.5 on the Richter scale. The cause of the explosions was investigated. 0*The destruction of the oxidizer plant raised concerns among NASA and contractor Morton Thiokol over the availability of solid fuel oxidizer beyond the next four Space Shuttle flights. A prolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering's production activities would also threaten the military's missile production schedule. (UPI, May 5/88; AP, May 5/88; NY Times, May 5/88; W Post, May 5/88; WSJ, May 5/88; USA Today, May 5/88; W Times, May 5/88; B Sun, May 5/88;
It was announced in a recent NASA press briefing that there had been a total of 230 reported "close calls" since the Challenger accident. A "close call" was defined by NASA as an incident in which there is no injury, no damage, and no impact on schedule, but which possesses the potential for a more serious mishap. (NASA Release 12988)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
Negotiators from NASA and the government of Japan reached agreement in substance on the text of a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the permanently crew tended civil Space Station. The Japanese Science and Technology Agency would serve as NASA's counterpart in implementing this MOU. Under the terms of the new MOU, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM)a permanently attached, pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The pressurized portion of the JEM would provide a shirtsleeve environment for the Space Station crew to perform research activities. The JEM's exposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earth observation, communications, advanced technology development and other activities requiring direct exposure to space. The experiment logistics module, which would provide transportation and storage of logistics items, would be transported to the Station by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8870)
NASA announced selection of the Government sites to be used as production and testing facilities for the Agency's planned Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The Tennessee Valley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM production facility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilization also would be made of available manufacturing and computer capability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the Slidell Computer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimize total program costs. The planned ASRM, which would replace the current Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid1990s, would incorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability and safety margins, as well as provide a significant added performance capability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88104; MSFC Release 88102; UPI, Jul 27/88; W Post, Jul 27/88; USA Today, Jul 27/88) During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of a new hightemperature superconductor. According to a paper published in Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrated that "samples of yttriumbariumcopper oxide, when mixed with silver oxide, heat treated, and exposed to 320 degrees Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trapped in the sample." Because superconducting material excludes a magnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch. According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of the scientific team, the implications of high temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous. "In space, with the elimination of the weight associated with gravity, it should be possible to develop lowvibration, lowfriction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance of the discovery is that this new material not only has stronger suspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties: it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normal temperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than other high temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88104)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
NASA announced that it had negotiated a contract with Rockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division to consolidate Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida launch site. Under the contract, Rockwell's orbiter logistics operations in Downey, California, would be transferred to existing Launch Support Operations activity at KSC. During this same period, Rockwell's component overhaul and repair activities would move from its network of original Shuttle equipment manufacturers to the Rockwell Service Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. The move would complete a consolidation begun in 1985. (NASA Release 88156)
EG&G Florida, Inc. was awarded a $635,529 contract to make modifications to the Space Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF). This work would include grinding a 3,500foot section at each end of the runway to smooth the surface texture, removing cross grooves and adding longitudinal "corduroy grooving." Additionally, existing landing zone light fixtures were to be modified and markings on the entire runway and overruns repainted. These modifications were intended to enhance landing safety by reducing Space Shuttle orbiter tire wear during landing operations. The SLF is 15,000 feet long and 300 feet wide, with a 1,000foot paved safety overrun at each end. Work was scheduled to begin January 26 and be completed by midMarch 1988. (NASA Release 8810)
NASA announced that it would lease to the U.S. Government unassigned space aboard a commercially developed space facility. The leasing agreement would apply for five years beginning at the end of fiscal year 1993. At least 30 percent of the facility would be available for commercial use. The facility would be deployed, checked out, and serviced periodically on orbit by Space Shuttle crews. It would provide a crewtended, shirtsleeve workspace and would also be able to operate in an untended, freeflying mode, providing a microgravity environment for periods of four to six months. NASA would initiate an open competition to be managed by the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 8825)
After several delays, the Soviet Union successfully completed an automated orbital flight test of the Space Shuttle Buran. The untended Soviet orbiterwhich is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiterswas launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198foot Energia rocket with two strapon boosters in a configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlike the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's engines for ascent to orbit. According to Soviet sources, the Soviet shuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landinga capability the U.S. Shuttles lack. After completing two orbits, Buran landed successfully on a 2.7mile runway at the Baikonur facility, ending the 31/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agency hailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude to crewtended Shuttle flights. In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBISSOV88222,''0*Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A; AP, Nov 15/88; UPI, Nov 15/88; NY Times, Nov 16/88; WSJ, Nov 16/88; W Post, Nov 16/88; LA Times, Nov 15/88; W Times, Nov 16/88; B Sun, Nov 16/88; P Inq, Nov 16/88; C Trib, Nov
The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle was rolled out of the Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) to Launch Pad 39B in preparation for mission STS26, scheduled for late September. (UPI, Jul 4/88; NY Times, Jul 5/88; W Post, Jul 5/88; WSJ, Jul 5/88; W Times, Jul 5/88; P Inq, Jul
NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a longduration, humantended scientific satellite called the Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA's four proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would study highenergy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable information about these phenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic research in plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the various forms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determine whether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could be scheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatory would be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 1215 tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above the Earth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 881)
NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747100 jetliner to serve as a second Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) for the space transportation system. A letter contract was signed with Boeing Military Airplane Company, a division of the Boeing Company, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for NASA use. The additional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability and eliminate a potential singlepoint failure in the space transportation system. The 231foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttle orbiter vehicles from landing sites to orbiter processing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The 747100, which is nearly identical to the original SCA, was selected to minimize costs associated with modifications and operation. (NASA Release 8828; JSC Release 88005) During February:
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
A Space Systems Development Agreement was signed by NASA and Spacehab, Inc., a private firm that was developing a Shuttlebased pressurized module for commercial applications. According to the agreement, NASA agreed to provide Shuttle payload bay space for Spacehab's middeck augmentation module on six Shuttle flights beginning in 1991. Spacehab would pay $28.2 million (adjusted for inflation) for standard services for each flight. The Spacehab module, to be constructed by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntsville, Alabama, would be a metal truncated cylinder measuring 10 feet in length by 13 feet in diameter, designed to fit in the Shuttle's cargo bay. Shuttle crew members would access the module through a tunnel from the Shuttle's middeck. The company would make available to customers a variety of locker and rack accommodations, with associated support and integration services. Spacehab was specifically identified in the President's Commercial Space Initiative, announced in February, in which the Reagan administration committed to make the best efforts to launch the commercial module in the early 1990s.(NASA Release 88114)
The fifth and final shortduration solid rocket motor Nozzle Joint Environment Simulator (NJES) firing test was carried out. The overall objective of the test, part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program, was to evaluate the failsafe performance of the redesigned casetonozzle joint with verified defects. (NASA Release 8856)
The Japanese Science and Technology Agency announced a 10year plan to develop an untended space plane and a series of robots capable of assembling and repairing satellites in space. The Agency also said that Japan would begin preliminary research into a crew tended space shuttle. (UPI, Jun 28/89; W Times, Jun 30/89)
Antinuclear activists in Florida protested the launch aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis next month of the Galileo space probe, which would carry two plutoniumfueled radioisotope thermoelectric generators. The protesters claimed an accident aboard the Atlantis similar to the Challenger explosion could contaminate large parts of Florida and lead to hundreds of cancerrelated deaths. NASA and the White House maintained that the0*chances of a plutonium leak in the event of an accident was negligible. Galileo was scheduled to reach Jupiter in late 1995. AP, Sep 12/89; UPI, Sep 12/89; USA Today, Sep 13/89)
A launch attempt of the Space Shuttle Atlantis was scrubbed 31 seconds before scheduled liftoff because of a power surge on a pump that recirculates liquid hydrogen fuel for one of the Shuttle main engines. Shuttle technicians were working to replace the pump and a leaky fuel line that was discovered after the scrub. A new launch attempt was expected to be made as early as Thursday. (UPI, Apr 2930/89; AP, Apr 30/89; W Post, May 1/89; NY Times, May 1/89; USA Today, May 1/89; B Sun, May 1/89; P Inq, May
the Sun, the Earth's atmosphere, and deep space objects. In April 1984, Solar Max was retrieved by the Space Shuttle Challenger (Mission 41C) for inorbit repairs and redeployment. Solar Max's orbit had been deteriorating faster than expected over the past0*several months because of unusually high solar activity, which caused the Earth's atmosphere to expand and increase the amount of aerodynamic drag experienced by the satellite. (SSR 1980 014 A; AP, Dec 2/89; UPI, Dec 2/89; NY Times, Dec 3/89; W Post, Dec 3/89; P Inq, Dec 3/89; B Sun, Dec 3/8)
Threetime spaceflight veteran Navy Captain Frederick Hauck, Commander of the first postChallenger Shuttle mission, announced he would leave NASA on April 3 to join the Pentagon staff of the Chief of Naval Operations. (NASA Release 8939, Mar 23/89)
NASA scientists reported that a group of eight newly fertilized chicken embryos carried aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS28 had failed to hatch upon returning to Earth, raising questions about the viability of animal reproduction in zero gravity. A group of 16 eggs fertilized nine days before launch were all successfully hatched. Of a third group of eight eggs scheduled to hatch Saturday, only a few embryos remained viable. Discovery astronaut James Bagian speculated that the results may indicate that gravity plays a previously unknown critical role during the process of cell differentiation. Bagian suggested that, should the experiment demonstrate a relationship between gravity and embryogenesis, the results would have "great0*implications" for future longduration space missions. (UPI, Mar 29/89; W Post, Mar 30/89; P Inq, Mar 30/89; NY Times, Mar 31/89)
The Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia was accidentally sprayed with water when an automatic sprinkler system went off unexpectedly inside the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) Orbiter Processing Facility No. 2. KSC engineers examined the orbiter for damage and planned an investigation of the incident. (UPI, Sep 24/89; W Times, Sep 25/89; USA Today, Sep 25/89)
A Space Shuttle main engine shut down prematurely and suffered severe damage during a fullduration test firing at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. NASA engineers said that a high speed liquid oxygen pump "came apart" during the test firing, causing a fire and structural damage to Rocketdyne engine No. 0212. This was the first serious malfunction of a main engine since 1985. (#(MSFC Release 89125, Jun 26/89; UPI, Jun 23/89; NY Times, Jun 28/89; W Times, Jun 28/89)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was successfully launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS34 to0*deploy the $1.4 billion Galileo Jupiter space probe. The Atlantis launch had been delayed by a week because of problems with a computer, a main engine master control device, and, finally, rain. Shortly after reaching orbit, Atlantis released the Galileo probe and the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) from the cargo bay. The IUS subsequently fired Galileo on a trajectory toward Venus, in preparation for a gravity assist maneuver that would swing the spacecraft back toward Earth twice and onward to Jupiter. Galileo was scheduled to reach Jupiter in December 1995, whereupon it would begin orbiting the planet for 22 months of observations of the Jovian system. Approximately five months before reaching Jupiter, Galileo would release a 34inch unpowered descent module that would enter the Jovian upper atmosphere and descend several hundred miles before being destroyed by extreme atmospheric pressure. The AtlantisGalileo mission had sparked protests and a law suit by antinuclear groups concerned over the danger of possible radioactive contamination from the probe's radioisotope thermal generators in the event of a catastrophic accident. In anticipation of possible efforts to disrupt the launch, NASA increased security measures at KSC. In addition to launching Galileo, the STS34 crew would conduct observations of the Earth's ozone layer and perform several onboard medical, biological, and materials processing experiments. The crew included Navy Captain Donald E. Williams (Commander), Navy Commander Michael J. McCulley (Pilot), and Mission Specialists Shannon Lucid, Franklin Changaz, and Ellen S. Baker. The mission ended successfully on October 23 with Atlantis landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA MOR 829348901; NASA PFOR M9898934; NASA STS34 Press Kit, Oct/89; NASA Facts: STS34; Galileo/KSC Release 7989, Sep/89; SSR 1989 084 AD; UPI, Oct 19/89; AP, Oct 19/89; NY Times, Oct 19/89; W Post, Oct 19/89; USA Today, Oct 19/89; WSJ, Oct 19/89; P Inq, Oct 19/89; W Times, Oct 19/89; B Sun, Oct 19/89)
NASA rolled out a fullscale mockup of the proposed ShuttleC, a new heavy lift launch vehicle based on Space Shuttle technology. The 115foot mockup, constructed in a Hangar at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was put on display in an effort to gain support for funding of the $1.5 billion ShuttleC development program in the fiscal year 1991 Federal budget. The ShuttleC would be an untended launch vehicle that would fly "piggyback" on the standard Shuttle SRM and external tank assembly and would have a greater payload capacity than the current Shuttles. ShuttleC could substitute for the crewtended0*Shuttles in the launching of components for Space Station Freedom. AP, Apr 18/89; LA Times, Apr 19;/89)
Dale D. Myers, the acting NASA Administrator, announced his plans to resign effective May 13. Myers had served as the NASA Deputy Administrator from October 6, 1986, when he was recruited to return to NASA by President Ronald Reagan. During his tenure, Myers was instrumental in guiding NASA through the period of recovery following the Challenger accident of January 28, 1986. (NASA Release 8949, Apr 13/89)
The Space Shuttle Columbia was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on mission STS28 to deploy a classified Department of Defense payload. This was the first launch of the Columbia orbiter in the three and a half years since the explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger. Various media sources reported that Columbia had deployed an advanced military reconnaissance satellite and performed tests of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) hardware. Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on Sunday, August 13. (SSR 1989 061A; NASA PFOR, 9898928; NASA MOR, E1998928; UPI, Aug 8/89; AP, Aug 8/89; NY Times, Aug 9/89; W Post, Aug 9/89; W Times, Aug 9/89; USA Today, Aug 9/89; LA Times, Aug 9/89; C Trib, Aug 9/89; P Inq, Aug 9/89; B Sun, Aug 9/89)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, on mission STS30, whose main objective was to deploy the $550 million Magellan Venus radar mapper. Magellan, the first United States interplanetary mission to' 0*be launched in 11 years, was deployed from the cargo bay of Atlantis 6 hours after launch and was subsequently propelled toward the Sun and Venus by a solid fuel inertial upper stage (IUS). Following the IUS firing, ground controllers confirmed that the spacecraft was operating normally and was on a proper course toward Venus. Upon arriving at Venus in August 1990, the 7,700pound Magellan would enter Venusian orbit for several months of extensive radar mapping of the planet's cloud shrouded surface. Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on May 8. (NASA MOR, C6008930, E1998930; NASA PFOR, M9898930; SSR 1989 033AB; UPI, May 5/89; NY Times, May 5/89;W Post, May 5/89; WSJ, May 5/89; P Inq, May 5/89; B Sun, May 5/89; W Times, May 5/89; USA Today, May
A report by the Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) entitled "Round Trip to Orbit: Human Space Flight Alternatives" recommended construction of a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter or a Shuttlederived launch vehicle in preparation for the Space Station assembly missions of the late 1990s. Citing estimates of Space Shuttle reliability of 97 to 99 percent, OTA warned that there was an 88 percent likelihood that another Shuttle orbiter would be lost before Space Station construction is completed. The OTA report stated: "Buying more orbiters would increase the resiliency of the Space Shuttle system...[and] its ability to recover rapidly from loss of another orbiter or any other event that delays launches. The Shuttle orbiter fleet is likely to continue to suffer occasional attrition." (AP, Aug 2/89; UPI, Aug 2/89; W Post, Aug
President George Bush chose the name "Endeavour" for the new Space Shuttle orbiter being built to replace the orbiter Challenger. The name "Endeavour" resulted from a nationwide orbiternaming competition supported by educational projects created by student teams in elementary and secondary schools. Endeavour was the name of the first ship commanded by James Cook, a British explorer, navigator, and astronomer. Cook commanded the Endeavour on its maiden voyage to the South Pacific on an astronomical and mapping mission. The new orbiter, designated OV105, was scheduled to be completed in 1991 and to fly its maiden voyage in March 1992. (NASA Release 8970, May 10/89)
The Space Shuttle Discovery was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on mission STS29, the main objective to deploy the final Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS4). Discovery carried a crew of five on a 5day mission. Six hours into the mission, the 2.5 ton $100 million TDRS4 was successfully deployed into low Earth orbit where it subsequently boosted itself into a 22,300 mile geosynchronous orbit. Discovery also carried biological experiments that to conduct studies of the embryonic development of chickens and bone healing in rats in a microgravity environment. The STS28 crew would also photograph and film environmentally damaged areas throughout the world for later scientific analysis. Discovery's launch had been delayed a month because of cracks found in the main engine turbopumps. Replacement occurred on the launch pad. During the mission, a hydrogen tank supplying the Shuttle's fuel cells was temporarily shut down because of erratic pressure readings. The problem, which caused a temporary electricity shortage aboard the Shuttle, was resolved the following day, allowing Discovery to stay in orbit for five days as planned. Discovery successfully landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on March 19. (NASA MOR/Flight Operation Report, M9898829; SSR 1989 021A; AP, Mar 1319/89; UPI, Mar 1319/89; NY Times, Mar 1420/89; WSJ, Mar 1420/89; W Post, Mar 1420/89; W Times, Mar 1420/89; USA Today, Mar 1420/89; P Inq, Mar 1420/89; B Sun, Mar 1420/89)
NASA named 18 astronauts to fly on future Space Shuttle missions, including the first AfricanAmerican woman and the first member of the Coast Guard to fly aboard the Shuttle. Dr. Mae Jemison, a physician, would become the first African American woman to fly in space. She was scheduled for the June 17, 1991, Spacelab mission aboard Discovery. (AP, Sep 9/89; UPI, Sep 29/89; USA Today, Oct 4/89; W Times, Oct 2/89) During September: The Soviet news magazine Izvestia published an article confirming that the Soviet Union had established a secret program in the 1960s to beat the United States in landing astronauts on the Moon. The Izvestia article claimed that the Soviet Union had secretly conducted a crewassisted lunar landing program from 1961 to 1969 comparable to the Apollo program and had developed a boosterknown as the N1comparable to the United States Saturn V. The Soviet lunar program was eventually abandoned after three attempts to launch the N1 failed; the United States successfully landed astronauts on the Moon in 1969. (FBISSov89210, Nov 1/89; H Chron, Sep 17/89)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that a NASA T38 jet trainer aircraft being flown by a Space Shuttle astronaut had experienced a near collision with a Pan American World Airways widebody jet about 30 miles West of Washington, DC. The pilots of the Airbus A310 jetliner reported the two planes had come within 500 feet of each other while on perpendicular flight paths. The T38 was flown by Navy Captain David M. Walker, Commander of the recently completed Space Shuttle mission STS28. The near collision occurred when Walker's aircraft strayed below its assigned flight elevation. (AP, May 17/89; UPI, May 17/89; NY Times, May 17/89; W Post, May 17/89; B Sun, May 17/89)
Morton Thiokol conducted a fullscale test firing of a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM), Qualification Motor 8 (QM8), under conditions simulating a coldweather launch. The QM8 was the sixth and final test of the redesigned Space Shuttle SRMs. A major objective of the test was to determine the performance of the SRM's redesigned field joints under cold weather conditions. LA Times, Jan 21/89, P Inq, Jan 21/89)
President George Bush announced the selection of Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, a former astronaut and head of the Space Shuttle program, to succeed Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator. The White House also announced that J.R. Thompson, Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, would be appointed NASA Deputy Administrator. Truly, a veteran of two Shuttle flights, was named to head the Shuttle program by Administrator Fletcher following the 1986 Challenger0*accident. Truly was credited with helping to restore safety and reliability to Shuttlerelated activities. (FBISSov89070, Apr 13/89; AP, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 12/89; NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89; WSJ, Apr 13/89; USA Today, Apr 13/89; W Times, Apr
NASA announced it had granted a $1.3 billion extension of the contract to Lockheed Corporation, Calabasas, California, to continue Space Shuttle processing operations for three more years. (NASA Release, Sep 27/89; AP, Sep 26/89; W Post, Sep 27/89)
A coalition of three antinuclear groups filed suit in the Washington, D.C. Federal District Court to stop the launch of the nuclearpowered Galileo space probe aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis. The three groups contended that NASA and the Department of Energy had illegally delayed release of health and safety risk assessments of a potential accident involving Galileo's plutoniumfueled radioisotope thermal generators. The groups filing suit were the Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, the Christic Institute, and the Foundation on Economic Trends. NASA and the Energy Department denied the charges, and the space agency continued to carry on with preparations for the planned launch of0*AtlantisGalileo on October 12. The suit was subsequently dismissed by the court during its preliminary hearing. (LA Times, Sep 28/89; NY Times, Sep 29/89; W Post, Sep 29/89; W Times, Sep 29/89; B Sun, Sep 29/89;UPI, Sep 29/89)
NASA announced that it had awarded a $1.1 billion contract to Lockheed Corporation of Calabasas, California and GenCorp, Inc. of Fairlawn, Ohio, for the development of the Space Shuttle advanced solid rocket motor (ASRM). The ASRM, which would replace the current Shuttle SRMs built by Morton Thiokol, would be a nextgeneration solid fuel propulsion system that would use an elongated single rocket casing instead of the current segmented case design. According to NASA, the new design would improve Shuttle safety and performance, allowing an additional 12,000pound payload capacity aboard the orbiters. Lockheed and GenCorp would eventually replace Morton Thiokol as prime contractors for Shuttle solid rocket propulsion. A faulty field joint on one of Thiokol's segmented boosters was blamed for the catastrophic explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. Under the terms of the sevenyear contract, Lockheed's Missile System division and GenCorp's Aerojet Space Booster Company would design, develop, and test the new generation of motors, and produce enough for six Shuttle flights beginning as early as 1994. The contract also had an option, valued at approximately $1 billion, for NASA to purchase ASRMs for 40 additional Shuttle flights and eight test firings. (NASA Release 8957, Apr 21/89; UPI, Apr 22/89; NY Times, Apr 22/89; W Post, Apr `"22/89; LA Times, Apr 22/89; WSJ, Apr 24/89)
The United States and West Germany signed an agreement to send two German astronauts and German scientific payloads on a future Space Shuttle mission. The German astronauts would fly aboard a 1992 Spacelab mission that would test materials processing techniques. Two Germans and a Dutch astronaut flew aboard a Shuttle Spacelab mission in November 1985. (NASA Release 89113, Jul 10/89; AP, Nov 10/89; UPI, Nov 10/89; P Inq, Jul 12/89)
Acting NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of former Space Shuttle astronaut William B. Lenoir as Associate Administrator for Space Station. Lenoir replaced James B. Odom, who was retiring. Truly also announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs as Director, Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 8877, May 18/89; UPI, May 18/89; AP, May 19/89; NY Times, May 19/89; W Post, May 19/89; WSJ, May 19/89; LA Times, May 19/89; W Times, May 23/89)
NASA announced that Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, had won a $297 million contract to develop the Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS), a space robot that would help construct and maintain the Space Station Freedom. Development of the robot was expected to take nine years and would include flight testing of a prototype aboard the Space Shuttle. Once deployed during an early Space Station construction mission, the mobile robot would be controlled remotely by astronauts from within the station, thereby minimizing the amount of "spacewalk" activity that astronauts would need to perform. (W Times, Apr 21/89; B Sun, Apr 21/89)
The National Research Council (NRC) recommended that NASA abandon plans to participate in development of a commercial orbiting space laboratory that had been promoted by the Reagan administration and some members of Congress. In recommending against the development of the Industrial Space Facility, the NRC argued that experiments foreseen for the space laboratory could be performed aboard the Space Shuttle and on Shuttlebased facilities during the period leading to the completion of Space Station Freedom. (NY Times, Apr 12/89; W Post, Apr 12/89)
Space Shuttle astronaut David S. Griggs was killed while off duty when a single engine propeller plane he was flying crashed near a private airstrip in Arkansas. Griggs had been performing aerobatic maneuvers in a vintage ST6 training plane when the craft struck the ground, killing the astronaut instantly. Griggs was a mission specialist aboard an April 1985 flight of the Space Shuttle Discovery and had been designated pilot for Discovery mission STS33 in November. (AP, Jun 18/89; W Post, Jun 18/89; UPI, Jun 19/89; NY Times, Jun 19/89; P Inq, Jun 19/89)
The Space Shuttle Discovery was successfully launched at night from Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on mission STS33. Discovery carried a classified Department of Defense payload believed to be a $300 million surveillance satellite. The satellite was deployed from the Shuttle's cargo bay on November 23, and was scheduled to boost itself into a geostationary orbit. Several experiments of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) technology were also expected to be performed. Crew members for STS33 were Air Force Colonel Frederick Gregory (Commander), Air Force Colonel John Blaha (Pilot), and Mission Specialists Navy Captain Manley L. Carter Jr., F. Story Musgrave, and Kathryn C. Thornton. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on November 27. (NASA Release 8975, Nov 15/89; SSR 1989 090 A; AP, Nov 23/89; UPI, Nov 23/89; NY Times, Nov 23/89; W Post, Nov 23/89; WSJ, Nov 23/89; W Times, Nov 23/89; P Inq, Nov 23/89)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced his resignation, effective April 8. Dr. Fletcher had served as NASA Administrator for a total of nine years, from April 1971 to May 1977, and again since May 1986, following the Challenger accident. Dr. Fletcher, who reluctantly agreed to return to the Agency at the request of President Ronald Reagan, supervised the adoption of a new management system that put greater emphasis on quality control and safety for the Shuttle program. During his second term, Dr. Fletcher had oversight of the redesign of the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters and successfully lobbied Congress for continuation of the Space Station program. In his resignation announcement, Dr. Fletcher said he now felt that he could "safely place the leadership of NASA in another's hands." NASA Deputy Administrator Dale Myers served as Acting Administrator until a successor was named by President George Bush. (NASA Release 8936, Mar 21/89; AP, Mar 21/89; UPI, Mar 21/89; NY Times, Mar 22/89; WSJ, Mar 22/89; USA Today, Mar 22/89; B Sun, Mar 22/89; LA Times, Mar 22/89)
The Department of Defense and NASA announced the appointment of contractors to continue research and development on the National AeroSpace Plane. General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, United Technologies (Pratt & Whitney), and Rockwell International planned to jointly pursue hypersonic technologies. (NASA Release 9071)0*May 31: The Apollo 204 Capsule, which caught fire on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida, and claimed the lives of three astronauts on January 27, 1967, remains at Langley Research Center in Virginia, where it has been stored since shortly after the accident. The capsule was slated to be entombed with the illfated Space Shuttle Challenger in an abandoned missile silo at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release 9076)
Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS35) was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro1 for a 10day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one xray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that would supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. The project originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, but subsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro1 crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The Xray telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro1 mission did not achieve all of its objectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lint in the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forced to aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135 of the slated 250 targets were observed. (NY Times, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90; W post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)
Shuttle program director Robert Crippen said that a Space Shuttle rescue of the errant satellite sent up earlier this month by Martin Marietta appeared possible. He could not say whether the Intelsat communications satellite would be lifted into a higher orbit or if the Shuttle would bring it back to Earth, but noted that either approach would require about one year for planning. (W Post, March 24/90)
NASA released a call for proposals to lease a commercially developed and owned space module, the Commercial Middeck Augmentation Module, which would ride in the payload bay of the Space Shuttle and add about 50 lockers to the orbiter's capacity. The need for greater capacity resulted from NASA's Commercial Development of Space Program, which was designed to enlarge research opportunities for private use by conducting experiments in materials processing, protein crystal growth, `"biotechnology, and fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 9046; Sp News, Mar 1218/90) During March: A NASA study released to the Senate disclosed that designs for the planned Space Station Freedom needed significant changes that would drive up the initial cost. The study found an elaborate program of preventative maintenance that would require about 2,200 hours each year for space walks by astronauts and0*begin before the station was even completed. Possible solutions included use of advanced robots for maintenance, newly designed spacesuits to ease space walks, and a redesign of Space Station parts that would make them easier to repair. (NY Times, Mar 19/90; Mar 20/90; Mar 28/90; Mar 29/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
NASA and Japan's Ministry of State for Science and Technology agreed on new areas of space cooperation during a meeting in Tokyo. NASA/Japan projects agreed upon were observation of the ozone layer from satellites, space environment monitoring (realtime solar wind data), Space Station solar terrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom, and space microgravity experiments aboard the Space Shuttle. Other areas discussed were the ongoing cooperation for building and utilization of the Space Station and joint projects in xray and infrared astronomy, cosmic ray research, the study of ocean dynamics, measurement of cloud height by satellite stereograph, reception of Japan's first marine observation satellite data, and satellite measurements of tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90106)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS41, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida after a 5month dry spell; the fleet was grounded during much of this period because of hydrogen'!0*leaks. Ulysses, the craft's 814pound nuclear powered payload, was released later that afternoon, and a threestage solidfuel rocket began the craft on its long trip to Jupiter. Ulysses was to sling shot Jupiter in order to achieve polar orbit about 120 million miles from the Sun in May 1994. In order to escape an Earth orbit, the $750 million joint mission between NASA and the European Space Agency reached 34,130 mph, the greatest velocity yet required by an interplanetary probe for the task. The scientific mission also included a controlled fire to see how flames behave in weightlessness and release of the craft's 50foot robotic arm, which had a special material attached to estimate effects of deterioration on the Intelsat satellite, launched earlier this year into a low and useless orbit. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 10, ending a fourday, practically flawless mission. (W Post, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90; NY Times, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90)
NASA granted a small Alexandria firm, Global Outpost, rights to find ways of using empty Space Shuttle fuel tanks, used to carry 500,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen and oxygen for Space Shuttle launch and initial insertion into orbit, as a platform for military, civilian, and commercial experiments. The agreement followed a June 1988 NASA announcement requesting commercial and academic uses for expended tanks. (W Times, Jan 29/90; NASA Release 9014)
Columbia's flight in early January, NASA announced, was made with a flawed backup oring inspectors had overlooked. A disaster similar to the Challenger accident 4 years previously could have occurred if the primary seal had failed. Inspectors also missed inferior welds on a critical pump that supplied one of the Atlantis main engines with fuel. The problem was0*corrected while on the launch pad in preparation for the upcoming
NASA announced a recently revised 1990 schedule for Space Shuttle launches that called for 9 flights instead of the previously announced 10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged0*on a threeweek delay to launch the Hubble Telescope, originally planned for deployment March 26, because of an unsatisfactory leak check of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster. This delay threatened the highpriority Ulysses mission scheduled for October 5. The mission had to be sent up within an 18day time period in order to slingshot Jupiter and head back toward the Sun, where it would achieve polar orbit around the star. The new agenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows: Jan 9: Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval of another. Feb 22: Atlantis; classified military satellite. Apr 18: Discovery; the Hubble Telescope.
The official Soviet Tass News Agency reported that their most advanced rocket, a Zenit booster, had blown up seconds after liftoff and destroyed much of the launch pad in the Kazakhstan Republic. The payload, said Western analysts, was likely a recon naissance satellite. The rocket had earlier been promoted for sale in the West and had been used to fly some versions of the Soviet Space Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 12/90)
The Air Force decided in September to convert the Space Launch Complex6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California for Space Shuttle liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets. The launch pad had been idle since the Challenger accident in 1986. (NY Times, Sep 30/90) Oct 1: The High Resolution Imager, an instrument for the study of cosmic Xrays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched last June, sent back its first light pictures to a ground station near Munich. The cooperative program between the United States, West Germany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited several international scientists. The pictures sent back represented a neutron star 3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova that occurred in this galaxy 320 years ago and 10,000 light years away, and a cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2156. (NASA Release 90133)
NASA declared its Shuttle fleet "leak free" as Columbia passed a fueling test after two defective seals had been replaced and nuts and connectors in the engine compartment had been tightened. Space Shuttle Atlantis had passed its fuel test a week earlier and was scheduled for liftoff November 9. (NY Times, Oct 31/90; W Post, Oct 31/90; NASA Release N9086)
Launching of the Shuttle Atlantis and deployment of a classified payload mission on February 22 were canceled because the mission Commander had a sore throat and headache, coupled with the prediction of wind and rain over Cape Canaveral, Florida. This was the first time a NASA mission had been scrubbed because of crew illness. (NY Times, Feb 22/90; Feb 23/90; W Post; Feb 22/90)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
Columbia; "astro" astronomy telescopes. Jul 9: Atlantis; classified military cargo. Aug 29: Columbia; a Spacelab life sciences module. Oct 5: Discovery; the Ulysses probe. Nov 1: Atlantis; Gamma Ray Observatory. Dec 12: Columbia; a materials science laboratory. A military mission carrying a variety of infrared sensors for the Strategic Defense Initiative was reassigned for 1992. NASA planned for 64 Space Shuttle flights and 30 expendable launch vehicle missions through September 1995. (UPI, Jan 29/90; W Times, Jan 30/90; NY Times, Feb 4/90; NASA Release 9015)
Charles Pellerin, director of astrophysics for NASA, announced that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope mirrors could easily be fixed in a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for mid1993. The mission would require replacing the telescope's widefield planetary camera with one designed to correct the flawed mirrors. (P Inq, Aug 17/90; W Times, Aug 17/90)
In an unreleased report, NASA determined that the proposed untended ShuttleC would prove too costly for use in building the Space Station. The original plan called for 18 Shuttle flights at a cost of $1.5 billion to erect the $25 billion station. Although using the ShuttleC would reduce the number of required flights to 10 because of its more than doubled cargo space, the price tag would jump to $3.7 billion, not including the $2 billion needed to develop the vehicle. (Sp News, Feb 26Mar 4/90)
A White House commission, formed in July as a result of the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding of the Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12member panel emphasized a new system of crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greater pursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on the accomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crewassisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said that a heavylift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Station designs were underway, but would be similar to the original ones. WSJ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; NY Times, Dec 11/90; W Post, Dec 11/90; H Post, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90161)
A Titan 4 rocket blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a classified payload outside experts believed was a $180 million advanced missile warning satellite. It was the third launch of the Titan 4 and followed a 2month delay caused by undisclosed technical problems. The satellite, they added, would likely observe Iraq. The Space Shuttle Atlantis, which occupied a nearby launch pad for liftoff on the November 15, also had a (#classified cargo aboard thought to be for the same purpose. (W Post, Nov 13/90; W Times, Nov 13/90)
The House passed a $44 billion, 3year spending authorization bill for NASA that included establishment of a Moon base and a crewassisted expedition to Mars. The bill was to next go to a conference committee to work out differences with the Senate. (LA Times, Sep 29/90) During September: Astronaut Bruce McCandless retired from NASA and as Captain from the U.S. Navy. He helped develop the space agency's Manned Maneuvering Unit, a jetpowered backpack he was the first to wear during a Space Shuttle Challenger mission in February 1984. (W Times, Sep 12/90)
A hydrogen leak similar to the one that scrubbed Columbia's mission late in May was discovered in the Space Shuttle Atlantis as it was being readied on the launch pad. Engineers determined that Atlantis would need to return to the hanger where it could be separated from its external fuel tank for repairs. Officials said that the flight, originally scheduled for midJuly, would be delayed at least several weeks and noted that the entire fleet was grounded until the problem could be ascertained. Finding the cause of the leak had proven difficult. If the final analysis pointed to a design flaw, grounding might have been stretched to months or even years. (NASA Release 9089; W Post, Jun 30/90; NY Times, Jun 30/90; WSJ, July 2/90; CSM, Jul During June: NASA awarded a $1.3 million contract to Martin Marietta Corporation to study design concepts for a space based "service station." The system would service satellites beyond the range of the Space Shuttle, provide them with fuel as well as replace certain components. (W Times, Jun 7/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the completion of the merger of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and the Office of Exploration; the two offices were merged into the Office of Aeronautics, Exploration, and Technology. Arnold D. Aldrich was named to head the new NASA office, which was intended to combine the analysis of exploration mission alternatives with innovative technologies, two closely related efforts that Truly felt should proceed under a strong central management. Truly also announced the establishment of the Office of Legislative Affairs, effective March 18, 1990. Headed by Martin P. Kress, this NASA office would be responsible for legislative matters and the coordination of budgetary and policy matters with Congress. (NASA Release 9032; 9033) During February: Daniel Brandenstein, NASA's chief astronaut, returned from a tour of Soviet space facilities and said the original untended Russian shuttle, maiden voyage in 1988, would never fly again. He also reported that the Soviets planned to launch a second untended space shuttle in 1991 and automatically dock it with Mir. The station's crew planned to run some tests. Again untended, it would undock and reenter the atmosphere. (UPI, Feb 21/90)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a $42.6 million contract to Rockwell International for continued Space Shuttle systems engineering and integration services. The contract called for Shuttle launch and flight support, test verification, operations integration, flight evaluation, engineering analysis, and data systems operations, as well as special studies. (NASA Release C90z)
The Ulysses spacecraft launched from Space Shuttle Discovery and developed a problem on its trip to rendezvous with Jupiter in 1992, from which it would slingshot to achieve polar orbit around the Sun. It was believed that the difficulty came from a 241/2foot antenna boom meant to study radio signals in space and waves in the solar winds. Scientists ascertained that the boom was bent, perhaps from the Sun's rays, and was causing the craft to wobble. Because of the wobble, the main dishshaped antenna would not be able to focus on Earth and relay data gleaned from the star. Scientists were confident that the problem would be solved before the craft's 1994 mission began. (C Trib''0*Dec 15/90; NY Times, Dec 16/90)
After five delays because of the Shuttle Commander's' 0*head cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather, Atlantis (STS36) lifted off under dark skies from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to deliver a 37,300pound classified military satellite into orbit. The postponements tacked on an additional $2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Truly reiterated NASA's policy that meeting launch schedules was secondary to safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its $500 million military payload the following day at an orbit inclined 62 degrees north of the equator, allowing it to fly over every major populated and industrialized center in the Soviet Union. An even higher inclination orbit would have been preferred. A polar orbit was considered ideal for a recon naissance satellite, but the Shuttle base at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, from where such an orbit could have been safely achieved, was not operational; the weight of the larger satellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle. Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California on March 4. No problems were reported during the brief 41/2 day mission, the Space Shuttle's 34th mission and the 6th mission dedicated solely to the military.W Post, Mar 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 5/90; Feb 28/90; NY Times, March 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; P Inq, Mar 5/90))
NASA announced the selection of two payload specialists for the International Microgravity Laboratory mission aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, scheduled for launch in December 1990. Dr. Roberta Bondar of the Canadian Space Agency and Dr. Ulf Merbold of the European Space Agency were to conduct the first of several microgravity investigations using the Spacelab Module. (NASA Release 909)
Scientists, after taking their first long look at the Long Duration Exposure Facility recovered by Space Shuttle Columbia in January, said the varied surfaces of the satellite showed signs of pits, scars, and discoloration in some areas while being strangely unscathed in others. The surfaces revealed no "showstoppers" however. The satellite was an experiment meant to test materials for use in building spacecraft and the Space Station. (W Post, Feb 13/86; NASA Release 9023)
NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 9077) 0*June 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principal means of reaching space. This was the second successful launch of the rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (W Post, Jun 9/90; NY Times, Jun 9/90)
For the first time, Soviet defense committee lawmakers visited the Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASA prepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classified satellite launch that, said sources, was to take reconnaissance photographs and intercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12day visit reflected a new openness in the Soviet Union, and the committee chairman, referring to the mission said, "We have no special secrets...I think you are wasting your money." (W Post, Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90)
The hydrogen leak that was detected in the Space Shuttle Atlantis reappeared, and engineers determined that the Shuttle would have to be taken off the launch pad and rolled back to the hanger for a closer look. Columbia, undergoing repairs for a similar leak, was expected to be on the launch pad early in August. The Atlantis liftoff with its classified military payload were rescheduled for November, bumping another launch into 1991 (#and reducing the projected number of flights in 1990 to seven. (P Inq, Jul 26/90; NY Times, Jul 26/90; W Times, Jul 26/90)
Two Space Shuttle crew commanders were grounded by NASA for disciplinary reasons. Robert L. Gibson was grounded for one year after he flew a stunt plane, in a July 7Texas air show, that collided with another plane and killed the second pilot. David M. Walker was grounded for 60 days because the T38 jet aircraft he piloted in May 1989 nearly collided with a Pan Am Airbus 310 over Dulles Airport, according to the second pilot. (P Inq, Jul 10/90; W Times, Jul 10/90; NY Times, Jul 10/90; NASA Release 9096)
The first scientific results from the Hubble Space Telescope confirmed that it would reveal a more detailed view of the heavens than any ground telescope, in spite of its flawed mirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view yet of a supernova discovered in 1987 and of densely packed stars in a distant galaxy that could be the result of a black hole. Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellan spacecraft was operating in another safe mode and communication with it had been offandon. The navigation problem had been0*narrowed down but not pinpointed, and the mapping survey of Venus would be delayed two or three weeks. (NY Times, Aug 30/90; W Times, Aug 30/90; NASA Release 90117; 90118) During August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator, and astronaut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire. Mahon had served with NASA for almost 30 years, managing and directing untended launch vehicles, Shuttle carrier systems, and spacelab operations. Captain McCulley, who planned to retire from the Navy, was to join Lockheed Space Operations Company and be involved with daytoday processing of Space Shuttle vehicles. (NASA Release 90116; 90119)
The Galileo spacecraft, launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis October 18, 1989, fired its thrusters so it could come closer to Earth and use our planet's gravity to slingshot in December toward the Sun for a 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. The'$0*flyby would mark the first time Earth had been approached by a spacecraft from Venus, or anywhere inside Earth's orbit. The craft was scheduled to study Earth during the maneuver, slingshot the Sun and study our planet again on the return trip in 1992, and then study Jupiter's atmosphere for 2 more years after reaching the planet. The loop around the solar system was necessary because the rocket that launched the craft was too weak to propel Galileo directly on its 2year trip to Jupiter. (Fla Today, Nov 14/90; P Inq, Nov 14/90)
NASA launched a Delta rocket carrying a West German observatory into a 360milehigh orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The observatory consisted of an Xray telescope and a widefield camera for detecting extreme ultraviolet light; scientists hoped the observatory would yield information about forces associated with the center of our galaxy, intergalactic gasses, quasars, black holes, hot stars, and objects on the edge of the universe. The observatory was dubbed Rosat, after the German Scientist Wilhelm Roentgen who discovered Xrays in 1895, and promised to be 100 times more sensitive than even the Einstein Xray Observatory launched in 1978. It was originally scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in 1987. (LA Times, Jun 2/90; NY Times, Jun 2/90; B Sun, Jun 2/90; P Inq, Jun 2/90)
A satellite launched by Martin Marietta from Cape Canaveral, Florida, failed to reach a useful orbit because of a wiring problem that did not allow separation from the Titan 3 rocket's second stage. Ground engineers successfully took the craft to a higher, but still useless, orbit, so that it would not be as likely to reenter the atmosphere. One plan offered by Orbital Sciences Corporation in Virginia was to attach a rocket' 0*to the satellite via the Space Shuttle so it could obtain the necessary 23,000 mile orbit. Martin Marietta, which had only two remaining contracts, believed it was in jeopardy of not getting any more contracts because of the incident. (WSJ, Mar 15/90; W Post, Mar 17/90; NY Times, Mar 16/90)
Japan successfully tested its new H2 rocket, which promised to lift large, sophisticated satellites. The rocket using an LE7 engine, similar to the hightechnology propulsion system used by the Space Shuttle, was slated for service in March 1992. (AP, Mar 6/90)
NASA announced the selection of Margaret G. Finarelli as Acting Associate Administrator for External Relations, and the names of microgravity mission payload specialist candidates. Finarelli, who had been Deputy Associate Administrator since December 1988, would temporarily replace Kenneth S. Pedersen, who had taken a oneyear teaching assignment with Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. Candidates for payload specialists for the March 1992 STS53 Space Shuttle mission were Lawrence J. DeLucas, Joseph Prahl, Albert Sacco, and Eugene H. Trinh. (NASA Release 90107; 90108)
NASA took the Space Shuttle Columbia off its schedule for 1990 launches, operating under the assumption that the orbiter was prone to fuel leaks. Still unable to pinpoint the exact location of the last hydrogen leak, NASA hoped that the craft would be able to fly in early 1991. A team of nine engineers was working on the problem. (NY Times, Sep 21/90; W Post, Sep 20/90; C Trib, Sep 20/90; NASA Release 90127)
A fuel leak that postponed Space Shuttle Columbia's
The Galileo spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on October 18, 1989, looped 10,000 miles above the planet Venus in what NASA engineers termed a "gravity assisted maneuver" that increased its speed by almost 5,000 mph for its trek to Jupiter. After taking 16 pictures of Venusian cloud and wind patterns while searching for lightning, the craft was scheduled to take more pictures of the planet during its return journey. The second set of photographs, which were to be coupled with sensors, were to detect dust, infrared and visible light, and electrically charged particles. Scientists determined that the spacecraft would be within range of the Earth and able to send back data, in October, using its small antenna. It was expected to reach Jupiter in December 1995. (P Inq, Feb 12/90; B Sun, Feb 11/90; NY Times, Feb 11/90)
Space Shuttle mission specialist Colonel Richard M. Mullane announced his retirement from NASA, effective July 1, 1990. He flew two Shuttle flights in 1984 and 1988 and was scheduled to fly aboard the Atlantis later in February. (NASA Release 9028)
Liftoff of the Space Shuttle Columbia was scrubbed for the third time, after a fuel leak was discovered. It was reportedly not in the same area as the leak that halted the mission last May. The second delay for liftoff occurred during the last week of August because of communication problems with the Xray telescope in Columbia's cargo bay. NASA engineers believed the problem lay in the fuel pumps feeding the Shuttle's three main engines and began replacing them the next day. Agency officials said that the flight would be delayed at least 11 days.0*W Times, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90; W Post, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90; NY Times, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90)
Lockheed Corporation received a $971 million contract from NASA to oversee design and development of a new generation of rocket motors for the Space Shuttle. Twenty more powerful solid rocket motors were to begin lifting the Shuttle in 1995, according to the contract, and sources said that if NASA exercised the option to order 88 more, the contract would be worth $1.39 billion. (WSJ, May 15/90; NASA Release 9068)
NASA signed an agreement to support the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) study of the feasibility of using the Shuttle's external tanks as research, storage, or manufacturing facilities. Space Shuttle fuel tanks were used to carry 500,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen and oxygen for launch and initial insertion into orbit. The agreement followed a June 1988 NASA announcement requesting commercial and academic uses for expended tanks. (NASA Release 9026)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
A Titan 4 rocket booster exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California during tests, killing one worker and injuring nine others. The Air Force was further developing the rocket, which experts called problem plagued, hoping to replace the Space Shuttle for launching of heavy payloads. (C Trib, Sep 8/90; LA Times, Sep 9/90)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS38, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite, probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would be assigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagon planned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the future. The satellite was deployed the following day. Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a continuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the 7mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the 3mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had not been used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixth time the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since the Challenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (NY Times, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; W Post, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA
NASA responded to a request issued August 7 by the Office of Management and Budget asking for various Federal agencies to outline the effects of a $100 billion cut in the 1991 budget. The report submitted by NASA warned of a halt in Space Shuttle flights, suspended development of the Space Station, and delayed launch of the Mars Observer spacecraft. Although not expected, cuts acrosstheboard were a possible result of the GrammRudman deficit control law. (Sp News, Sep 913/90)
NASA launched the first of 10 expected Shuttle flights in 1990 (flight STS32) from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a 10day mission to orbit a Navy communications satellite and to retrieve another. The liftoff, originally scheduled for December 18, had been delayed three times because of problems with the renovated launch pad and once because of low clouds. The Navy satellite was deployed January 10. On January 12, the spacecraft closed in on and retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), an 11ton satellite, into the cargo bay, using a 50foot robotic arm. The LDEF was sent up with Space Shuttle Challenger in April 1984 to provide vital information on the design of spacecraft and NASA's Space Station, as well as other experiments. The orbiting laboratory was scheduled to be recovered 10 months after its deployment, but the nearly 5year postponement caused by scheduling problems and the Challenger accident resulted in a decaying orbit that was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere by March of 1990. The 57 experiments aboard the 30footlong cylindrical satellite included an array of potential space building materials being tested for reactions to radiation, extreme temperature changes, and collisions with space matter. Also tested for prolonged space exposure were optical fibers, pure crystals for use in electronics, and a student experiment involving tomato seeds. Interstellar gases and cosmic radiation were also trapped in an attempt to find clues into the formation of the Milky Way and the evolution of heavier elements. For the remainder of the mission, astronauts carried out other scientific and engineering work. Columbia landed on a concrete runway early in the morning on
The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crewassisted missions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as a springboard to further research. Among their recommendations were greater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater emphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essential research concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs of building the Space Station was recommended as well; it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90 Sp News, Mar 1218/90)
The Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, awarded Rockwell International Corporation a fiveyear extension on the contract for systems integration. The $1.36 billion contract extensions were for flight and ground systems engineering maintenance and safety analysis, including configuration of the hardware required for each orbiter flight and Shuttle mission support from countdown to landing. (NASA Release C90A; C90B; WSJ, Jan 12/90)
Space Shuttle pilot Donald E. Williams announced his retirement from NASA and the Navy, beginning March 1. He piloted two Shuttle missions, in April 1985 and October 1989, was Chief of the Astronaut Office Mission Support Branch, and Deputy Manager of Operations Integration. (NASA Release 9031)
Lowell Hawkinson, chairman of the Gensym Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts, which created the G2 system, announced that Biosphere II, would be initiated in March. Biosphere II is an environment controlled by the advanced computer program G2 and designed for eight scientists to seal themselves inside for two years. NASA had been using G2 on its Shuttle flights to control certain functions since October 1989. According to Tony Heindel, a light controller at Mission Control at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, G2 monitors 16,000 data points per second, gathering such information as temperature, voltages, availability of jet thrusters, and condition of on-board computers and instruments. (NY Times, Feb 10/91)
Charles A. Bowsher, comptroller general of the General Accounting Office, estimated that NASA had underestimated by $10 billion the construction cost of the Space Station because it did not include the costs of flying the Shuttle during station construction, developing the crew lifeboat, conducting scientific projects, and installing certain equipment. NASA underestimated operations costs by $24 billion because it omitted Shuttle flight costs, salaries of ground-based personnel, the cost of research, and added electrical power. (AP, Apr 30/91)
William Lenoir, NASA space flight chief, outlined the revised plans for the Space Station to the National Space Council on February 5. The revision would save $6 billion over five years and would cut in half the number of astronauts to live aboard as of September 1999. The new design would assemble the station in larger pieces on the ground, thus requiring 23 Space Shuttle flights to build instead of the original 34 flights. The plan is due to Congress on March 5 but may be extended to a later date. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91)
NASA postponed the landing of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of high winds at Edwards Air Force Base in California and bad weather at the alternate landing site of Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (P Inq, Apr 11/91; B Sun, Apr 11/91; W Post, Apr 11/91; W Times, Apr 11/91; NY Times, Apr 11/91; USA Today, Apr 11/91; AP, Apr 11/91; UPI, Apr 11/91)
The media reported NASA's announcement that henceforth the Kennedy Space Center in Florida would be a prime Shuttle landing site beginning with Atlantis's mission in July. However, because of Florida's temperamental weather, Shuttles were expected to return to California 60 percent of the time, according to Robert L. Crippen, director of the Space Shuttle program. (AP, Jun 20/91; UPI, Jun 20/91; NYT, Jun 21/91; B Sun, Jun 21/91; LA Times, Jun 21/91)
The United Nations (U.N.) reported that the world's ozone layer, particularly over the Antarctic, was thinner than ever and the "hole" over the Antarctic was increasing. However, U.N. scientist Ruman Bojkov said the U.S. Space Shuttle Challenger had not significantly contributed to the situation. Readings were taken by NASA satellites and ground-based spectrometers and the data analyzed by international scientists convened by the U.N. Environment Program and the World Meteorological Organization. Subsequently Environmental Protection Agency Administrator William K. Reilly said "The problem is more serious than we believed." (UPI, Oct 22/91; P Inq, Oct 23/91; W Post, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; WSJ, Oct 23/91; CSM, Oct 23/91; W Times, Oct 23/91; B Sun, Oct 23/91; LA Times, Oct 23/91)
Engineers began a practice countdown for Space Shuttle Columbia, and the four-man, three woman crew prepared to begin dress rehearsal for a planned May 24 launching. The purpose of the nine-day 11th flight of Columbia was the Spacelab Life Sciences mission, the first spacelab dedicated to life sciences research. The crew were to perform experiments to evaluate the adaptation of humans to space flight as well as to conduct some experiments on animals in a gravity-free environment. The planned experiments were to be conducted in the Spacelab module. (NASA General Release 91-69; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; UPI, May 13/91; AP, May 13/91; B Sun, May 14/91; W Times, May 14/91; USA Today, May 14/91)
NASA announced a recent agreement between its Office of Commercial Programs and the University of Alabama, Huntsville (UAH), that would provide additional flight research opportunities on the Space Shuttle for NASA's 17 Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). In support of this, Instrumentation Technology Associates, Inc., Exton, Pennsylvania, signed a commercial agreement with UAH to provide the university's Consortium for Materials Development in Space CCDS, with flight hardware that would be flown on five Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 91-203)
A pressurized laboratory to be used on Space Shuttle Columbia's late May mission was damaged when a technician removed a latch and the module tilted, making a slight tear in the module's insulating thermal blanket. NASA spokesman Mitch Varnes said damage appeared minor and should not delay the mission. (AP, Mar 22/91)
An editorial in a trade journal commended Rockwell International for completing Space Shuttle Endeavour on time and under budget, stating that NASA should expect the same standards of performance with regard to the Space Station. (SP News, May 6-12/91)
NASA announced adjustments to the February 1991 Mixed Fleet Manifest as a result of the cracks discovered on Space Shuttle Discovery. Space Shuttle Atlantis was to fly in April; after repairs, Discovery (STS-39 mission) was to fly in May as was STS-40/Spacelab Life Sciences Mission aboard Columbia. The Tracking Data Relay Satellite Mission originally scheduled to fly on Discovery in July was to be on Atlantis in August. The Defense Support Program mission remained on Atlantis but was moved from August to December with the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. The International Microgravity Laboratory mission planned for December 1991 would become the first flight in 1992. The mixed cargo flight of the Tethered Satellite System and the European Space Agency's European Retrievable Carrier, originally scheduled for February 1992 on Discovery, would move to August 1992 on Atlantis. Other mid-1992 flights would remain as scheduled earlier. (NASA release 91-44; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the ceremony that would take place on April 25 on the occasion of the rolling out of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour. The ceremony was scheduled for Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, where the orbiter was assembled by Rockwell International Corporation's Space System Division. Truly praised the efforts of all those in NASA and industry who had cooperated on the program. Part of the ceremony would involve the presentation to NASA by Robert Duce, Dean of the University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography, of Endeavour's first "payload," a sternpost remnant recovered from the orbiter's namesake, the first ship commanded by British explorer Captain James Cook in 1768-71. During the ceremony Truly announced the creation of the NASA Endeavour Teacher Fellowship Program  with the gifts donated to NASA by the public for the replacement orbiter. The program would award scholarships to American undergraduates studying to be teachers. (NASA Release 91-62; UPI, Apr 24/91; NASA Release 91-64)
Navy Commander Ken Reightler, a Marylander, was scheduled to fly on September 19 on the Shuttle Discovery. A Naval Academy graduate and a test pilot, Reightler will be a pilot on the five-day mission that was to deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. (B Sun, Apr 4/91)
William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, announced that NASA was sending Space Shuttle Discovery from the launch pad back to the hangar to repair cracked door hinges. Shuttle director Robert Crippen said Discovery should be ready to fly in late April or early May. (AP, Feb 28/91; P Inq, Mar 1/91; NY Times. Mar 1/91; WSJ, Mar 1/91; W Times, Mar 1/91; USA Today, Mar 1/91; W Post, Mar 1/91; UPI, Mar 1/91)
The media reported that on October 31, a Federal grand jury in Iowa had indicted the Rockwell International Corporation and two of its employees on charges of overbilling NASA for work on the Space Shuttle program. On November 8, NASA announced its suspension of Collins Commercial Avionics, Cedar Rapids, Iowa, a division of Rockwell International from further government contracts because of the indictment. (NY Times, Nov 1/91; WSJ, Nov 1/91; P Inq, Nov 1/91; B Sun, Nov 1/91; W Times, Nov 1/91; AP, Nov 1/91; UPI, Nov 1/91; NASA Release 91-186; AP, Nov 9/91; Fla Today, Nov 11/91; W Post, Nov 11/91; WSJ, Nov 11/91; UPI, Nov 11/91)
Space Shuttle Columbia, according to AP, began its trip from an assembly building at Kennedy Space Center to the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, a four-mile journey. (AP, May 2/91)
The media covered the refusal of a Federal judge on December 12 to order the public release of the audio tape of the last moments of the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986, saying it would violate the privacy of the victims' families. (NY Times, Dec 13/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; USA Today, Dec 13/91; W Times, Dec 13/91; AP, Dec 13/91)
Ham radio operators in Long Beach, California, made history when they successfully transmitted a television picture to the Space Shuttle Atlantis. (LA Times, Apr 8/91)
NASA announced it had modified its Space Shuttle contract with Rockwell International Corporation's Space Division at an additional cost of $27.6 million. The modification entailed the design, fabrication, testing, and installation of main propulsion system 14-inch disconnects into orbiter umbilicals in order to increase flight safety. Two other companies were involved in the work: Parker Hannifin and Martin Marietta. (NASA Release C91-g)
NASA announced that the U.S. and Spain had signed a space cooperation agreement providing for the use of Spanish bases and installations as alternative landing sites for the U.S. Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 91-109)
NASA announced the naming of M. Rhea Seddon as Payload Commander for Spacelab Life Sciences-2 Space Shuttle mission, scheduled for launch in July 1993. (NASA Release 91-175)
Space Shuttle Endeavour arrived at Kennedy Space Center. Considerable work remained to be done on the Shuttle, including the installation of the three main engines. (AP, May 7/91)
UPI reported the practice countdown of the crew of Shuttle Atlantis for its flight July 23. NASA announced that Atlantis would put NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite into orbit on its mission in order to update the satellite tracking network. (UPI, Jul 3/91; unnumbered NASA General Release, undated)
NASA said small cracks were found in the thermal seals on the wings of a second Space Shuttle, the Columbia. The cause of the cracks remained undetermined. (AP, Oct 2/91; Fla Today, Oct 2/91; W Times, Oct 3/91)
NASA announced the award to members of three Space Shuttle crews of the Vladimir M. Komarov Diploma by the National Aeronautic Association for their "outstanding achievements in the field of exploration of outer space. The awards were from the Council of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale. The crews receiving the awards were the January 1990 STS-32 mission, which retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility; the December 1990 STS-35 mission, which carried the ASTRO-1 astrophysics observatory; and the October 1990 mission STS-41, which deployed the joint NASA/European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft to study the sun. (NASA Release 91-202 Revised; Fla Today, Dec 15/91)
NASA announced its closing for security reasons of the public viewing site for watching Space Shuttle landings at Edwards Air Force Base until the end of the Persian Gulf War. (Daily News, Feb 22/91)
AP reported that Space Shuttle Columbia was bolted atop a jumbo jet and flown from Cape Canaveral to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, before proceeding on August 11 to Rockwell International's Shuttle assembly plant in Palmdale, California. The arrival of Columbia in Palmdale on August 13 was enthusiastically greeted by the inhabitants. (AP, Aug 10/91; Antelope Valley, Aug 14/91)
NASA announced details of Space Shuttle mission STS-42, a worldwide research effort in the behavior of materials and life in weightlessness. This would be the 15th flight of Discovery and was scheduled for launch on January 22, 1992 from Edwards Air Force Base, California. Scientists from NASA, the European Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, the French National Center for Space Studies, the German Space Agency, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan cooperated in planning experiments aboard the International Microgravity Laboratory-1, which Discovery was to carry. This was to be the first of eight Space Shuttle flights planned for 1992, five of which were to feature international participation. (NASA Release 92-211)
Stormy weather prevented Space Shuttle Atlantis from landing at Kennedy Space Center so it landed instead at MacDill Air Force Base; the flight would resume when the weather cleared. (AP, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91)
NASA announced information about the flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis scheduled for launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center. The Shuttle was to deploy NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) into orbit to update the satellite tracking network. Details of the TDRS, its size, capacities, and capabilities, were provided. (NASA Release 91-97)
Astronaut Manley Lanier "Sonny" Carter, who flew on the Shuttle Discovery in 1989, was one of those killed in the crash of the commuter plane carrying former Senator John Tower. Biographic data were given. (UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 6/91)
An article about the 900 telephone area code cited the use of a 900 number by the National Space Institute in 1982, allowing callers to listen in on conversations between mission control and Space Shuttle crews. (AP, Mar 25/91)
According to the media, engineers waited out the storm at Cape Canaveral and then hauled Shuttle Atlantis to its launch pad. The Shuttle was scheduled to launch a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite to replace the Indian Ocean relay station. (UPI, Jun 25/91; NY Times, Jun 26/91; W Times, June 26/91; USA Today, Jun 26/91; C Trin, Jun 26/91)
William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said NASA hoped to cut the operating cost of its Space Shuttle program by 15 percent over a five-year period. It planned to do this by eliminating a layer of management and merging the offices of the Program Directorate in Washington, Level I, with the Program Office located at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Level II. The reorganization plan as yet lacked final approval. (W Times, Dec 13/91; Fla Today, Dec 13/91)
The local newspaper carried an article on an area resident, Dale Reed, who said his "lifting-body concept"--an aircraft shape that eliminated the need for wings, influenced the design of the Space Shuttle. He built scale models of his idea and convinced his boss, Paul Bikle, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, to try it on a glider. Reed was a NASA engineer for 32 years and subsequently worked as senior engineer for PRC, Inc., a NASA contractor. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Sep 13/91)
NASA announced that as part of the agreement between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev during the July 30-31 Summit in Moscow, the U.S. and the Soviet Union had agreed to expand space cooperation. This is to consist of flying a U.S. astronaut on a long-duration Soviet Space Station Mir mission and a Soviet cosmonaut on a U.S. Space Shuttle mission, increasing cooperation in monitoring the global environment from space, and initiating annual consultations between the two governments on civil space issues. (NASA Release 91-122; P Inq, Aug 1/91; NY Times, Aug 1/91; AP, Aug 1/91; W Post, Aug 1/91)
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, mounted atop NASA's Boeing 747 Shuttle carrier, began its two-day flight back to Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (AP, Dec 7/91; W Times, Dec 8/91)
Chase Manhattan Bank granted $64 million five-year financing to Spacehab Inc. Spacehab was building a large pressurized chamber to fit into the storage bay of the Space Shuttle, giving the astronauts or technicians more room to run experiments. Spacehab planned to send its first unit aloft in December 1992. It obtained capital from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Aeritalia of Italy, which was designing and building most of the module and its thermal controls, and the Mitsubishi Corporation of Japan. (NY Times, Mar 14/91)
The press reported that Space Shuttle Discovery left California on September 24 enroute back to Florida, flying piggyback aboard a jetliner. (LA Times, Sep 25/91; UPI, Sep 26/91; NY Times, Sep 27/91)
NASA officials told UPI that a 1993 Shuttle flight would end with a fully automatic, hands-off landing to test untried systems that might be needed if pilots were not up to the task after a long-duration mission (UPI, Nov 19/91)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch on September 12, would deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) 350 miles above Earth. The UARS is to study humankind's effect on the planet's atmosphere and its shielding ozone layer and is the first major flight element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 91-136)
The media stated that Space Shuttle Discovery was rolled to the launch pad to prepare for its scientific research mission in late January 1992. (AP, Dec 19/91; W Times, Dec 20/91; USA Today, Dec 20/91; LA Times, Dec 20/91)
An independent government panel, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, praised NASA for grounding the Space Shuttle fleet in 1990 to fix fuel leaks and not sacrificing flight safety to meet a demanding launch schedule. (UPI, Mar 22/91)
Hours before Space Shuttle Discovery was to blast off on its "Star Wars" mission, NASA canceled the launch because of the failure of an electrical sensor that measures pressure on an oxidizer turbopump on the engine. (AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91; NY Times, Apr 24/91; W Post, Apr 24/91; W Times, Apr 24/91; USA Today, Apr 24/91; LA Times, Apr 24/91; C Trin, Apr 24/91; AP, Apr 24/91)
The media reported a problem with an electronic component in Space Shuttle Atlantis but it was not expected to delay the launch. However, another power supply problem with the data processor might cause difficulties. (AP, Jul 17/91; UPI, Jul 17/91; USA Today, Jul 17/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that Johns Hopkins University astrophysicist Sam Durrance, who flew with Shuttle Columbia's Astro flight in December 1990, lobbied for an Astro-2 flight to continue use of the telescopes and other equipment that made significant scientific discoveries. Some NASA and other officials were giving the possibility serious consideration. (B Sun, May 14/91)
Astronauts on Space Shuttle Discovery aimed a research satellite at rocket fuel spewed in space, then captured the satellite and put it back in the Shuttle's cargo bay. (W Post, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91; LA Times, May 3/91; AP, May 3/91; UPI, May 3/91)
NASA announced a contract with Thiokol Corporation of Ogden, Utah, to manufacture 68 additional flight sets (136 motors) of redesigned Solid Rocket Motors and six additional motors for flight support for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release C91-bb)
NASA announced that researchers at its Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, had developed a laser-based system for measuring winds above launch sites. The system called CLAWS, for Coherent Launch Site Atmospheric Wind Sounder, was created by the Spacecraft Controls Branch, Flight Systems Directorate, and Lockheed. CLAWS was used in the September 12 launch of Space Shuttle Discovery and might eventually replace weather balloons as a means of gathering data aloft. (NASA Release 91-206)
Nippon Television Network asked to borrow from the Smithsonian the Space Shuttle Enterprise, an Apollo capsule, a moon conveyor vehicle, a rocket, and a spacesuit. The Enterprise is stored at Dulles Airport and transporting it--the back of a 747 or by ship would be difficult. The space gear was to be used to celebrate the company's fortieth anniversary in Tokyo in 1993. (W Post, Feb 23/91)
NASA issued a preliminary report on findings of the June Spacelab Shuttle mission. The human body's adaptation to weightlessness began on the launch pad and researchers needed to develop new ways to counteract these physiological effects. These effects include weight loss, loss of body fluid, drop in red blood cell production, and reduced heart pumping capacity. (UPI, Sep 19/91; AP, Sep 20/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91; W Post, Sep 20/91; USA Today, Sep 20/91)
USA Today reported that five years later NASA was still tracking down debris from Challenger in the hands of collectors because the Space Shuttle was government property. (USA Today, May 21/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a message to all NASA staff on the fifth anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. He cited the important lessons learned, the stress on flight safety, and the successful Shuttle missions since that time. (NASA Release N91-8)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced, following a senior management meeting, that NASA would conduct a thorough review of the recent discovery that a fuel sensor removed from Space Shuttle Columbia last fall was cracked. However, Truly indicated that the sensor problem on Columbia had been corrected and the Shuttle was now tentatively scheduled for launch on June 1. (NASA Release 91-79; AP, May 25/91; UPI, May 25/91)
NASA announced it modified its Space Shuttle orbiter production contract with Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division in Downey, California. The modifications, at a cost of $93.5 million, extend the mission duration of Columbia flights from 10 days to 16 days, plus a two-day contingency. Measures required include a regenerative carbon dioxide removal system, improved waste collection provisions, added gaseous nitrogen and crew stowage provisions, and additional power furnished by an Extended Duration Orbiter cryogenic pallet holding spherical tanks of liquid oxygen. (NASA Release C91-c)
NASA announced that on February 21 test personnel at its John C. Stennis Space Center, Mississippi, had conducted a 1.5 second ignition test on a new turbopump developed by Pratt and Whitney for the Space Shuttle Main Engine. The company test program, underway since 1986, includes a partnership with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. The pumps use newer design technology and materials. Stennis Space Center is NASA's facility for testing all Space Shuttle Main Engines that power the orbiter during its first 8 1/2 minutes of flight. (NASA Release 91-36)
An editorial summarized the achievements of 10 years of Shuttle flights. (B Sun, Apr 23/91)
NASA and the Defense Department were expected to present the National Space Council with a proposal to build a new, heavy unmanned booster for the late 1990s. It would be based on a Space Shuttle external tank equipped with oxygen/hydrogen engines, using strap-on solid rocket motors. Jack Lee, director of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, told the US Space Foundation Symposium in Colorado Springs that the belief was that the new device could achieve a payload cost to orbit as low as $500-$1,000 per pound. (AvWk, Apr 15/91)
AP reported that Japan planned to start developing a small unmanned Space Shuttle in 1992 and wanted to launch it by 2000. (AP, Jun 18/91)
NASA announced its Mixed Fleet Manifest for the Space Shuttle and expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) for the next three years. Of the 26 Space Shuttle flights, 18 would be for NASA payloads or joint NASA/international payloads. The Shuttle was to focus on a variety of space science activities supporting life sciences, materials science, and astrophysics investigations. The remaining flights would consist of two international Spacelab missions, two flights of the commercially provided Spacehab module, the retrieval and reboost of a stranded commercial communications satellite, and three Department of Defense (DOD) missions. Seven Space Shuttle launches were planned for 1991, eight in 1992, and 11 in 1993.
A NASA crew hauled the Shuttle Discovery to its launch pad to prepare for takeoff approximately April 25. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; W Times, Apr 2/91)
NASA rolled the Shuttle Atlantis to a launch pad at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for a scheduled April 6 liftoff. (W Post, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
NASA cleared Space Shuttle Atlantis for launch on April 5 and said the mission would include the first US walk in space in five and one half years. The five-member crew was to deploy the 17-ton Gamma Ray Observatory. (AP, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; P Inq, Mar 28/91; USA Today, Mar 28/91; W Times, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 31/91)
Soviet space program experts announced that the 40-ton Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 would break up and fall to earth in February. Tass, the official Soviet press agency, implied Soviet officials had lost control of the station when it said the authorities would issue a "timely warning" to all countries on whose territory station "parts are likely to fall." Salyut 7 was launched in 1982 and last inhabited in 1986, holding up to six astronauts. The Soviet Union had planned to send a rescue mission with the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran but the Shuttle was delayed. (NY Times, Jan 1/91)
NASA indicated that the Shuttle Atlantis had landed 200 yards short of its lakebed runway at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The reason was that astronauts were unaware of the wind shift, of which ground controllers did not inform them because they thought the information was not needed. Measures have been taken to prevent similar incidents in the future by installing more efficient brakes and a drag chute to help slow the aircraft after touchdown. (O Sen Star, Apr 23/91)
NASA announced delivery of its "restructuring" report to Congress, redesigning Space Station Freedom. William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, stated that NASA cut costs (by $8.9 million through 1999), simplified the design, and reduced the complexity of the project in accordance with Congress's directions and the Augustine Commission's recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be needed to achieve the human-tended phase when astronauts, brought by the Space Shuttle, work for two-week periods. A permanently manned configuration would be achieved in fiscal year 2000, consisting of the US laboratory and habitat, and European and Japanese laboratories; the Canadian Mobile Servicing System; accommodations for a live-in crew of four; and three sets of solar arrays providing 65 kilowatts of electric power. Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return Vehicle must be available to evacuate crew in emergency; this phase requires 17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scaling back some plans and resulting in some layoffs by contractors and subcontractors. (NASA release 91-45; B Sun, Mar 21/91; W Post, Mar 21/91; WSJ, Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM, Mar 22/91; W Post, Mar 22/91; B Sun, Mar 22/91; NY Times, Mar 22/91; W Times, Mar 22/91; UPI, Mar 22/91; The Citizen, Mar 24/91)
NASA announced the postponement of the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia because of last minute problems discovered: two computer devices and nine four-inch temperature sensors. The flight was to be delayed at least 11 days. Reasons for the delay in finding the flaws were discussed. (P Inq, May 22/91; NY Times, May 22/91; W Post, May 22/91; USA Today, May 22/91; AP, May 22/91; UPI, May 22/91; LA Times, May 22/91; P Inq, May 23/91; NY Times, May 23/91; W Post, May 23/91;  USA Today, May 23/91; AP, May 23/91; UPI, May 23/91)
NASA discovered cracks in the protective thermal layer of the wings of Discovery, the third Space Shuttle to experience this problem. (AP, Oct 3/91; W Times, Oct 4/91)
Smithsonian officials scaled back plans for a National Museum of Air and Space annex from $325 million to $162 million. The site must be within one hour's drive of Washington and would be used largely to store airplanes. In other testimony, officials said the Space Shuttle Enterprise would not be leased to a Japanese television network. (W Post, Mar 22/91)
NASA engineers studied a tiny crack on the hinge mechanism of Shuttle Atlantis but planned to go ahead with a launch in April. Atlantis was scheduled to ferry into orbit the Gamma Ray Observatory, a Hubble Space Telescope-class astronomical instrument built to study extremely high energy radiation from deep space. (NASA Release, "STS-37 Mission Advisory"; UPI, Mar 6/91)
The crew of Shuttle Discovery prepared for a 38-hour "space ballet" with a satellite that will study Discovery's exhaust plumes. With two recorders not working, the astronauts turned to other instruments. The satellite launch was delayed to allow the crew to complete as many observations as possible of Earth's aurora before the coolant for the telescope ran out. (B Sun, Apr 30/91; W Times, Apr 30/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; USA Today, Apr 30/91; LA Times, Apr 30/91; AP, 30 Apr 91; UPI, 30 Apr/91)
Extensive media coverage preceded the scheduled launching of Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12. The countdown was planned to begin on September 9, but the discovery of a leak in the orbital steering system might delay the mission. The flight was to be the first in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program and was to place into orbit the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). The UARS was to carry 10 scientific instruments, of which four would study the ozone layer. (AP, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 8/91; W Post, Sep 8/91; NY Times, Sep 8/91; P Inq, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 9/91; W Times, Sep 9/91; USA Today, Sep 9/91; C Trin, Sep 9/91; B Sun, Sep 10/91; NY Times, Sep 10/91; P Inq, Sep 10/91; W Times, Sep 10/91; LA Times, Sep 10/91; AP, Sep 10/91; UPI, Sep 10/91)
UPI reported that new Space Shuttle Endeavour was delayed an additional day in its trip from the factory in California to Kennedy Space Center in Florida because of stormy weather. (UPI, May 6/91)
NASA announced that a new Crew Transport Vehicle (CTV) had been developed to allow the crew efficient egress after Shuttle flights to facilitate life science or medical investigations. The CTV was a renovated "people mover." (NASA Release 91-80)
Space Shuttle Discovery blasted off in what mission director Ronald D. Dittemore said was "probably the most complex flight flown to date." More than 60 Shuttle maneuvers were planned and 17 instruments were to be used to study the Shuttle's exhaust plumes, chemical releases, and the Earth's atmosphere. A problem with a tape recorder delayed the launch half an hour; after the launch further problems were experienced with two tape recorders. (NY Times, Apr 29/91; USA Today, Apr 29/91; W Post, Apr 29/91); B Sun, Apr 29/91; CSM, Apr 29/91; P Inq, Apr 29/91; LA Times, Apr 29/91; AP, Apr 29/91; C Trin, Apr 29/91; UPI, Apr 29/91)
NASA announced that its newest Space Shuttle, Endeavour, would be rolled out April 25 at a ceremony at Rockwell International's Space Division Facility, Palmdale, California. (NASA Editor's Note N-91-25)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was slowly hauled to its launch pad for a scheduled November 19 blastoff, according to UPI. NASA announced its mission was to deploy a Defense Support Program satellite designed to detect nuclear detonations, missile launches, and space launches from a geosynchronous orbit. A number of other experiments are to be performed during the 10-day flight. (NASA Release 91-176; UPI, Oct 24/91)
NASA prepared to begin countdown for Shuttle Discovery, despite predicted bad weather. (P Inq, Apr 20/91; W Post, Apr 21/91; B Sun, Apr 21/91; USA Today, Apr 22/91; W Post, Apr 22/91; AP, Apr 22/91; UPI, Apr 22/91)
NASA announced that November 19 had been set for the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis, which would carry a full load of military and scientific experiments during its 10-day mission. Of major importance would be its deployment of the latest in a series of Defense Support Program reconnaissance satellites (NASA Launch Advisory; AP, Nov 7/91; UPI, Nov 8/91)
Astronaut Mark Lee said a Space Shuttle flight in Endeavour, scheduled for August 3, 1992, in which his wife Jan Davis would also participate, would be just another work assignment. The media featured them as the first married couple in space. (AP, Mar 24/91; H Post, Mar 25/91; LA Times, Mar 27/91)
Ceremonies connected with NASA Administrator Richard Truly's presentation to Rockwell International Space Systems Division, Palmdale, of the 1990 George M. Low Trophy to a contractor for outstanding achievement in quality and productivity improvement were featured at some length. About half the Palmdale work force were scheduled to be laid off after Endeavour's completion; the remaining 450 workers beginning in July would modernize the Shuttle Columbia. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 5/91)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Fisher, M.D., would resign effective January 31, 1991. He was to return to full-time medical practice in Texas. With NASA since 1980, Fisher took part in research and in the 20th Space Shuttle mission in August 1985 where he engaged in the longest spacewalk in the history of spaceflight. (NASA release 91-4; UPI, Jan 8/91)
The media reported that the launch of Shuttle Columbia was again postponed because of problems with the navigation equipment. (UPI, Jun 1/91; AP, Jun 1/91; P Inq, Jun 2/91; W Post, Jun 2/91; NY Times, Jun 2/91; LA Times, Jun 2/91; CSM, Jun 3/91; USA Today, Jun 3/91)
The media in a series of articles anticipated the launching of Shuttle Discovery, discussed preparations for blast off, and outlined tasks to be performed. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; W Post, Apr 23/91; USA Today, Apr 23/91; CSM, Apr 23/91)
NASA announced it would hold the first Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) Post-Retrieval Symposium June 2-8, 1991, in Kissimmee, Florida. LDEF exposed 57 science and technology experiments to the space environment for almost six years until Shuttle Columbia returned it to Earth in January 1990. The conference was planned to examine the results of LDEF and the effects of a long-term space environment on materials and systems. (NASA Release N91-38)
Japan's space agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Development Agency (NASDA), plans to have three NASDA astronauts, including one woman doctor, participate in NASA Space Shuttle flights. (NY Times, Mar 24/91)
Florida Today described the opening on September 3 at the Kennedy Space Center of a third garage for NASA's four-Orbiter Space Shuttle fleet. The hangar was outfitted with equipment intended for the Air Force's mothballed Shuttle launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, saving NASA about $40 million. (Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
According to the wire services, two of three generators on Space Shuttle Atlantis were inadvertently left running after the landing. As a result, the generators were flooded with water, a byproduct of the power-generating process, and were being checked. (AP, Aug 13/91; UPI, Aug 14/91; O Sen Star, Aug 15/91; Fla Today, Aug 15/91)
The media covered the flawless touchdown of Shuttle Columbia on June 14. The Shuttle apparently suffered no major damage. After a night's sleep, four of the astronauts remained to undergo a series of medical and physical tests of their readjustment to gravity. Tests also were to be performed on the animals that traveled on Columbia. (UPI, Jun 14/91; W Post, Jun 15/91; P Inq, Jun 15/91; AP, Jun 15/91; UPI, Jun 15/91; W Post, Jun 16/91)
Scientists from several US government and university laboratories reported finding the rare atmospheric isotope Beryllium-7 present on the surface of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF). Dr. Gerald J. Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, commented on the significance as twofold: to date the isotope is known as produced at much lower altitudes than the LDEF was orbiting; and only one atmospheric gas, atomic oxygen, is previously known as interacting with orbiting spacecraft. The LDEF was returned from space by Space Shuttle Columbia in January 1990 after nearly six years in Earth orbit and was still being analyzed. The LDEF program was managed by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-30)
NASA officials reported that a quality inspector had discovered a cracked hinge in a fuel line door of Shuttle Discovery. The effect of the finding on Discovery's tentative launch date of March 9 was unknown. (UPI, Feb 19/91; AP, Feb 19/91; B Sun, Feb 20/91; W Post, Feb 20/91; NY Times, Feb 20/91; WSJ, Feb 20/91; USA Today, Feb 20/91; W Times, Feb 20/91; UPI, Feb 20/91)
A feature article in the New York Times discussed the impact of space rockets on the ozone layer. Reportedly, NASA estimated that each Shuttle flight injected some 75 tons of chlorine into the stratosphere. Dr. Michael J. Prather, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute in New York City, calculated that the lifting of nine Shuttles and six Titan 4s every year would add 0.3 percent to stratospheric chlorine, which in turn would destroy much less than 1 percent of the ozone there. This made the Shuttle a large source of pollution but small by comparison to any other industry such as refrigeration or solvents. (NY Times, May 14/91)
According to AP, NASA and the Pentagon were undecided how much information they would give about the next Shuttle mission, the November launch of Atlantis, intended to release a satellite designed to spot an enemy missile attack. (AP, Sep 18/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, commended U.S. government-sponsored educational displays at the Experimental Aircraft Association's exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin. It specifically complimented NASA's Space Station and Space Shuttle displays and astronaut Steve Nagel's presentations as effectively communicating U.S. space leadership. (AvWk, Aug 5/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, speaking as chairman of the National Space Council, said the U.S. would not buy or build more Space Shuttle orbiters. It is to continue to use the four existing orbiters into the next century but planned to develop a new family of rockets to replace the current fleet of unmanned vehicles. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said he helped devise the policy's wording and was "totally in support" of it.(P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; B Sun, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; USA Today, Jul 25/91; WSJ, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; Washington Technology, Jul 25/91; Htsvl Tms, Jul 26/91; Peninsula Times Tribune, Jul 30/91 quoting San Diego Tribune; B Sun, Jul 31/91)
William Paciesas, research professor of Physics at the University of Alabama, Huntsville, is co-investigator of an experiment on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory to be carried by Space Shuttle Atlantis in April. The Burst and Transient Source Experiment was to study the origins of gamma ray bursts. Gamma rays are at the upper end of the energy spectrum, carrying more energy at higher frequency than visible light, ultraviolet light, or x-rays. (Hntsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
An editorial commended the Space Shuttle record as remarkably positive over the past 10 years. (Fla Today, Apr 12/91)
NASA's next Shuttle mission is to be that of Atlantis, scheduled for launch in July to release a giant Tracking and Data Relay Satellite intended to link Shuttles and other low-orbiting spacecraft with the ground. Conrad Nagel, the NASA manager responsible for the launch preparation, raised the possibility that Atlantis might be launched earlier than July 25. (Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 15/91)
The Huntsville Times quoted Aerospace America as saying that Soviet officials confirmed reports that the Soviet military was preparing a manned space fighter with a crew of two to use against the U.S. Space Shuttle. The story cited a visit by General Dynamics technology analyst Richard Ward with Soviet designers. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 22/91)
NASA announced that July 23 would be the launch date for Space Shuttle Atlantis, which was to deploy the fifth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. (NASA STS-43 Launch Advisory)
The Marshall Islands commemorated the tenth anniversary of US Space Shuttle flights by issuing a block of four stamps. (AP, Apr 12/91)
According to Reuters, as reported by the Orlando Sentinel Star, Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency, said at a news conference at the Paris Air Show that plans to launch a European Space Shuttle were proceeding despite cost overruns and technical problems. (O Sen Star, Jun 19/91)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) chief scientist William Kinard of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, revealed that 200 experimenters in nine countries were analyzing the data gathered by the LDEF satellite that Space Shuttle Columbia rescued in 1990. The plan was to retrieve LDEF after 11 months, but delays and loss of Challenger stranded LDEF for five years and nine months. Nevertheless experiments were conducted and interesting findings were being discovered. (CSM, Feb 8/91)
President George Bush received the crew of Space Shuttle Atlantis. (UPI, May 8/91)
According to the Washington Post, as part of U.S.-Soviet discussions leading to a summit, was the possible exchange of American astronauts flying on Mir and Soviet cosmonauts being launched on a U.S. Space Shuttle. (W Post, Jun 29/91)
Robert Gibson, an astronaut removed from command of a Shuttle mission for violating flight-safety rules, unofficially has set a new altitude record of 27,000 feet in a single-engine Cassutt Formula 1 "midget" racing plane. (UPI, Feb 1/91; LA Times, Feb 3/91)
NASA program scientist Edward Weiler said in a telephone interview with UPI that an emergency Shuttle mission to replace faulty gyroscopes and solar panels aboard the Hubble Space Telescope was not needed before a flight already set for 1993 or early 1994. As a precaution, however, NASA engineers were perfecting computer control software that would stabilize the telescope if all its gyroscopes were to fail, until a Shuttle repair mission were mounted. (UPI, Aug 23/91)
The Wall Street Journal featured two inventors, of whom one, Khanh Dinh of Vietnamese origin, with NASA's assistance developed an innovative heat pipe technology. His company won a NASA contract to work on the heat-removal system for the Space Shuttle and also won a federal award for helping to commercialize space technology. (WSJ, Aug 27/91)
NASA announced the appointment of Leonard S. Nicholson as Director, Space Shuttle program, replacing Robert L. Crippen who is to be Director, Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 91-208; AP, Dec 16/91; W Times, Dec 17/91; USA Today, Dec 17/91; Fla Today, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91)
The Washington Post carried an article about the difficulties Spacehab Inc. was having commercially. NASA said there was a need for its product: a 10-foot-long pressurized module that fits in the cargo area of the Space Shuttle, expanding the cramped living and storage quarters. Problems arose, however, over NASA's ability to cancel contracts unilaterally (which might occur if Congress in its annual appropriations cut NASA's funds) and Congress's ability to cut funds for Spacehab in spite of any commitments NASA made to it. The lengthy article reviews the history of Spacehab and its operations. (W Post, Jul 8/91)
According to AP, the Shuttle Columbia left California on a piggyback jet ride to its home at Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (AP, Jun 19/91)
Rockwell International announced that it would lay off 450 workers assembling the Space Shuttle Endeavour after its delivery to NASA in late April. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 10/91)
NASA released its first in a new series of educational video products entitled "Space Basics," illustrating orbital science. A teacher's guide is also available. NASA planned that each future Shuttle mission would have a teacher's guide, "Mission Watch," and following the mission a summary report, "Mission Highlights." (NASA Release 91-29)
The media reported engineers were studying a possible problem connected with a $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) to be launched by Shuttle Atlantis. The problem involved the motor that deployed a boom carrying a six-foot-wide antenna. The main TDRS antennas are folded for launch, but once the satellite is in orbit, the antenna booms rotate outward and the antennas open up like umbrellas. On June 24, NASA manager of the project Nicholas Chrissotimos, stated that the problem was resolved. (UPI, Jun 21/91; AP, Jun 22/91; C Trin, Jun 25/91)
NASA announced that September 12 was set for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery and its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. The announcement followed completion of the Flight Readiness Review. (NASA Launch Advisory, Aug 28/91; CSM, Aug 28/91; UPI, Aug 28/91; DPA, Aug 28/91; P Inq, Aug 29/91; W Times, Aug 29/91; NY Times, Aug 29/91; USA Today, Aug 29/91; LA Times, Aug 29/91; AP, Aug 29/91)
The Washington Times reported that the Smithsonian Institution had decided to keep the National Air and Space Museum Annex at Dulles International Airport and scale down the project, which is to include the Space Shuttle Enterprise. The cost at Dulles would be $8 million less than at Baltimore-Washington International Airport, and Virginia could make a larger contribution than Maryland to total costs. (W Times, May 9/91)
The media reported that because of high winds in California, Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The right tire was severely damaged on landing, but the new stronger brakes worked well. In addition, twice as much fiberglass thermal tile filler would have to be replaced than was customary after a flight. The astronauts accomplished 32 of 33 planned primary observations, 18 of 21 secondary observations, and 41 of 44 category-3 experiments. (P Inq, May 7/91; W Post, May 7/91; NY Times, May 7/91; USA Today, May 7/91; B Sun, May 7/91; WSJ, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; P Inq, May 8/91; AP, May 8/91; UPI, May 9/91)
The two astronauts on NASA's first Shuttle flight 10 years ago, John Young and Robert Crippen, returned to Cape Canaveral for an anniversary celebration. The 20,000 workers at Kennedy Space Center and their families were invited for the occasion. (AP, Apr 13/91; B Sun, Apr 14/91)
PR Newswire reported that Loral Space Information Systems awarded Control Data a $6.5 million contract for a Flight Analysis and Design System to modernize mission planning for NASA's Space Shuttle program. (PR Newswire, May 15/91)
NASA announced crew members for eight future Space Shuttle missions, of which the first, a Microgravity Laboratory mission, is scheduled for May 1992. (NASA Release 91-137; AP, Aug 23/91; UPI, Aug 23/91; LA Times, Aug 24/91; AvWk, Aug 26/91)
Thousands of people watched Atlantis take off from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The external fuel tank from Space Shuttle Atlantis broke off after takeoff and was seen over Hawaii streaking toward Earth. Some accounts gave biographic data of crew members. (AP, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 6/91; LA Times, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; P Inq, Apr 6/91; B Sun, Apr 6/91; LA Times, Apr 7/91)
NASA announced that early results from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) confirmed the link between the presence of chlorine monoxide and the depletion of ozone in Earth's upper atmosphere. The UARS was launched by Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12, 1991. (NASA Release 91-199)
NASA announced that the second Astro mission, dedicated to astrophysics, would fly aboard the Space Shuttle. The success of the first Astro mission and the ability of the instruments to acquire high-quality scientific data were major reasons for the decision. The following instruments were to fly on Astro-2 to observe the ultraviolet part of the electromagnetic spectrum: the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope, which performs spectroscopy; the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope, which produces images of components of nebulae, stars, and galaxies; and the Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photopolarimeter Experiment, which measures light polarization. (NASA Release 91-76; AP, May 20/91; B Sun, May 21/91)
According to AP, Space Shuttle Columbia returned home to Florida after a one-week trip from the West Coast. Reportedly, NASA would save $1 million, in addition to travel time, by landing a Shuttle in Florida. (AP, June 21/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer, quoting AP, reported that a hydraulic fuel tank in one of Space Shuttle Atlantis's solid rocket boosters burst after a test on October 31. However, according to NASA spokeswoman Lisa Malone, the rupture should not delay the scheduled launch of Atlantis. (P Inq, Nov 1/91)
Media coverage was extensive of NASA's cutting short by three days the mission of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of a failed navigational unit. Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, December 1. The Shuttle landed in good condition although it lost a small electrical connector part on landing. (W Post, Dec 1/91; W Times, Dec 1/91; NY Times, Dec 1/91; B Sun, Dec 1/91;P Inq, Dec 1/91; P Inq, Dec 2/91; NY Times, Dec 2/91; W Post, Dec 2/91; W Times, Dec 2/91; B Sun, Dec 2/91; USA Today, Dec 2/91; AP, Dec 2/91; C Trin, Dec 2/91; UPI, Dec 2/91; B Sun, Dec 3/91; NY Times, Dec 3/91; W Times, Dec 3/91; USA Today, Dec 3/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
NASA's goal was to deploy two Space Shuttle missions during April: Atlantis on April 5 and Discovery on April 25. The last two-launching month was January 1986. In addition to launching the Gamma Ray Observatory, the Atlantis flight would feature a spacewalk by Jerry Ross and Jap Apt. (NY Times, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; LA Times, Apr 4/91; B Sun, Apr 5/91;  W Post, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91)
Kenneth Szalai, recently named director of NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Base, stated that NASA was putting a new emphasis on aeronautics. The facility's number one project involved the F-18 high-angle-of-attack program to help design more maneuverable aircraft. Similar work was underway on the X-29 as well as modifications on the F-15 jet fighter and testing of Space Shuttle landing gear systems. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 7/91)
NASA announced that Franco Malerba would be Prime Payload Specialist and Umberto Guidoni Backup Payload Specialist for the Tethered Satellite System mission on Space Shuttle Atlantis in the summer of 1992. This is a cooperative mission between NASA and Italy's space agency, Agenzia Spaziale Italiana. (NASA Release 91-154)
The media carried extensive coverage of the preparatory stages for the mission of Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew. The four medical specialists were to conduct tests on human body functions while the three astronauts flew the Shuttle and were subject to some of the tests. Scientists hoped to learn why astronauts return to Earth with weakened immune systems, reduced bone mass, a decrease in body fluid or blood, fewer red blood cells, and less muscle protein, as well as space motion sickness. The 30 white rats and 2,478 tiny jellyfish being carried were to be analyzed after the flight. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91; W Post, May 20/91; AP, May 20/91; UPI, May 20/91; CSM, May 20/91; NY Times, May 21/91; USA Today, May 21/91; UPI, May 21/91)
NASA spokeswoman Lisa Malone said three days of torrential rain at Cape Canaveral, Florida, had failed to damage Space Shuttle Atlantis. (B Sun, Mar 19/91; USA Today, Mar 19/91)
NASA announced that a developmental Space Shuttle main engine sustained extensive internal damage while it was undergoing ground testing July 24 at NASA's Stennis Space Center, near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi. The engine differed from engines used in Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 91-118)
Navy Captain Michael L. Coats, the astronaut to command the Discovery mission, said that astronauts in Discovery, although with no military charge, would seek to observe the Persian Gulf War in their flight. The Discovery's military payloads would provide data to help the united States detect missiles fired in future wars. (H Post, Jan 24/91)
NASA announced the renaming of the Gamma Ray Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, by Space Shuttle Atlantis, in honor of American physicist Arthur Holly Compton. (NASA Release 91-151)
The Chicago Tribune featured Elmhurst College professor Frank Mittermeyer who has been growing tomatoes from some 1,000 seeds that orbited Earth for six years and were retrieved by Space Shuttle Challenger in 1990. Mittermeyer noticed the second generation of space tomatoes were not as robust as the first. (C Trin, Sep 23/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald expressed the concern of some NASA staff over the number of flight waivers NASA had issued. NASA issues such waivers on certain critical items rather than change the Shuttle design, which would be very costly. Statistics indicate that the number of waivers approved since the Challenger accident more than tripled. According to Frank Pizzano, head of the reliability and maintainability engineering division at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the increase results from stricter standards for waivers but many weaknesses were eliminated in the Shuttle redesign after the Challenger accident. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 8/91)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) sponsored a workshop of scientists, environmentalists, regulators, and aerospace industry representatives the summer of 1991. As a result, a report was issued on October 17, concluding that rockets blasting into space generate pollutants that deplete stratospheric ozone, increase acid rain, contribute to global warming, and reduce air quality. Jerry Grey, science and technology policy director for the AIAA, said all nations that launch rocket-powered vehicles should contribute to an international effort to reduce the problems. The United States used more solid rockets than any other nation. For example, NASA estimated that each Space Shuttle flight deposited about 75 tons of chlorine into the ozone layer. Subsequently, Reuters interviewed Steve Newmann, chief environmental engineer in NASA's Office of Space Flight. He admitted NASA played a minor role in depleting the ozone layer it was studying but said NASA was working to make its next generation of space vehicles more environmentally friendly. (NY Times, Oct 18/91; B Sun, Oct 28/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to preparations for the launch of Shuttle Atlantis, scheduled for November 19. Coverage included mention of a "spy camera" designed to take detailed pictures of installations on Earth from space. (P Inq, Nov 17/91; W Times, Nov 17/91; USA Today, Nov 18/91; B Sun, Nov 18/91; W Times, Nov 18/91; NY Times, Nov 18/91; C Trin, Nov 18/91; LA Times, Nov 18/91; AP, Nov 18/91; UPI, Nov 18/91; NY Times, Nov 19/91; USA Today, Nov 19/91; W Post, Nov 19/91; UPI, Nov 19/91)
James R. Thompson, NASA Deputy Administrator, was quoted as praising NASA's preeminence in space and aeronautics technology but admitting its recent difficulties. In view of these, Thompson indicated he thought NASA should slow its push for the Space Station and instead adapt the Space Shuttle to fly longer missions to demonstrate why a Space Station would be valuable.  (Birmingham News, Aug 29/91)
The media discussed plans for NASA's next Shuttle flight, that of Discovery in September to deploy a satellite to study the ozone layer in Earth's upper atmosphere. Discovery was moved to the launch pad, and various systems were connected to prepare for a practice countdown. (UPI, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91)
Hughes Communications Galaxy is suing NASA because it refused to launch Hughes' satellites from the Space Shuttle after the Challenger accident. Edward Frankle, NASA general counsel, said the contract foresaw that Hughes might not get the service it signed up for. (B Sun, Mar 23/91; AP, Mar 25/91; W Times, Mar 26/91; W Post, Mar 26/91; P Inq, Mar 26/91; AP, Mar 26/91)
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore announced that for financial reasons it was ending its participation in the Magellan Telescope project in Las Campanas, Chile as of June 30. It cited an inability to raise the $15 million, which was its project share. The role of the Astronomy Department at Johns Hopkins was enhanced through its space participation. The Hopkins Ultaviolet Telescope was successfully flown aboard the Space Shuttle and Johns Hopkins contains on campus the Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA's center for astronomy programs with the Hubble Space Telescope. (B Sun, Apr 3/91)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
The Christian Science Monitor reviewed NASA's nine proposed Space Shuttle missions for 1992. It noted the strong international flavor of the missions, including the ascent of the first Italian Space Agency astronaut aboard Atlantis in July 1992. Astronauts from Canada and the European Space Agency were to fly on several missions. In August, Japan's first professional astronaut was to ride on the new orbiter Endeavour, scheduled to debut in May as replacement for the Challenger. Other proposed missions and their scheduled dates were outlined. (CSM, Dec 19/91)
The media covered preparations for launching by the crew of Shuttle Columbia. (AP, Jun 4/91; UPI, Jun 4/91; NY Times, Jun 5/91; W Times, Jun 5/91;  USA Today, Jun 5/91; W Post, Jun 5/91; B Sun, Jun 5/91; P Inq, Jun 5/91)
The media reported that Shuttle Discovery was hauled to its launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Scheduled for a March blastoff, its mission was to learn more about how to detect rockets in flight, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative missile defense program. (UPI, Feb 15/91; LA Times, Feb 16/91)
According to a space publication, NASA's cost estimate for its Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program had increased to about $3 billion, and NASA formally announced that the main ASRM goal was to aid the construction of the Space Station. The ASRM was intended to launch an extra 8,000 pounds of Space Station equipment on each Shuttle flight carrying Space Station hardware. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91)
Following the Flight Readiness Review, NASA announced April 23 as the launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery, with a seven-man crew commanded by Navy Captain Michael L. Coats. (NASA Release 91-54; W Times, Apr 16/91; AP, Apr 16/91; UPI, Apr 16/91; B Sun, Apr 17/91; NY Times, Apr 18/91)
According to Florida Today, the Atlantis astronauts were scheduled to arrive at Kennedy Space Center in a few days, to begin preparations and a practice countdown for the Space Shuttle flight. (Fla Today, Oct 28/91; UPI, Oct 31/91)
According to AP, the House subcommittee on Science, Space, and Technology planned to examine NASA's "midlife crisis," referring to the agency's "management failures" and "loss of leadership." The report mentioned NASA's recent series of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, the GOES weather satellite, the postponements in the Space Shuttle launch, and the Galileo space probe's jammed antenna. (AP, Jul 31/91)
The Eureca satellite that failed to enter proper orbit after being released from the Shuttle Atlantis responded to commands to boost itself into a higher orbit. The reusable satellite held experiments using shrimp eggs, seeds, crystals, bacteria spores, solar monitors, cosmic dust catchers, and a telescope. Its was slated to remain in orbit for several months before being retrieved and returned to Earth for study. (P Inq, Aug 7/92; LA Times, Aug 7/92; NY Times, Aug 7/92; W Times, Aug 7/92; USA Today, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 7/92; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
The Space Shuttle returned to earth with its seven-member crew, two Japanese carp, four frogs and assorted tadpoles, hornets, and flies. This was the first Shuttle flight devoted to Japanese research. (NY Times, Sept 21/92; P Inq, Sept 21/92; The Sun, Sept 21/92; W Times, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; W Post, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; AP, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; UPI, Sept 21/92; USA Today, Sept 21/92; LA Times, Sept 21/92)
Astronauts on the Shuttle Atlantis cleared a snag in the tether cord linking the Italian-built satellite to the Shuttle and safely reeled the satellite back into the Shuttle's cargo bay, averting the need for an emergency space walk. The satellite flew above Atlantis for 24 hours, never going higher than 850 feet on the tether, far short of the twelve-and-one-half mile target. Even though the experiment fell short of its goal of generating electricity with a tethered satellite, the exercise showed that tethered vehicles probably can be reliably controlled in space. (LA Times, Aug 6/92; P Inq, Aug 6/92; W Post, Aug 6/92; W Times, Aug 6/92; NY Times, Aug 6/92, Aug 9/92; USA Today, Aug 6/92; WSJ, Aug 6/92; APn, Aug 6/92, Aug 8/92; UPI, Aug 6/92, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 6/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis and its seven-member crew was launched into orbit to begin eight days of around-the-clock research to probe the health of Earth's polluted atmosphere. Embarking on NASA's first manned "Mission to Planet Earth," Atlantis's flight was the first of 10 planned over the next decade to chart subtle atmospheric changes as the sun's energy waxes and wanes slightly over a complete 11-year "solar cycle." (W Post, Mar 25/92; USA Today, Mar 25/92; WSJ, Mar 25/92; B Sun, Mar 25/92; NY Times, Mar 25/92; AP, Mar 25/92)
A Starfire I rocket manufactured by EER Systems Corporation of Vienna, Virginia, failed to achieve suborbital flight after launch from the White Sands Missile Range. The flight carried nine microgravity experiments. At a cost of $3 million, the Starfire rocket was thought to be an inexpensive way to carry out experiments without the costs associated with programs such as the Space Shuttle. (Las Cruces, NM, Sun News, Sept 11/92; El Paso Times, Sept 11/92)
As part of the 1993 budget, President Bush approved the cancellation of two major NASA projects--a scientific mission to rendezvous with an asteroid and a program to build more powerful Space Shuttle boosters. Under the budget plan, the White House cancelled the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), a $3 billion program to develop new and more powerful boosters for the Space Shuttle, as well as the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, a $700 million spacecraft slated for launch in the late 1990s. The 1993 Bush plan allocated a $700 million increase over the 1992 $14.3 billion NASA budget. (Space News, Jan 28/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed at Cape Canaveral, ending a 10-day journey during which the crew released a laser-reflecting satellite and tested a robotic eye. (NY Times, Nov 2/92; P Inq, Nov 2/92; W Post, Nov 2/92; W Times, Nov 2/92; AP, Nov 2/92; UPI, Nov 2/92; The Sun, Nov 2/92)
NASA announced that a Board of Investigation had been formed to assess the problem of the fouled tether that prevented the successful release of the Tethered Satellite System during Shuttle Atlantis' just-completed flight. NASA officials said that any decision about reflight of the $380 million tether system would depend in part on a quick determination of what went wrong and how much it would cost to solve the problem. NASA set an August 28 deadline for the board to report its findings. (NASA Release 92-129; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92, Aug 17/92)
J.P. Mitchell, Pratt and Whitney's Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME) Alternate Turbopump Development project manager, reported that a pair of Pratt and Whitney designed high-pressure turbopumps had been successfully tested at 100 percent rated power on a SSME at NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. (PR Newswire, Jan 23/92)
European, Canadian, and Finnish ministers, meeting in Granada, Spain, approved spending cuts for the European Space Agency of about 13 percent through the year 2000--down to $26 billion. The biggest cuts will affect the Hermes Space Shuttle. The ministers also launched a three-year study of ways to work with Russia on future space missions. (WSJ, Nov 11/92)
NASA officials scheduled the next Shuttle launch for July 31, three weeks after the Shuttle Columbia returned from its record-breaking two-week mission. Atlantis' seven-day flight was slated to troll an Italian satellite on a 12-mile-long tether and to launch Eureca, a European satellite, on a one-year mission. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 26/92; W Times, Jul 27/92; NY Times, Jul 28/92)
The House of Representatives approved a $47.3 billion space program for the next three years after voting to limit spending on development of an advanced solid-fuel rocket motor motor. The bill reauthorizing NASA for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 was passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate. The House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned Space Station, nearly $8 billion for other space science applications, and $12.5 billion for the space shuttle program. Before approving the bill, the House agreed to cut in half, to $260 million, the 1993 budget for the next generation solid-fuel rocket, designed to enable the Space Shuttle to carry heavier payloads, including key components of the Space Station. (AP, May 5/92)
Defense contractor Teledyne, Inc., announced that it would pay $17.5 million in fines to settle federal criminal charges alleging that the company systematically falsified reliability tests of electromagnetic relays. The relays are used in virtually all U. S. weapons systems and space programs, including the Patriot missile and the Space Shuttle. It wasn't known if any systems failures had been caused by the relays, which function as electronic switches. (AP Oct 3/92)
NASA announced that astronaut James F. Buchli (Col., USMC), a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, was to retire from the U.S. Marine Corps and leave NASA to accept the position of Manager, Station Systems Operations and Requirements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release: 92-77)
NASA headquarters announced that Space Shuttle Columbia would be launched on a 13-day mission on June 25, 1992. Mission STS-50, planned to be the longest flight to date in the Shuttle program, will carry the United States Microgravity Laboratory-1 payload into orbit. A Spacelab long module was to serve as an in-orbit laboratory for seven crewmembers and 31 experiments devoted to materials science, fluid physics, combustion science, and biotechnology. (NASA STS-50 Launch Advisory)
NASA began assembling Space Shuttle Discovery for launch in December on a mission to deploy a secret Department of Defense satellite. Liftoff was scheduled for December 2, nearly a month behind schedule because of problems with a faulty steering engine. (P Inq, Nov 4/92; W Times, Nov 4/92)
NASA managers set January 13 as the launch date for the first Shuttle mission of 1993. Designated STS-54, the flight was to have two primary objectives--deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-F) and astronomical observations of invisible x-ray sources within the Milky Way Galaxy with the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer. The crew was to be comprised of John Casper, commander, Don McMonagle, pilot, and three mission specialists, Mario Runco, Greg Harbaugh, and Susan Helms. (NASA Release N92-110; C Trib, Dec 23/92; AP, Dec 22/92; UPI, Dec 22/92)
The new Space Shuttle Endeavour was slowly hauled to its seaside launching pad for work to ready the ship for an engine test firing in April and its maiden flight in early May. Mounted atop a powerful Apollo-era crawler-transporter, Endeavour began the 4 1/2 mile, six-hour trip to pad 39-B at 7:18 a.m. EST. Engineers spent the afternoon hooking up fuel lines and various mechanical, hydraulic and electrical systems. (UPI, Mar 14/92; AP, Mar 13/92; P Inq, Mar 14/92)
Dr. David M. Rust, chief scientist for the Flare Genesis project, a powerful solar telescope project developed by a team at Johns Hopkins University, said the telescope could be launched as early as December 1993. Rather than be launched on a NASA rocket or from a Space Shuttle, which might take a decade of planning and cost hundreds of millions of dollars, the telescope was to be dragged 19 miles above Antarctica by a balloon. The project would be another in a series of long-duration research flights using large balloons. Project scientists hoped to use the telescope to explore the precise cause of solar flares. (The Sun, Sept 15/92)
NASA announced the departure of Navy Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein, Chief of the Astronaut Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, since 1986 and a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, effective about October 1. Selected by NASA in 1978, Brandenstein first flew as a pilot aboard the Shuttle Challenger in 1978 and holds the record for time in space (789 hours) among Space Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 92-100)
Shuttle Columbia astronauts carried out experiments designed to ease reentry from space. They pedalled furiously on a stationary bicycle and floated in a depressurization sack to draw blood from the top of the body to the legs. They also grabbed an aluminum panel with the Shuttle's arm and swung it about the spacecraft's cargo bay to test a Canadian robotic vision system. A day earlier, they deployed the Lageos II geodynamics satellite. (NY Times, (Oct 25/92; W Post, Oct 25/92; P Inq Oct 24/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
A pinched piece of rubber filler--not a faulty O-ring seal--caused a leak in a solid rocket booster being readied for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, NASA said. The booster's three O-rings seals were in good condition. (AP, Sept 24/92; UPn, Sept 24/92; W Times, Sept 25/92)
A task group looking into issues concerning future satellite rescue and repair said NASA should continue to perform such missions but only when they "produce genuine benefits to U. S. interests in view of the inherent risks to the Shuttle and its crew." The task force also recommended that NASA should charge higher fees for the risky and expensive work of retrieving commercial satellites with the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 92-197; The Sun, Nov 7/92; AP, Nov. 6/92; W Post, Nov 7/92; Space News, Nov 16-22/92)
A company spokesman for Rockwell Corporation said that NASA was negotiating with Rockwell to build spare parts in the Antelope Valley for the Space Shuttle program. Rockwell was negotiating the terms of a $55 million contract to build a midbody fuselage and a tail for the Space Shuttle fleet. The work would be performed in the hanger where the company built all of the Space Shuttles for NASA. Work would begin with 70 employees and was expected to last until 1999. (Daily News, May 18/92)
Dr. Lynn Wiley, an obstetrician who had worked with NASA since the early 1980s, reported that because of plans for long-term missions in space, the question of sex and reproduction had become very important issues. Men and women could be teamed in lunar colonization efforts planned after the turn of the century and in trips to Mars, which could take two to three years for a round trip. Dr. Stewart Whitman of the Space Settlement Studies Program at Niagara University agreed that research was "essential if males and females are going to be on long-term missions together." But Barbara Shwartz, a spokeswoman for the Johnson Space Shuttle Center, said Shuttle sex is not feasible because there is no "privacy" and stressed that NASA plans no sexual experiments involving humans. (W Times, Feb 28/92; Huntsville Times, Feb 20/92; Birmingham News, Feb 20/92; NY Times, Feb 11/92)
NASA announced that Rockwell International Corporation's Space Systems Division had received NASA's first-ever award for World Class Performance in recognition of its exemplary work in building the new Space Shuttle orbiter Endeavour. The award is given when the NASA administrator determines that an organization has performed world-class work of significant benefit to the agency and U.S. taxpayers. (PR Newswire, Jul 14/92)
NASA reported that astronaut Bruce E. Melnick, Commander USCG, will be leaving NASA in July 1992. Melnick, who flew on Space Shuttle missions STS-41 and STS-49, accepted the position of Director, Shuttle Processing Contract Process Improvement Technology with Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 92-68; USA Today, May 20/92; AP, May 19/92)
NASA managers decided to replace all three main engines aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour because of problems with powerful oxygen pumps that came to light after an engine test firing. Rocket engineers initially believed that Endeavour had sailed through its flight readiness firing in good condition, with no signs of any major problems in the ship's propulsion system. But detailed analysis of data from the 22-second test indicated the liquid oxygen high pressure turbopump bolted to main engine No. 2 had experienced high vibration levels during engine operation, apparently because of abnormal bearing wear. NASA decided to replace all three of the engines to minimize the impact on the Shuttle's launch processing. (UPI, Apr 8/92; AP, Apr 8/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour began testing a system to deliver intravenous fluids in weightlessness, a step toward meeting the possible medical needs of astronauts who stay in space long-term. (AP Sept 18/92)
On the fourth day of their mission, Shuttle Columbia's astronauts measured ozone in Earth's upper atmosphere and tested a new toilet. The flight was scheduled to last ten days. (W Post, Oct 26/92; P Inq, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 26/92; USA Today, Oct 26/92; W. Times, Oct 26/92; AP, Oct 25/92, Oct 26/92; UPI, Oct 26/92)
The Tethered Satellite System Investigative Board presented an interim report on the cause of the failure of the tethered satellite experiment on the Shuttle Atlantis' mission earlier this month. Preliminary findings indicated that a bolt one-quarter of an inch in diameter got in the way of a reel of cord, causing it to jam. The bolt was part of a structural change made earlier this year to strengthen the tether system's attach points to withstand better the rigors of launch and landing, NASA said. Italian scientists hope to retry the experiment. A complete report was expected in about a month. (AP, Aug 29/92; API, Aug 28/92; UPI, Aug 28/92; NY Times, Aug 30/92; C Trib, Aug 30/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
Reacting to the recent failed attempt at tethered space flight by the crew of Shuttle Atlantis, Astronaut Jeffrey Hoffman, the payload commander, said NASA needed to improve the way equipment was tested on the ground before flight. "When we're doing fundamentally new things, we've really got to pay close attention to how we're doing the testing on the ground or else we're going to continue to get surprised," Hoffman said. (APn, Aug 14/92)
NASA researchers said that tests on astronauts aboard a June 5-14, 1991, flight of the Space Shuttle Columbia found their hearts, lungs, immune systems, and nervous systems responded in unexpected ways. Involved were blood pressure, muscle mass, production of key cells, and proper balance and orientation. The results do not suggest any major obstacles to long-term space missions, according to Ronald White, NASA's chief of life sciences. Longer human space flights, however, might depend on developing artificial gravity or other measures to minimize the physical effects of spaceflight. (UPI, Jul 25/92; NY Times, Jul 25/92; W Post, Jul 25/92)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in San Francisco, California, NASA Administrator Samuel S. Goldin said that NASA should decide within five years whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005. A decision in the matter should be made by 1997, Goldin said, although in any event, the space agency would continue to fly the Shuttles until at least 2005. Shuttle costs would have to come down in the meantime, however, even as safety improvements continued. (Space News, Dec 7-13/92)
NASA announced that Charles F. Bolden, Jr. Col., USMC, would command Space Shuttle mission STS-60 in November 1993. Other crew members would be Pilot Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr.; and mission specialists Franklin R. Chang-Diaz; Jan Davis, Ronald M. Sega, and a Russian cosmonaut yet to be designated. (NASA Release 92-188; Space News, Nov 2-8/92)
Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
An article in the Chicago Tribune discussed the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran; built in the early 1980s, the Buran flew only once in November 1988. Today all three models of the spacecraft sit idle, victims of the economic downsizing in Russia. The Buran program seems destined for oblivion. (C Trib, Nov 8/92)
NASA started a countdown toward test-firing the Space Shuttle Endeavour's main engines. Endeavour's three main engines were to be fired for 22 seconds. If all goes well, launch teams would begin preparing the Shuttle for a satellite rescue mission in early May 1992. (W Times, Apr 4/92; AP, Apr 4/92; UPI, Apr 6/92)
After four days of trying, laser signals beamed up from Florida were received aboard the Shuttle Discovery. That success came a day after NASA had decided to cancel a major experiment in tracking space debris because of a dead battery aboard the Shuttle. (NY Times, Dec. 7/92; The Sun, Dec 7/92; USA Today, Dec 7/92; AP, Dec 7/92; UPI, Dec 5/92; W Post, Dec 7/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92)
Rockwell International and a Russian company announced plans to collaborate on a system to enable the Space Shuttle  Atlantis to dock with Russia's MIR Space Station. Rockwell said it had signed an agreement under which NPO Energia would develop hardware for the system and build some components. (AP, Sept 9/92)
Veteran NASA astronauts Richard O. Covey and Kenneth        Bowersox and ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier were named to the crew for STS-61, the Hubble Space Shuttle Telescope servicing mission scheduled for late 1993. Covey was appointed the mission commander, and Bowersox was to be the pilot. Nicollier was named to be a mission specialist. Three other crew members previously named to the STS-61 mission were payload commander Story Musgrave, and mission specialists Tom Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Kathryn D. Thornton. (NASA Release 92-218)
On their first full day in space, two crew members of the Space Shuttle Endeavour conducted experiments involving motion sickness. Understanding motion sickness has high priority among space agencies around the world. It strikes most astronauts during their first few days in space, and it affects flight planning, such as space walks, which are never scheduled early in a mission. (W Post, Sept 14/92; NY Times, Sept 14/92; W Times, Sept 14/92; AP, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92)
It was reported that Martin Marietta Corporation had abandoned the six-year venture into the commercial satellite launching business that it started in the summer of 1986, seven months after the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. The original plan was to build 20 Titan rockets for commercial launches. That number was reduced to 12, and the company charged $90 million to fourth-quarter earnings in 1988 for a reserve to help finance the launch venture. Martin eventually built only four commercial Titans, the last of which was scheduled for launch in September 1992, carrying a payload to map the surface of Mars and look for possible landing sites on that planet. (B Sun, May 8/92)
It was reported that a Russian-German space crew will blast off from Kazakhstan on March 17, 1992, the first manned flight since the birth of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). German cosmonaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade was scheduled to travel aboard a Soyuz craft to the Mir Space Station, six weeks after his countryman Ulf Merbold returned from a successful eight-day mission aboard the U.S. Shuttle Discovery in January. Kayser-Threde GmbH, a small Munich high technology firm, would produce hardware for scientific tests during Flade's week-long mission. (Reuters, Feb 24/92)
Space Shuttle Endeavour touched down on Rogers Dry Lake, California, ending a historic, nine-day maiden voyage. The public's response to Endeavour's mission, which featured an unprecedented three-astronaut capture of a stranded communications satellite, was the most enthusiastic since the Shuttle program resumed in 1988, NASA officials said. A crowd of an estimated 125,000 turned out in the desert to watch the landing. (LA Times, May 17/92; P Inq, May 17/92; AP, May 16/92; W Times, May 17/92; B Sun, May 16/92; W Post, May 17/92)
Michael Griffin, NASA associate administrator for exploration, said that a new heavy-lift vehicle built from components of the Space Shuttle transportation system should be able to launch elements of Space Station Freedom at a cost comparable to that of the space shuttle. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis made a near-perfect touchdown at Cape Canaveral after a nine-day atmospheric research flight, NASA's first manned "Mission to Planet Earth." Atlantis's ambitious flight marked the first in a series of at least 10 such missions to study the sun and Earth's atmosphere over the next decade to chart subtle changes in the sun's energy output that affect chemical processes critical to life on Earth. The Shuttle circled the world 143 times during its nine-day voyage and traveled 3.7 million miles. (UPI, Apr 2/92; AP, Apr 2/92)
Jeremiah Pearson, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said NASA planners were studying ways to cut up to 25 percent from the Space Shuttle budget by 1997, a much more extensive reduction than previously projected. The 25 percent cut would produce savings of about $3 billion, Pearson said. Managers at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida were already working to cut 10 percent from the Shuttle's 1994 budget. (Space News, Aug 24-30/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the conclusion of the longest-ever Shuttle flight, a 14-day research mission intended as a rehearsal for NASA's Space Station. The arrival was diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base in California, because of rain. (P Inq, Jul 10/92; The Sun, Jul 10/92; LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 9/92, 10/92; CSM, Jul 10/92; NY Times, Jul 10/92; WSJ, Jul 10/92; AP, Jul 09/92; UPI, Jul 9/92)
The countdown for the December 2 launch of the Shuttle Discovery began, the 10th and allegedly the last Shuttle mission dedicated to U. S. Department of Defense work. Aside from releasing a secret military satellite, astronauts were to conduct a number of military experiments, such as testing a Shuttle laser system and releasing of metal balls to be tracked by space debris researchers. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 28/92 and Nov 29/92; W Times, Nov 28/92; Nov 29/92, and Nov 30/92; CSM, Nov 27/92; P Inq, Nov 30/92; USA Today, Nov 30/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
NASA announced that the first flight of the IML-O1 (International Microgravity Laboratory), was set for January 22, 1992, aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. Over 220 scientists from 14 countries were to be represented in this unprecedented international effort to conduct research in both materials and life sciences in the microgravity environment. (NASA Note N92-3)
Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off on a secret mission for the Pentagon, carrying what analysts surmised was a spy satellite to monitor troop movements in Eastern Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. Several days of technology and medical experiments were also scheduled for the week-long mission. The launch was delayed 85 minutes while the sun melted a thick coat of ice from its fuel tank. This eighth and last Shuttle mission of 1992, the 52d for NASA's program, concluded NASA's busiest year since 1985, when nine Shuttles flew. It was also the last to carry a classified military cargo.
Belgium's Prince Philippe, who is the nephew of King Baudouin and heir to the throne, called the crew members of the Space Shuttle Atlantis to congradulate them on their launch and to honor Dirk Frimout, the first Belgian in space. (AP, Mar 26/92; UPI, Mar 26/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery, which flew in space nine days in January, returned home after 14 days on the ground in California and a cross-country piggyback trip on a Boeing 747. The Shuttle left for the Kennedy Space Center, stopping overnight at Biggs Army Air Field in El Paso, Texas and at Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. (AP, Feb 16/92)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, in its annual report to officials of NASA, questioned the agency's decision to save money by eliminating several engine improvement programs, which could compromise the safety of future Space Shuttle flights. Although the panel said NASA was generally doing a good job on safety issues, the panel said it was unwise for the agency to stop developing a new main combustion chamber for the engine and a new hydrogen fuel pump. (NY Times, Mar 18/92)
The scheduled launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis was canceled because of fuel leaks, but NASA decided it was a fleeting problem that posed no danger. Launch director Bob Sieck said he was confident the trouble was not a recurrence of the hydrogen leaks that grounded the Shuttle fleet for almost six months in 1990. The launch was rescheduled for the next day. (W Post, Mar 24/92; NY Times, Mar 24/92; W Times, Mar 24/92; P Inq, Mar 24/92)
James Abrahamson, former Strategic Defense Initiative Director, left Hughes Aircraft to serve as co-chairman of Oracle Systems. A former Air Force general, Abrahamson was expected to supervise such projects as NASA's Space Shuttle and the Air Force's F-16 fighter. (Bus Wk, Sept 28/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour resumed science work after successful repairs Sunday night on a set of water-cooled furnaces critical to several of the 43 experiments aboard the shuttle. The crew observed irradiated fruit fly larvae, fertilized frog eggs, kept tabs on two fish with electrodes attached to their brains, and tested a new manufacturing method for electronic components. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Sept 15/92; W Post, Sept 15/92; The Sun, Sept 15/92)
Technicians searching for a leak in a Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket found a 1-inch hair pressed into a secondary seal, a NASA spokesman said. The leak was detected yesterday in a segment of a booster for the Shuttle Columbia, which was being prepared for a February launch date. It was a leak in an O-ring seal that was blamed for the 1986 Shuttle Challenger explosion in which seven astronauts were killed. (W Times, Dec 27/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 27/92)
NASA announced that Sergei K. Krikalev and Col.Valadimir G. Titov had been approved as the two Russian candidates to be trained to fly on a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993. (NASA Release 92-166)
NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)
The Shuttle Atlantis landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending a mission that deployed a European scientific satellite but that failed to complete an experiment with a tethered satellite. (USA Today, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 8/92; P Inq, Aug 9/92; W Post, Aug 9/92; The Sun, Aug 9/92; W Times, Aug 9/92; NY Times, Aug 9/92; CSM, Aug 10/92; WSJ, Aug 10/92)
The U.S. Defense Department announced that it had no further plans to use the Space Shuttle for major payloads after launch of a classified military satellite during a Shuttle flight in November. The Pentagon, which once had planned to be a prime user of the Space Shuttles, was to be relegated to a minor and occasional Shuttle customer. In place of the Shuttles, the Pentagon planned to rely much more heavily on expendable launch vehicles for military payloads. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
The Justice Department accused a large military electronics maker of falsifying results of tests on sophisticated weapons and spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle. The department joined a $250 million civil lawsuit that accused Teledyne Relays, a Teledyne Inc. unit, of falsifying tests to ensure the reliability of electromagnetic relays, according to court papers. Government contracts accounted for about a third of Teledyne's $3.2 billion in sales last year. (AP, Apr 23/92)
In another article in Nature, scientists from NASA and Hughes STX Corporation in Lanham, Maryland, said that the uppermost part of Earth's protective ozone layer was about seven percent thinner in 1989 than it was in 1980. The conclusions were based on observations taken by the Nimbus-7 environmental research satellite launched in 1978 and refined by a calibration device on a Space Shuttle mission in October 1989. The new observations were consistent with previous projections of ozone depletion. (UPI Jul 9/92;
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
NASA announced that a Space Shuttle flight link up with the Russian Mir Space Station, tentatively planned for September 1994, would be retargeted for launch in April 1995. A flight by a Russian cosmonaut aboard the Shuttle Discovery remained on track for launch on November 16, 1993. The first flight to begin building the planned Space Station Freedom was rescheduled for July 1996. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor roared into orbit on September 12 on a history-making seven-day mission. It carried the first married couple, Mark Lee and Jan Davis, the first black woman, Mae Jemison, and the first Japanese, Mamoru Mohri, to fly on a U.S. spacecraft. It also carried fish, frogs, hornets, flies, and fertilized chicken eggs, all subjects of the research mission. Endeavour's flight was also the first U.S. space mission devoted to Japanese research. Japan supplied 34 of the 43 Spacelab experiments, the United States seven, and two were shared. Japan contributed $90 million of the estimated $363 million cost of the flight. (CSM, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92; W Times, Sept 13/92; NY Times, Sept 13/92; The Sun, Sept 13/92; P Inq, Sept 13/92; W Times, Sept 12/92; W Post, Sept 12/92; The Sun, Sept 12/92; C Trib, Sept 12/92;)
NASA announced that Dr. Chiaki Mukai of the Japanese National Space Development Agency had been designated as the prime payload specialist for the second International Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for launch aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia in July 1994. She was to be the first Japanese woman to take part in a U.S. space shuttle mission. Dr. Jean-Jacques Favier, a scientist with the French Atomic Energy Commission, was selected as an alternate payload specialist. (NASA Release 92-173; UPI, Oct 20/92)
NASA announced signature of a $59.3 million supplemental agreement with Rockwell International's Space Systems Divison for the design, development, test, and evaluation of a new system to update Space Shuttle orbiter cockpit displays. (NASA Release C92-15)
Scientists at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California announced plans to blast an 11-pound projectile from a 155-foot-long cannon into a California hill. The test shot was intended to demonstrate that an ultra-high-velocity gun hitherto used only for laboratory research can be adapted to send payloads into space at only about one-fortieth of what it costs to orbit them by Space Shuttle. The gun was the product of a program called the Super High Altitude Research Project. (NY Times, Sept 29/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia blasted into space under control of a five-man, one-woman crew. In command was James Wetherbee of the Navy; his co-pilot was Capt. Michael Baker.  Mission specialists were Capt. William Shepherd of the Navy, flight engineer; Charles Lacy Veach; Tamara Jernigan; and Canadian researcher Steven MacLean. On board were commercially sponsored experiments that were to examine a potential treatment for osteoporosis, material crystals to increase the speed of computers, protein crystals to determine the molecular structure of "alfa-2b interferon" used in the treatment of some cancers, and experiments on microgravity effects on astronauts. (NASA Release 92-180; P Inq, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92; AP, Oct 22/92; P Inq, Oct 23/92; NY Times, Oct 23/92; Oct 25/92; W Times, Oct 23/92; USA Today, Oct 23/92; AP, Oct 23/92; CSM, Oct 23/92; LA Times, Oct 23/92; The Sun, Oct 23/92; C Trib, Oct 23/92)
The flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, carrying seven astronauts from three countries, was the second Shuttle mission in a row to carry an array of life science experiments focusing on the effects of space travel on humans and other organisms, with an eye toward preparing to send astronauts on interplanetary flights, specifically, NASA's proposed manned mission to Mars. The astronauts were split 12-hour work shifts so experiments including a battery of medical tests could be conducted non-stop. Researchers hoped to learn more about space motion sickness and back pain, common ailments among astronauts in orbit. Experiments were also to be conducted in the cargo bay to measure effects of zero gravity, fertilization of eggs, and cartilage formation in various organisms. The Shuttle would also study the effect of bombardment by high-energy cosmic rays on living tissue. (B Sun, Jan 22/92; NY Times, Jan 23/92)
According to a poll commissioned by the company that built the U.S. Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and President Bush's proposed missions to the moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent of the nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared with 74 percent two years ago and 78 percent in 1988. Support for an outpost on Mars, a goal announced by Bush during his first year in office, had slipped to 49 percent from 62 percent in 1990 and 66 percent in 1988. (O Sen, Mar 19/92)
NASA announced that more than 700 researchers from around the world would convene on March 16-20, 1992, at Johnson Space Center's (JSC) Gilruth Center in Houston, Texas for five days of discussions on research on the universe, with much of the focus on Venus and findings from NASA's Magellan probe. Magellan, deployed from the Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1989, has mapped about 97 percent of the Venusian surface with its remote sensing cameras. An overview of the Magellan program called "Magellan at Venus: The Global Perspective Emerges," start was scheduled to the conference on March 6, 1992. (NASA Note N92-19)
The Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew set a record for the longest Space Shuttle flight on the 11th day of a laboratory research mission. Columbia passed the previous Shuttle endurance record of 10 days, 21 hours, and one minute set in 1990 by another Shuttle Columbia crew. (W Times, Jul 7/92; The Sun, Jul 7/92; W Post, Jul 7/92; AP Jul 7/92; UPI Jul 76/92; USA Today, Jul 7/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis released the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, but it encountered immediate problems with its steering system and remained in too low an orbit. Engineers at the European Space Agency's control center in Darmstadt, Germany, struggled to understand the problem, hoping to boost the satellite into its proper orbit 320 miles above the Earth within  a day or two. (W Times, Aug 3/92; WSJ, Aug 3/92; The Sun, Aug 3/92; LA Times, Aug 3/92; NY Times, Aug 3/92; P Inq, Aug 3/92; APn, Aug 3/92; UPI, Aug 3/92)
Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
Explorers reported that the lost city of Ubar, called "the Atlantis of the Sands" by Lawrence of Arabia, had been found in Oman using pictures taken from the Space Shuttle Challenger in October 1984. The city was thought to have been inhabited from 2800 B.C. until A.D. 100. (USA Today, Feb 5/92; W Times, Feb 5/92; P Inq, Feb 5/92; NY Times International, Feb 5/92; B Sun, Feb 5/92)
Scientists from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said they planned to seek answers to such problems as the development of frog eggs in weightlessness and control of space motion sickness on the next Shuttle flight scheduled for mid-September. Space Shuttle Endeavour was slated to carry a crew of seven, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J, a science laboratory containing 43 experiments, 34 of them provided by Japan, on a six-day mission. (NASA Releases 92-130 and 92-128)
NASA's Tethered Satellite System Investigative Board released its report, presenting the panel's finding on problems which had prevented full deployment of the satellite during Space Shuttle mission STS-46. The report identified causes for four of five problems that occurred and made recommendations for actions to prevent similar occurrences in the future. (NASA Release 92-196; UPI, Nov 6/92)
NASA officials added an extra day to the environmental mission of the Space Shuttle Atlantis so its seven-member crew could conduct more research on the atmosphere. (P Inq, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92)
The countdown began for the launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia on a research and satellite delivery mission. (NY Times, Oct 20/92; UPI, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
Shuttle Atlantis' astronauts unreeled a tethered satellite in a risky electrical experiment never before tried in space, but the effort immediately ran into difficulties. Four hours and about a dozen tries were needed to free the satellite from the Shuttle. Then the unreeling tether line jammed twice, and the satellite ended the day about 850 feet instead of twelve and one-half miles from the Shuttle. NASA added an eighth day to Atlantis' mission because of problems with the Eureca and tethered satellite experiments. (W Post, Aug 5/92; The Sun, Aug 5/92; LA Times, Aug 5/92; WSJ, Aug 5/92; USA Today, Aug 5/92; NY Times, Aug 5/92; P Inq, Aug 5/92; W Times, Aug 5/92; APn, Aug 5/92; UPI, Aug 5/92; C Trib, Aug 5/92; Time Magazine, Aug 17/92)
NASA delayed the maiden flight of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour from May 4 to May 7 to allow a daylight liftoff. Tom Utsman, acting associate administrator for space flight at NASA, said officials had reviewed the criteria and decided that it would be prudent to delay the flight so detailed photographs and documentation could be made for analysis. A dalylight liftoff also would allow Endeavour's seven-member crew to make a daylight landing back at the Kennedy Space Center in case of an engine failure early in flight. (UPI, Apr 28/92; W Post, Apr 28/92; USA Today, Apr 28/92; NY Times, Apr 28/92)
NASA inspectors announced that they had discovered a pinhole-size leak in an O-ring seal of a solid rocket booster intended for Space Shuttle Discovery's November 15 launch. Technicians replaced the seal, which was similar to the one that caused the 1986 Challenger explosion. (USA Today, Sept 23/92; W Times, Sept 23/92; AP, Sept 23; UPI, Sept 23/92)
Three American astronauts took a historic spacewalk using their gloved hands to make a last-ditch rescue of a wayward satellite. It was the first time so many astronsuts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands. All previous salvage operations had mainly used some type of high-technology hardware. At 230 miles above the Earth, the three astronauts of the Space Shuttle Endeavour grabbed the wobbling 4.5 ton, 17 foot satellite and stopped its rotation, holding it motionless for about a minute while sloshing fuel settled down. (NY Times, May 14/92; B Sun, May 14/92; USA Today, May 14/92; W Times, May 14/92; W Post, May 14/92; P Inq, May 14/92; AP, May 14/92)
NASA announced that the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) had resumed full science operations following the resolution of problems with the satellite's solar array drive. Flight controllers had turned off the satellite's instruments June 2 after observing that the solar array drive was not operating smoothly and that the solar array itself was not properly tracking the sun. UARS was launched September 12, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Discovery. It was designed to study the chemistry, dynamics, and energetics of the Earth's upper atmosphere, focusing particularly on ozone depletion. UARS was the first major satellite element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-117)
With just over three years left before construction of Space Station Freedom begins in Earth orbit, NASA announced that it would add spacewalks to upcoming Shuttle flights when possible, beginning with one during STS-54 in January 1993. (NASA Release 92-210)
NASA scientists were baffled by a brownish discoloration, representing some kind of growth, on the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) satellite. The LDEF was retrieved by a Space Shuttle in January 1990. Whatever the growth, it had formed in space and despite high ultraviolet radiation and the corrosive power of atomic oxygen. (W Times, Sept 9/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Astronauts had to wait more than two hours before debarking because of toxic fumes from a leaking thruster. The main mission, the deployment of a secret Pentagon satellite, occurred soon after launch in what was the last Shuttle mission for the U. S. military. The day before, the Shuttle had to swerve in orbit to avoid a four-inch piece of space junk, the third such incident in two years. (The Sun, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; UPI, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; NY Times, Dec 10/92; WSJ, Dec 10/92; P Inq, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 13/92; USA Today, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 11/92)
After triumphing in a bruising congressional battle in 1991 and securing a $2.25 billion berth in the Administration's 1993 budget, NASA officials and Space Station Freedom contractors said they were on target toward a scheduled launch of the first Space Station components in November 1995. The station, to be lofted piece by piece aboard the Space Shuttle, was to be partially operational by 1997, and permanently manned by a four-astronaut crew by 2000. (LA Times, Feb 24/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
Astronauts aboard the Shuttle Columbia beamed down Fourth of July greetings on the 10th day of a planned 13-day mission, the longest in Shuttle history. The goal of Columbia's was  twofold: to study the effects of weightlessness on physical, chemical, medical, and biological processes, and to demonstrate the Shuttle's capability to remain in orbit at least 13 days. A wide range of experiments aimed at generating knowledge from microgravity science were underway in the long Spacelab module being flown on Columbia. (UPI, Jul 4/92; AP, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; W Post, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92; P Inq, Jul 5/92; W Times, Jul 5/92; Reuters, Jul 4/92; AvWk, Jul 6/92)
NASA-sponsored research into the biological effects of space flight at the University of Wisconsin suggested that astronauts may have to workout in space to protect their bones on long-duration flights. Dr. Arthur Vailas of the university's Biodynamics Laboratory based his conclusions on the metabolic processes in the bones of rats that had experienced days of weightlessness aboard the Space Shuttle. (UPI, Oct 21/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
Amid concerns over cold weather, the Shuttle Discovery was prepared for lauch from Cape Canaveral at 8:53 a.m. EDT. (USA Today, Jan 22/92)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
In an experiment co-sponsored by NASA and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, D.C., a novel cell culture system for growing bone cells was to undergo its first test in weightlessness on a Space Shuttle mission. The objectives of the Space Tissue Loss-1 (STL) experiment involve studying the effects of the microgravity environment on the biochemistry and functional activity of various tissues including muscle, bone and blood cells. Post-flight electron microscopic analyses of cells from the flight experiment were to be conducted by Dr. Stephen Doty of the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York City.(NASA Release 92-30)
NASA chose Rockwell International's Palmdale plant in California to refit the seven-year-old Space Shuttle Atlantis, allowing the spacecraft to stay aloft longer and possibly enabling it to rendezvous with the Russian Space Station Mir.  (LA Times, Jul 2/92)
NASA and Thiokol Corporation officials were working on a modification to prevent a field joint lining from creating leaks in the cases of solid rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle. This effort came after engineers discovered a leak in a segment of the booster rocket assembled for the Space Shuttle Discovery's scheduled November launch. (AvWk, Sept 28/92)
It was reported that NASA's decision to kill off a multibillion-dollar program to develop a new, more powerful solid rocket booster for the Space Shuttle fleet was a carefully planned move actually intended to help save the project. The advanced solid-rocket motor program, which would have cost nearly $500 million in 1993, was eliminated with the expectation that funds for the project would be restored by Representative Jamie L. Whitten (D-Miss.), chairman of the House Apppropriations Committee. (LA Times, Feb 3/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts on Tuesday completed a series of spacewalks to install an engine and move an antenna on the Mir Space Station, partly in preparation for docking with a U.S. Space Shuttle in 1994. (AP, Sept 15/92)
Jim Scott, Magellan project manager at the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, expressed regret at NASA's decision to cut short the spacecraft's mission. Since its launching from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on May 4, 1989, the spacecraft had mapped 97 percent of Venus' surface, using radar to peer through the planet's thick clouds and take pictures of the rugged, volcanic landscape. Scientists hoped to continue mapping in more detail during an "extended mission" ending in 1995, but NASA officials decided to avoid adding $80 million to the cost by ending the mission on September 30, 1993. The budget decision meant that engineers would not be able to move Magellan from its elliptical orbit and into a lower circular orbit starting in May 1993. That would have allowed Magellan to remap Venus with three to 10 times more detail than the pcitures it already had taken. (NASA Release, 92-14; W Times, Jan 29/92)
NASA set a December 2d launch date for the year's eighth and last Shuttle flight, a military mission, designated STS-53. Five astronauts, all military men, will release a classified satellite, thought to be a Lacrosse radar-imaging satellite from the Shuttle Discovery. Crew members are David Walker, commander; Robert Cabana, co-pilot; James Voss, Guion Bluford, and Michael Richard Clifford. (W Times, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
Teledyne Industries paid a record $17.5 million in criminal fines for falsifying tests on electronic relay switches used in high-tech weapons and spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle. Teledyne pleaded guilty to 35 criminal counts. (W Times, Nov 10/92; WSJ, Nov 10/92; USA Today, Nov 10/92; AP, Nov 9/92; UPI, Nov 9/92)
A spokesman for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization said a 23,000--pound rocket motor clamped to the marrooned Intelsat 6 satellite by the crew of Space Shuttle Endeavour fired fllawlwssly at 1:25 p.m. EDT while both were orbiting about 230 miles over Africa. The 122-nation consortium, based in Washington, owns and operates the $150-million satellite. (LA Times, May 15/92)
Space Center Houston opened on this date. The $70 million non-profit center, which expected to lure two million visitors a year, is designed to bring the "wonder days" of the early space program to a generation of children that has known only the Space Shuttle. The center, on the periphery of NASA's space campus, supplants the former visitor facility inside the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.  (USA Today, Oct 14/92; H Chron, Oct 14/92, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92; Newsweek, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jeremiah W. Pearson, III, announced that Thomas Utsman, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight, will become the Program Director for the Space Shuttle. He will direct long-range Shuttle planning, Space Shuttle continuous improvement activities and overseeing efforts to reduce Shuttle operations costs while maintaining safety. (NASA Release 92-83)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin charged a new team of agency officials with finding a cheaper way to build Space Station Freedom, even if that meant assembling much of it without the Space Shuttle. The team, comprised mainly of officials within NASA but outside the Station program, was asked to redesign the Station so that it can be completed on time despite congressionally imposed spending limits. Goldin's directive came in the wake of reduced Space Station funding in both the House of Representative and the Senate. Findings were due to Goldin by November. (Space News, Aug 17/92; AvWk, Aug 24/92)
The countdown began for the Space Shuttle Atlantis on a mission to test an Italian satellite linked to the Shuttle by 12 miles of electricity-generating cord. NASA officials said there was a 90 percent chance of acceptable launching conditions on July 31. (NY Times, Jul 29/92, Jul 31/92; CSM, Jul 29/92; UPI, Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; AP Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; The Sun, Jul 31/92; W Post, Jul 31/92; LA Times, Jul 31/92; P Inq, Jul 31/92)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
Dr. Carl Fichtel, Principal Investigator for the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), announced that NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory found three new gamma-ray quasars, detected more than 200 cosmic gamma ray bursts, and captured the best ever observation of the glow of gamma radiation from the disk of the Milky Way galaxy. The Compton Observatory, built by TRW Inc., Redondo Beach, California, is the second of NASA's "Great Observatories." The first was the Hubble Space Telescope, launched in April 1990. The Compton Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, from the Space Shuttle Atlantis, orbits Earth at an altitude of 268 by 262 miles. (NASA Release 92-6)
The commander of the Space Shuttle Endeavour, Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein of the Navy, said that the problems and needs of America's cities were no reason to divert money from the space agency's annual budget of $14 billion. If anything, Capitain Brqndemstein said a strong space program was needed to nspire yopung to high achievement and hopes for the future. He said that voyages of exploration were a vital social investment, todayand centuries ago. "America is a country based on boldness and looking into the future, not looking out the back of the bus," said Captain Brandenstein. (NY Times, May 18/92)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's international crew took time off from their scientific work to remember the seven astronauts who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger six years ago. "It being the 28th, we're all mindful of the sacrifices made along the way," Discovery crewman William Readdy said during a news conference from space. It was the first time that Americans had been in orbit on the anniversary of the Jan 28, 1986 explosion of Challenger 73 seconds after it took off from Cape Canaveral. (P Inq, Jan 29/92; USA Today, Jan 29/92)
The seven astronauts who returned to Earth July 9 after spending 14 days on the Shuttle Columbia said that getting used to Earth again had been similar to adjusting after shorter flights. They also said that preliminary results indicated their experiments had been successful. The crew grew protein crystals for use in medical research, studied fire safety in space by lighting candles and igniting wiring insulation and polyurethane foam, jiggled drops of liquid with sound waves to see how fluids behave in space, and tested a new miniature space greenhouse. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 21/92)
Space Shuttle Mission STS-45 was designated for the first flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS-1). The ATLAS-1 was to measure long-term variability in the total energy radiated by the sun and measure the Earth's middle atmospheric constituents over one 11-year solar cycle. (NASA Note N92-14)
NASA announced that an exotic mix of materials and equipment would be exposed to the unique conditions of microgravity during Space Shuttle Columbia's 13-day mission scheduled for June 1992. The flight would be NASA's longest Shuttle mission and was the first of a series of missions leading to 90-day assignments aboard the planned Space Station Freedom. Astronaut Bonnie Dunbar and three scientists were scheduled spend most of their time in the pressurized Spacelab module in Columbia's cargo bay. (USA Today, May 27/92)
A division of Rockwell International agreed to pay $1.42 million and to permit the federal government to lecture employees about honesty to settle a fraud case involving Space Shuttle work. Prosecutors said they would drop charges that Rockwell's Collins Commercial Avionics Division in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, which makes and repairs Shuttle flight instruments, had defrauded NASA by altering time cards for work done on the Shuttle program. (P Inq, Jul 22/92; NY Times, Jul 22/92; WSJ, Jul 22/92; AP, Jul 21/92)
Weather conditions forced postponement of the Space Shuttle Columbia's return, lengthening what is already NASA's longest Shuttle mission into a full two weeks. (P Inq, Jul 9/92; LA Times, Jul 9/92; W Post, Jul 9/92; NY Times, Jul 9/92; W Times, Jul 9/92; The Sun, Jul 9/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia commander Richard N. Richards made a pitch today for the Space Station Freedom, saying that astronauts on the Columbia Shuttle flight needed more time in orbit to conduct scheduled experiments. Such time would be available on the Space Station, which had experienced funding difficulties in Congress. Two Shuttle astronauts worked though part of their breaks as they rushed to complete experiments, one dealing with the growth of crystals and the other with dust particles. (W Post, Jul 4/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis photographed natural auroras and fired clouds of gas into space as they circled Earth for a fourth day. (NY Times, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 27/92; W Post, Mar 27/92)
NASA set Sept. 12 as the launch date for the seven-day scientific mission of the Shuttle Endeavour. The 50th Shuttle mission was to include a number of Shuttle mission firsts: the first married couple, the first black woman, and the first Japanese astronaut on a U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release STS-47 Launch Advisory; USA Today, Sept. 2/92)
Rockwell International and NPO Energia of Kaliningrad agreed September 4 to discuss cooperation in space flight and technology and to work together on a docking system that will connect the U.S. Space Shuttle to the Russian Mir Space Station. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA set an October 22 launch date for Space Shuttle Columbia's satellite-delivery and research mission. The six-member crew was to release the Itlian Space Agency's Laser Geodynamic Satellite, or Lageos, then conduct spacecraft tracking experiments and mechanical and medical tests. (NASA Release N92-88; LA Times, Oct 7/92)
According to NASA scientists, human, plant, and animal cells exposed to the microgravity of space for only a few days show changes in function and structure. Although preliminary, the results of the recent life sciences research on the Space Shuttle suggest alteration in metabolism, immune cell function, cell division, and cell attachment. Scientists also reported dramatic changes from space travel in some of the body's systems. Four principal investigators from the Space Life Sciences-1 mission flown aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in June 1991 reported key finds in the areas of cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and neurovestibular physiology. (NASA Release 92-124)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
During Space Shuttle Columbia's upcoming mission, scientists planned to test a theory which may have applications ranging from hurricane dynamics to superconductivity . The Lambda-Point Experiment was to study the strange behavior of helium at its critical temperature of 2.177 degrees above absolute zero. Other experiments were to study the effects of gravity on metals and semiconductors as they solidify on Earth and in orbit and vibrations in the Shuttle as the vibrations affect the other two experiments. The Shuttle crew was also scheduled to deploy the Laser Geodynamics Satellite, an Italian satellite to study the movements of the Earth's crust and other phenomena. (NASA Releases 92-175 and 92-176; LA Times, Oct 2/92)
NASA removed scientific samples and volatile fuels from the Space Shuttle Columbia on Tuesday. The Shuttle was grounded for at least three weeks because of an engine shutdown that had occurred three seconds before liftoff. (AP, Mar 24/93; UPI, Mar 24/93)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched on a satellite-deployment mission after two months of delays.  The liftoff had been postponed five times for equipment failure, payload problems, and a meteor shower.  After a short delay caused by a minor communications problem, astronauts on board successfully deployed the $363 million Advanced Communication Technology Satellite (ACTS). The satellite could one day shrink the diameter of satellite dishes to one and one-half feet.
Bad weather delayed the landing of Space Shuttle Endeavour at Kennedy Space Center. The landing was rescheduled for June 30, weather permitting. (UPI, June 29/93, June 30/93; W Post, June 30/93; USA Today, June 30/93; NY Times, June 30/93; B Sun, June 30/93; AP, June 30/93; RTw, June 30/93)
China's state-run media reported that China had reached its first agreement with the United States to rent payload space in the U.S. Space Shuttle program for scientific research projects.  Jian Jingshan, director of the Center for Space  Science and Applied Research at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said his center had rented eight payload booths to carry equipment for experiments in space physics. (C Trib, Dec 5/93)
Astronauts assigned to the Space Shuttle Columbia mission in the fall of 1993 were scheduled to conduct experiments on rats while in orbit. After beheading the rats, they were to dissect them. This would be the first dissection of an animal in space, to NASA's knowledge. The remaining rats aboard the Shuttle were scheduled for a similar fate once they returned to Earth.  NASA's Willy Hinds, a biologist and immunologist who is in charge of the project, said that "these tissues...are the biological equivalent of the moon rocks."  (AP, Aug 30/93; LA Times, Sept 5/93)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-61 to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was scheduled for December 1, 1993. The flight was the first in a series of planned visits to the orbiting telescope. The 11-day mission was designed to accommodate a record five spacewalks with the capability for an additional two if needed.
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts Colonel Vladimir G. Titov and Sergei K. Krikalev were scheduled to meet with the media for interviews on Tuesday, March 9. The two cosmonauts were training as mission specialists for Shuttle mission STS-60 set to be launched in late 1993. (NASA Editors Note N93-9)
Astrophysicists reported that data from an x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour might have come from a million-degree gas produced by a nearby and fairly recent supernova, or exploding star. Scientists have puzzled over these x-rays for 25 year. Wilton T. Sanders from the University of Wisconsin commented, "There's a lot more analysis that needs to be done before we can start pinning down the exact origin of these x-rays. At this point, we're just very happy with the results that we're getting. The x-rays do seem to clearly be from a thermal process." (W Times, Jan 19/93; B Sun, Jan 19/93; NASA Release, Jan 21/93)
NASA began replacing Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines in preparation for another launch attempt next month.  The third countdown for Discovery ended on August 12 with an engine shutdown three seconds before launch.  Engineers traced the problem to a sensor that was supposed to monitor the flow of fuel in main engine No. 2. (AP, Aug 18/93)
NASA announced that results from a Spacelab crystal growth experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle last summer had brought researchers closer to understanding the molecular structure of proteins; such understanding would aid scientists in developing more effective disease-fighting, anti-parasitic drugs. (NASA Release 93-166)
NASA halted the countdown for Space Shuttle Discovery less than an hour before scheduled liftoff because of a bad electrical circuit controlling a set of launch pad safety locks.  A second launch attempt was expected to take place no earlier than late next week. (AP, Jul 17/93; UPn, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 17/93; USA Today, Jul 19/93; P Inq, Jul 18/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93; W Times, Jul 18/93; W Post, Jul 18/93)
NASA announced that the December flight of the Endeavor Space Shuttle mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope was scheduled to last ll days and to involve a record five spacewalks, with the possibility of two additional walks, if needed. (NASA Release 93-76; W Times, Apr 25/93)
A NASA official said that Rocketdyne might lose as much as $29 million in profits on its Space Shuttle engine program because of manufacturing problems at its Canoga Park plant. The company could lose the funds, known as award fees, if NASA determined that the company had performed poorly between November and April. NASA was completing a review of Rocketdyne's space shuttle engine manufacturing operation. (Daily News, June 3/93)
Space Shuttle Columbia was fueled for the third launch attempt of a science mission chartered by Germany. The mission, which was years behind schedule, was scheduled for launch Monday, April 26 at 10:52 a.m. (UPI, Apr 25/93; AP, Apr 26/93; NY Times, Apr 26/93; USA Today, Apr 26/93; RTw, Apr 26/93
NASA completed its review of the flight readiness of Columbia Shuttle Mission STS-55, a mission dedicated primarily to the German Space Agency for research in life and microgravity sciences. During the review, inspectors decided to replace the Shuttle's high pressure oxidizer pumps.
Russian officials announced that two Russian cosmonauts had taken a space walk to rearrange solar panels on the outside of the Mir Space Station in order to increase the panels' efficiency. The rearrangement also would prepare the Mir for an eventual docking by the U.S. Space Shuttle. The cosmonauts encountered several problems during the walk and had to stay outside their capsule longer than planned. (AP, Apr 4/19, Apr 4/20; RTw, Apr 20/93; USA Today, Apr 20/93)
NASA announced that it had set July 17 as the launch date for the Space Shuttle Discovery's 17th flight.  The nine-day mission of STS-51 was to include deployment of an Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) and deployment and retrieval of the German-built ORFEUS-SPAS astrophysics free-
NASA announced that June 20, 1993, had been set as the new launch date for the next flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The launch originally had been scheduled for June 3. (NASA Launch Advisory)
NASA unveiled a $300 million radar system that can take color pictures of Earth's damaged environment from a Space Shuttle. According to NASA project scientist Diane Evans, "In many case, radar is the only way scientists can explore unaccessible regions on Earth's surface." The camera was scheduled to fly on the Shuttle three times, in 1994, 1995, and 1996. NASA and the German and Italian space agencies cooperated on the project. NASA paid half the cost. (AP, May 14/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden instructed senior NASA managers to begin a five-month study that would examine whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005 or upgrade the fleet so that shuttles could fly until 2030. The study was being led by Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Systems Development. (Space News, Feb. 8-14/93)
NASA announced the selection of 11 new science mission concepts in the Discovery Program for further study during this fiscal year. The Discovery missions were selected from 73 concepts discussed at the Discovery Mission Workshop held last November. The potential projects were those thought to have the highest scientific value as well as a reasonable chance of meeting budgetary guidelines.	 Discovery missions were designed to proceed from development to flight in less than three years.
A recent Space Shuttle experiment on rats some day may lead to the discovery of the genes that direct bone cells to produce more bone.  The third Physiological and Anatomical Rodent Experiment (PARE-3) studied changes in the activity of bone-forming cells after nine days of spaceflight.  It also investigated whether these changes were reversed within three days of return to Earth. (NASA Release 93-181)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
NASA announced that the material that keeps the Space Shuttle from burning up when it returns from space may help treat medical problems on earth. Researchers from NASA's Ames Research Center in California were working with physicians in San Antonio to determine whether the Space Shuttle's ceramic surface insulation materials could be used in bone transplants. (NASA Release 93-102)
Late this month, the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft was scheduled to visit a big chunk of rock named Ida, only the second asteroid to be explored up close.  Galileo, launched from a Space Shuttle in 1989, was scheduled to be within 1,500 miles of Ida in late August, on its way to its 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. Galileo made the world's first asteroid encounter--with Gaspra--in October 1991.
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
NASA reported that an explosive designed to free a satellite aboard Space Shuttle Discovery accidentally detonated while the Shuttle was in orbit last month, hurling shrapnel though the cargo compartment.  The five astronauts were never in any danger, a NASA official said. The damage would not delay Discovery's next flight in January. (RTw, Oct 7/93; AP, Oct 8/93; Fla Today, Oct 11/93, Oct 14/93)
NASA announced that a German-chartered Space Shuttle mission was scheduled for launch March 14 after a delay of more than two weeks. NASA said the delay was caused by a false alarm with the space shuttle Columbia's main engines, which were suspected of containing outdated parts. (W Times, Feb 27/93)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee voted June 9 to prevent NASA from moving about 90 Space Shuttle jobs from Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to Johnson Space Center in Houston. (Space News, June 21-27/93)
NASA announced that June 3, 1993 had been set as the target date for the STS-57 mission of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The mission would be highlighted by the retrieval of the European observation satellite EURECA and the first flight of Spacehab, a commercial spacelab facility. (NASA Editors Note N93-28)
A National Research Council (NCR) study found that Space Shuttle computer software programs were flawed by lax attention to safety by NASA engineers. Nancy Leveson, who headed the NRC committee that prepared the report, said that "many of the same kinds of mistakes that played a role in the Challenger accident are now being repeated with the shuttle flight software." NASA, which requested the study, was considering some of the report's recommendations. (AP, June 28/93; USA Today, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93)
Space Shuttle Columbia, carrying seven astronauts, 48 rats, and a medical research lab, blasted into orbit for a record 14 days of experiments to learn more about keeping astronauts healthy during long voyages in weightlessness. The research was also expected to shed light on other health issues, including hypertension, anemia, and osteoporosis.  This mission was only the second mission in 58 Shuttle trips focused entirely on medical research.
The Washington Post reported that Maxime Faget, chairman and founder of Space International Inc., had resigned from his position as consultant to the Space Shuttle redesign team. Some NASA employees questioned Faget's objectivity because his company had earlier proposed its own alternative Space Station and design and because the company would likely bid on any new design proposal. Faget's resignation "was determined by both NASA and Space Industries as necessary." (W Post, Mar 24/93)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that a NASA advisory panel had found that the Hubble Space Telescope would have had even more component failure in orbit if the launch had not slipped from 1986 to 1990 as a result of the Challenger accident. The delay enabled technicians to do additional testing that revealed suspect parts. (AvWk, May 24/93)
NASA named representatives from government and industry and academic experts from across the country to take part in an independent review of NASA's Space shuttle redesign options. A total of 16 individuals were invited to serve on the committee. Charles M. Vest had previously been named by Vice President Albert Gore to head the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station. The Advisory Committee was to submit its recommendations in June. (NASA Release 93-59)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.
NASA added a spacewalk to a U.S. Shuttle mission scheduled for July as part of a continuing program to give astronauts experience before start of Space Station construction in 1996. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
NASA announced at least a two-day delay in the planned March 14 launch of Space Shuttle Columbia because of a ruptured hydraulic hose that had sprayed fluid in the engine compartment. This was the second delay in three weeks for the German Spacelab mission. (AP, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; P Inq, Mar 4/93; USA Today, Mar 4/93; RTw, Mar 3/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that NASA was using a new x-ray machine, called the Reverse Geometry x-ray system, to examine parts of the Space Shuttle. The new technology, produced by the Digiray Corporation, eliminates fuzzy images and displays a 3-D picture almost instantly. (LA Times, Apr 25/93; AP, May 24/93)
Germany's space agency was scheduled to be in charge of the scientific aspect of Shuttle Columbia's next research mission. NASA would oversee Shuttle operations during the flight. Ninety-three experiments were planned, two-thirds sponsored by German institutions and the rest by other European countries, the United States, and Japan. This would only be the second time in 32 years of American manned spaceflight that a mission had been managed from outside the United States. (AP, Jan 20/97)
NASA announced that bad weather had forced the military to postpone launch of a rocket scheduled to unfurl a tether in space and that the delay had forced NASA to bump the launch of shuttle Columbia from Sunday to Monday. (RTw, Mar 19/93; AP, Mar 19/93; UPI, Mar 19/93; W Post, Mar 19/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced agency plans to use its nearly completed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) Yellow Creek facilities in Iuka, Mississippi, for manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. (NASA Release 93-215)
The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)
Bernard A. Harris, MD, an African American, was set to make his first Shuttle flight aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in late February. He was scheduled to conduct experiments exploring the behavior of humans, living organisms, and materials.
NASA announced that, despite transmitting problems, the on-board data recovery system of Space Shuttle STS-56 had captured 103 orbital sunrises and sunsets observed by the Atmospheric Trace Molecule Spectroscopy (ATMOS) instrument aboard the Shuttle. (NASA Release 93-118)
NASA announced that Shuttle Columbia, with a science mission paid for and directed by Germany, was scheduled to be launched on April 24. The launch was scheduled to take place just seven days after Discovery's return from an atmospheric research flight. An engine shutdown March 22 halted Columbia's launch with just three seconds to go. (AP, 4/21; 93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 21/93; USA Today, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 22/93)
NASA reported that NASA's Shuttle Mission, STS-57, scheduled for launch in early June, would highlight the beginning of a new era in the commercial development of space. The Endeavour's six-person crew was scheduled to retrieve a European satellite and also was scheduled to use experiments designed by and for students, operate a payload that might improve crystal growth techniques, and demonstrate possible on-earth refueling techniques. (NASA Release 093-78)
The Smithsonian Museum put the Air and Space Museum Annex proposed for Dulles Airport on its priority list for 1993. The annex would display, for the first time, such pieces of aeronautical history as the Enola Gay atomic bomber, the Space Shuttle Enterprise, and the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane.
General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego proposed returning to the moon for a 21-day, two-person mission in 1999. The mission would use a capsule and return vehicle transported by the U.S. Space Shuttle and a Titan 4 rocket with a Centaur upper stage; the proposal did not call for the construction of a new launcher. However, NASA's head of exploration called many of the calculations in the proposal overly optimistic. NASA's own rough draft for a lunar base program entailed construction of a new launcher and higher costs than those projected in the General Dynamics proposal. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, had awarded the Space Shuttle Orbiter Avionics Software contract to IBM Corporation, Houston.  The contract was for the development and maintenance of the primary avionics support software, tool development and maintenance, and certification of primary flight software. (NASA Release C93-s)
NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)
NASA announced an August 4 launch attempt for the Space Shuttle Discovery. (RTw, Jul 7/93; USA Today, Jul 28/93)
NASA released 45 photos of the Space Shuttle Challenger's smashed crew cabin, after they were given to the New York Times by a man who had obtained them under the federal Freedom of Information Act. The pictures were taken after the crew cabin was recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in 1986. (AP, Feb 15/93; B Sun, Feb 15; W Post, Feb 15/93; USA Today, Feb 15/93; P Inq, Feb 15/93; NY Times, Feb 13/93)
In an interview in the Scientist, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the current NASA reorganization would make science more of a priority in NASA and involve the science community in correcting problems at NASA. He stated, "NASA is science and exploration, not infrastructure and bureaucracy." In response to a question about jobs, he noted that NASA was not a jobs program, but rather existed for "inspiration and hope, and a basic understanding of science." He said that he hoped to launch a small discovery satellite every year, while cutting back Space Shuttle flights from 12 or 13 to six a year. (The Scientist, Jan 11/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
The Navy announced that it was turning over the Moffett Naval Air Station, located 40 miles south of San Francisco, California, to NASA's Ames Research Center, which is located on the base. The Center was to continue developing and testing space and aircraft-related technologies. The center's wind tunnels, flight simulators, and other facilities have helped produce and test generations of spacecraft and commercial aircraft, including the Space Shuttle. (AP, Jan 4/93)
Technicians re-entered the engine compartment of Space Shuttle Discovery to replace what was believed to be a bad temperature sensor. The problem delayed some launch countdown preparations but, according to Shuttle Test Director Mike Leinbach, posed no threat to the launch, scheduled for the morning of August 12. (B Sun, Aug 12/93; RTw Aug, 11/93, Aug 12/93; UPI, Aug 11/93; P Inq, Aug 12/93; W Post, Aug 12/93; USA Today, Aug 12/93)
NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Discovery would be sent on its eight-day atmospheric research mission next week, pushing Columbia's German-sponsored science flight into late April. The Columbia was scheduled for launch April 24. (UPI, Mar 30/93; W Post, Mar 31/93; RTw, Mar 31/93)
NASA ground crews began final preparations to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite delivery mission.  The liftoff was scheduled for August 12.  Discovery was to carry two satellites.  Five astronauts were scheduled to put one satellite in orbit to conduct advanced communications experiments.  The other, a telescope, was to be let out of the cargo bay for several days of celestial observations, then captured and returned to Earth.  (Rtw, Aug 9/93; AP, Aug 9/93, Aug 10/93; W Post, Aug 10/93; UPI, Aug 8/93)
A biography of Christa McAuliffe, the teacher-astronaut who was killed when the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, is the subject of a new biography, written by her mother, Grace George Corrigan. The biography, A Journal for Christa, published  on September 7, by the University of Nebraska Press, lends weight to arguments that NASA pressed ahead with the high-profile flight to win mention of it in President Reagan's State of the Union Message, which had been scheduled for January 28, the day of the launch. (AP, Sep 7/93; NY Times, Sep 8/93; B Sun, Sep 8/93)
The Christian Science Monitor, noting that Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission would symbolize what NASA called "the year of commercial space," reported that companies had been slow to exploit the commercial possibilities of space. For example, although NASA had leased 200 of the 300 locker spaces available on Spacehab's first six flights, the agency had few customers for the other 100 lockers. (CSM, June 3/93)
USA Today reported that scientists on the Space Shuttle Columbia during its fall mission were scheduled to behead five white rats. Space program scientists Frank Sulzman said that killing the rats in orbit would give researchers better information on the effect of weightlessness on the animals. (USA Today, May 12/93)
NASA announced that three engine pumps that had been removed from Space Shuttle Columbia for fear that the seal retainers in the pumps were an old variety that required inspection after each flight were a newer version that did not need automatic pre-flight inspection. The confusion stemmed from a paperwork mixup at the Rockwell International Corporation, maker of the engines. (NY Times, Feb 19/93)
Belgian scientists, using research from outer space, invented a new detection system they hoped would prevent crib deaths. Physics professor Manuel Paiva monitored the breathing of astronauts during a Space Shuttle mission two months ago by using a custom-made space suit with special sensors built into the garment. Paiva said that he had used the same technique for babies by attaching the electronic sensors inside pajamas.  The sensors are able to detect a range of respiration problems. Paiva said research had so far been promising but another six months were needed to complete the studies. (RTw, Jul 28/93)
NASA spokeswoman June Malone said a broken pin was responsible for a leaky engine valve removed from Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled to lift off on an atmospheric research mission next week. The alignment pin broke while technicians were removing plumbing from around the valve for leak tests ordered after the March 22 main engine shutdown of Columbia. (AP, Apr 1/93)
Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)
NASA announced that NASA personnel had moved the Space Shuttle Discovery to the launch pad on Monday March 15. Discovery was scheduled to be launched in April on an atmospheric research mission. Meanwhile preflight work resumed on Columbia, which was scheduled to be launched in less than a week. (W Times, Mar 16/93; USA Today, Mar 16/93; AP, Mar 15/93)
Working with a team of Hopkins scientists last spring, Kimberly Ennico, a 20-year-old junior at Johns Hopkins University, discovered a small flaw in the video camera that acts as a range finder for the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in January 1995. Ms. Ennico discovered that the telescope's video range finder slightly distorted the positions of stars and distant galaxies. Her discovery allowed astronomers to compensate for the flaw by adjusting their computations. (B Sun, Jan 28/93)
Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park unit of Rockwell International, was blamed for the last-minute blastoff delay of Space Shuttle Discovery.  The shutdown was traced to a faulty fuel sensor in one of Discovery's engines, built by Rocketdyne.
The media reported that the Space Shuttle Columbia landed May 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California, after low clouds at Cape Canaveral, Florida, forced it to divert to California.
NASA announced the formation of an investigation board to examine the causes of a simultaneous detonation of two Super*Zip explosive cords, one primary and the other a backup, that occurred during the deployment of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite(ACTS) and its Transfer Orbit State (TS) booster from Discovery during Shuttle Mission STS-51 (September 12-20, 1993). (NASA Release 93-184)
NASA canceled the Space Shuttle Columbia launch, scheduled for April 24, because of problems with a key navigational aid. The launch was rescheduled for 10:50 a.m. April 26. (UPI, Apr 24/93; RTw, Apr 24/93; P Inq, Apr 25/93; NY Times, Apr 25/93; B Sun, Apr 24/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
NASA said that two ozone monitors aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery were having difficulty sending measurements to ground controllers. Two monitors--one German and the other American--had trouble sending measurements to the ground. The U.S. monitor, which was supposed to supply most of the atmospheric research data, was also in danger of losing information. Timothy Miller, mission scientist for NASA, said a backup recorder for the U.S. ozone instrument could hold just over half the amount of data sought. Nasa ground controllers were attempting to solve the problem. (B Sun, Apr 9/93; NY Times, Apr 9/93; USA Today, Apr 9/93; W Post, Apr 9/93; UPI, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 9/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
The countdown began for the Hubble Telescope repair mission, considered by many to be NASA's biggest challenge in space since the Apollo moon landings. The Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to lift off on the 11-day flight on December 1. (B Sun, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; USA Today, Nov 29/93; P Inq, Nov 29/93; NY Times Magazine, Nov 28/93; USA Weekend, Nov 26-28; W Post, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; RTw, Nov 27/93, 28/93; APn, Nov 27/93, Nov 28/93; UPn, Nov 26/93, Nov 28/93; W Times, Dec 1/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
An article in Flight International featured the U.S. Spacehab, the world's first privately owned, manned microgravity-laboratory. The Spacehab was scheduled to be lifted aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour mission on June 3.
A panel of experts tasked with examining the Space Shuttle's main engines said that they were safe to fly provided that technical checks were made "vigorously and rigorously." The panel noted that the engines were so fussy that they needed constant maintenance. Such attention was one of the factors that had driven the cost of each Shuttle flight to about $500 million. The panel suggested that NASA continue to press forward on a number of technical improvements already in the works. (AP, Feb 12/93)
A NASA study of safety in the Space Shuttle program found that honest mistaken go unreported if workers fear blunders can cost their jobs.  The study found no major safety concerns but said managers had not bridged the communications gap identified in the investigation of the 1986 Challenger disaster. The report said that "exaggerated" news coverage of safety-related incidents led to the mistaken perception among workers that reporting incident and mistakes might result in punitive action. (Rtw, Jul 26/93)
A last-minute glitch in a computer system that monitors Shuttle takeoffs to ensure people's safety on the ground forced NASA to scrub the launch of Shuttle Columbia on a medical research mission. NASA said that it would try for an October 15 launch, if the weather cooperated.
NASA selected USN Commander James D. Wetherbee to command the STS-63 mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in mid-1994.  Other crew members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foal, Janice E. Voss, Bernard A. Harris, Jr., and Russian Air Force Colonel Vladimir G. Titov. Collins is the agency's first woman pilot.
As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use.
A spacewalk was added to Space Shuttle mission STS-57 aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour as part of a series of spacewalk tests NASA planned to conduct during the next three years to prepare for the construction and maintenance of Space Station Freedom. Endeavour was scheduled for an April launch. The main objectives of the STS-57 mission were retrieval of the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) deployed during a Shuttle flight in August 1992 and the conducting of research in the Spacehab module. (NASA Release 93-31)
A European Space Agency official said that a re-usable science satellite scheduled to be rescued during Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission next week would be mothballed after astronauts returned it to earth and experiments were removed from it. The satellite was scheduled to be flown four more times, but there was no budget for additional flights. (RTw, June 16/93)
NASA reported that the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia had been halted three seconds before liftoff because of a main engine failure caused by a malfunctioning engine valve. When the Shuttle's computers detected a faulty valve, the safety system shut down the Shuttle's main engines. Officials stressed that the crew on the $1 billion German-charted research mission was never in any danger because of the aborted liftoff. Repairs were expected to take about three weeks. The shutdown was the third launch pad abort in Shuttle program history. (Reuters, Mar 22/93, Mar 23/93; AP, Mar 22/93; UPI, Mar 22/93; B Sun, Mar 23/93; P Inq, Mar 23/93; CSM, Mar 23/93; NY Times, Mar 23/93; USA Today, Mar 23/93; W Post, Mar 23/93; W Times, Mar 23/93; WSJ, Mar 23/93)
According to Neal Pellis of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, a research project from the Cancer Center aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour could provide "a big step in developing better treatments for cancer patients." The experiment will attempt to find out more about the human immune system and why it doesn't work as well in long-term space travel. (H Post, Jan 6/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts released a spacecraft that was to study the solar wind and the sun's corona. The spacecraft would be picked up by Discovery after two days.
The Space Shuttle Discovery, with five astronauts on board, was scheduled to lift off at 1:32 a.m. April 6 to study the condition of the Earth's ozone layer and sample 30 to 40 other gases. Three instruments in the Shuttle cargo bay would measure ozone, and four others would probe solar energy. A nighttime launch was necessary to put Discovery on the desired course for observing sunrises in the Northern Hemisphere. Meteorologists predicted an 80 percent chance of good weather. (W Post, Apr 5/93, Apr 6/93; W Times, Apr 5/93; LA Times, Apr 5/93; NY Times, Apr 4/93; AP, Apr 5/93; UPn, Apr 3/93; RTw, Apr 3/97)
In a report to Congress, the General Accounting Office (GAO) reported that NASA  had underestimated the cost of its programs by billions of dollars. The report noted that original estimates for 25 of the 29 NASA programs GAO analyzed were too low. GAO found that more than a third cost more than double the early estimates, while only four cost less than those estimates. Most of the programs cost between 50 and 99 percent more than the early projections. One notable exception was Space Shuttle Endeavour; its $1.8 billion cost was $399 million less than the original estimate. NASA officials cited "overoptimism" as a reason why initial estimates were often significantly lower than current estimates. (NY Times, Jan 31/93; AP, Jan 30/93; Space News, Feb 8-14/94)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly at Edwards Air Force Base after 14 days in orbit, ending the Shuttle program's longest flight with a wealth of new data on weightless in humans. Columbia's mission was only the second in U.S. history totally devoted to medical research.  The Shuttle logged 5.8 million miles and circled Earth 225 times during its journey, which began October 18.  Columbia performed well but sustained damage to thermal barriers around engine heat shields and to its protective tiles.  Both problems have occurred before and will continue to be investigated, a NASA spokesperson said.
Astronaut Ellen Ochoa, scheduled to be aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery when it was launched in April, would be the first Hispanic female to fly in space. Ochoa, an expert with the shuttle's 50-foot-long robot arm, was scheduled to deploy and retrieve a $6 million spacecraft while on the mission. (FL Today, Apr 3/93)
The launch of Space Shuttle Discovery's eight-day scientific mission, scheduled for 2:32 a.m. April 6 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, was aborted 11 seconds before liftoff when computers detected a problem. It was the second aborted launch in two weeks for the Shuttle program. The previous launch, involving the Shuttle Columbia, was halted three seconds from liftoff on March 22.
Senior astronaut Jerry Ross, payload commander for the Shuttle Columbia's February 25 mission, said that NASA should revamp globe-spanning training because such programs endangered fliers' family life and could lead to physical and mental exhaustion. Ross and another astronaut spent about 28 weeks in Germany preparing for the German spacelab mission aboard Columbia. (USA Today, Feb 5/93; W Times, Feb 5/93; AP, Feb 4/93; Space News, Feb 8-14)
Space Shuttle Columbia was launched on Monday, April 26, on a German science mission that had been delayed for over two months. This was the third attempt at launching the
NASA announced that a mysterious glitch had caused the Ulysses solar explorer spacecraft to shut down its instruments and stop sending data over the weekend. Eight of the instruments were working by the Tuesday following the shutdown, and NASA predicted that the ninth instrument would be operational within days. A similar, still unexplained malfunction occurred in 1991. Ulysses was released from a Space Shuttle in 1990 on a $750 mission to study the sun's poles in 1994-95. (AP, Feb 16/93; W Post, Feb 17/93); USA Today, Feb 17/93; AP, Feb 17/93)
The Houston Post reported that a faulty command from Mission Control during a Shuttle flight a month ago caused sparks aboard Endeavour and knocked out power to some of its equipment. The six astronauts aboard the Shuttle were in no danger, and power was restored in 10 minutes.  The incident, however, did lead NASA to convene a safety board meeting.  (AP, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 5/93; RTw, Aug 4/93; UPI, Aug 4/93)
NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)
A NASA safety panel reported that inspection of recovered Space Shuttle solid rocket motors had found traces of soot on O-rings and recommended a redesign of one of the motor's main joints. The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP) warned NASA on March 18 that the possibility of a problem was "sufficiently high" to warrant the joint's redesign. (Space News, Mar 22/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
After a month of delays, NASA prepared for launch  of the Shuttle Columbia's German mission. Forecasters were predicting a 70 percent chance of favorable lift-off conditions. The flight would be Columbia's 14th in 12 years.
Intelsat and Martin Marietta reached a tentative settlement of lawsuits connected with a communications satellite that Space Shuttle astronauts rescued after it was stranded in low orbit. The lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 1990 launch of a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went into a low, useless orbit after a Martin Marietta rocket launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts attached a new rocket booster package to the satellite in May 1992, and the satellite then fired itself into its proper orbit. (W Times, June 12/93; W Post, June 12/93)
According to a report in Reuters, the Arianespace consortium continued to be the world leader in number of commercial satellite launches. Ariane filled the void when NASA stopped launching commercial payloads after the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded in January 1986. U.S. launchers, especially the General Dynamics Atlas series, which has the capacity to launch large payloads, were fighting for each launch contract. (RTw, Mar 14/93)
NASA postponed a scheduled launch of Space Shuttle Discovery until August 12 because of the Perseid meteor shower.  This was the third time the mission had been delayed.  The Perseid meteor shower occurs each August; it was expected to be more intense than usual this August, raising the possibility that a spacecraft in Earth orbit could be damaged by a piece of debris. (UPI, Jul 30/93; Rtw, Jul 30/93; AP, Jul 31/93; W Post, Jul 31/93; NY Times, Jul 31/93; B Sun, Aug 4/93; USA Today, Aug 10/93, Aug 11/93, Aug 12/93)
The media reported that the crew aboard Shuttle Columbia had succeeded in flushing urine and other waste water into space from a backup storage system. This was the first time crew members had attempted to dump fluid overboard from contingency containers. Later in the day, the astronauts repaired a nitrogen gas line, restoring the shuttle's normal water pressure, which had dropped as a result of the Shuttle's plumbing problems. The mission's science experiments continued as planned.
A spokesman for Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California said that a pressure buildup ripped apart an experimental supergun designed to fire objects into space. The accident delayed a demonstration scheduled for this spring. Scientists hoped to use the gun, which is like an enormous air rifle, to shoot payloads into space at a fraction of the cost of sending them into orbit via a Space Shuttle. (AP, Mar 18/93; USA Today, Mar 18/93;
U.S. and European space officials announced that they had postponed a planned rocket firing intended to move the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) to a position where it could be retrieved by a Space Shuttle next month. An apparent gyroscope problem aboard the orbiting research satellite forced the postponement. (RTw, May 18/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour's spacewalkers were the first to wear new spacesuit gloves that provide not only more thermal protection but also a better sense of touch than earlier models. The gloves are the first to have breaks in the gray silicone-coated Keviar finger and palm surface so joints can bend easier.  They are also insulated with Nomex felt for added warmth in space, where temperatures can plunge to hundreds of degrees below zero. (USA Today, Dec 7/93)
NASA officials said that Germany was being charged only $150 million of the $400 million cost of launching a science mission aboard Shuttle Columbia on February 25. Columbia's crew was expected to include two German researchers and a laboratory of German science experiments. The price was agreed upon in 1986 under a pricing policy NASA officials admitted was outdated. (O Sen Star, Feb 4/93)
NASA named Astronauts Tamara E. Jernigan, Thomas David Jones, James S. Voss, and Ellen Ochoa payload commanders on upcoming Space Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 93-140)
A spaceship, with two cosmonauts on board, was launched from Kazakhstan to test a new docking procedure for a possible linkup with a U.S. Space Shuttle. The spaceship was scheduled to dock with the orbiting Space Station Mir and deliver the two cosmonauts, who would replace the two currently on board the Mir.  (W Times, Jan 23/93; AP, Jan 24/93; UPI, Jan 24/93)
NASA announced that NASA and the Russian Space Agency had agreed to up to 10 Shuttle flights to Mir with a total of 24 months time on board Mir for U.S. astronauts, a program of scientific and technological research, and the upgrade and extension of the Mir lifetime during the period 1995-1997. (NASA Release 93-222)
An improperly etched spring in one of Space Shuttle Endeavour's three oxygen turbopumps could delay next week's planned launch of the Space Shuttle. The inspection stamp was etched in a high-stress area rather than in a spot with minimal stress, NASA officials said. The spring holds the pump bearings in place. If the improperly marked spring broke at liftoff, the affected bearing cage could come loose. (AP, May 25/93)
NASA astronaut Bernard A. Harris Jr., M.D. was scheduled to present a National Urban League (NLU) banner, flown on the STS-55 Space Shuttle mission, to NLU president John Jacob during the organization's opening keynote ceremony on Sunday, August 1, in Washington, D.C. (NASA Media Advisory)
An official of Japan's Science and Technology Agency announced that it would spend $4.6 billion developing an unmanned Space Shuttle that would repair satellites, act as a space transporter, and serve as a laboratory for micro-gravity experiments. (Rtw, Jul 7/93)
The House of Representatives voted to deny funding requests for two science projects: President Clinton's request for $640 million for the superconducting Super Collider and $4 billion for NASA's request to build a more powerful Space Shuttle engine. (AP, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 20/93; USA Today, Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93; NY Times, Oct 20/93; W Post, Oct 21/93, Oct 22/93; C Trib, Oct 22/93; B Sun, Oct 25/93)
Shortly after Space Shuttle Endeavour's launch later this month, technicians and engineers from GTE Government Systems Corporation were to establish an almost continuous communications link with the Shuttle. The space link to earth would come through a system of tracking and data relay satellites (TDRS), which would be supplemented by a satellite carried by Endeavor. (Business Wire, Jan 5, 93).
NASA said that the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour would be delayed for at least two weeks because the Shuttle's engine maker, Rocketdyne, had failed to correctly document whether one of the engine's parts was reliable. In a review of Rocketdyne's operation, NASA discovered many problems with how the company documented its work. In one case earlier in the year, a paperwork problem made it impossible for NASA to determine whether a Shuttle's engines contained proper seal retainers or older, phased-out models.
NASA announced that it planned to use the eight Space Shuttle flights scheduled for 1993 for research relating to the building and operation of Space Station Freedom, scheduled to be launched in three years.
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
NASA said that engineers have launched a review of the Space Shuttle Columbia's liftoff to identify debris seen near Columbia's three main engines.  A spokesman said that the Shuttle performed flawlessly during its ascent, but that officials were intrigued by video images that captured an object "of unknown origin" falling into the fiery engine plume about 45 seconds after liftoff. (RTw, Oct 19/93)
Two Russia cosmonauts training for a U.S. Shuttle flight said that they were eager to try out America's spaceship. The two cosmonauts had two and one-half years of space experience between them. (AP, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 10/93)
The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)
NASA reported that it had lost all contact with Shuttle Columbia for 80 minutes on May 4 because of an erroneous computer command sent to the Shuttle. The blackout led to the loss of some science data but did not cause any major problems; NASA officials, however, reviewed procedures for creating and sending commands to the Shuttle antenna.
NASA announced that it would soon begin tests using a modified Convair 990 commercial jet airliner to expand the operational landing capabilities of the Space Shuttle system. The Convair has been undergoing modifications for two years in preparation for tests that would help Johnson Space Center researchers better understand the operational capabilities of the Shuttle system. (Desert Wings, Jan 8/93)
After a one-day weather delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour lifted off before dawn on a mission to repair the out-of-focus $3 billion Hubble Space Telescope. Four members of the Shuttle crew, made up of six men and one woman, were to take five planned day-long spacewalks in an attempt to restore the full capability of the Hubble observatory. (WP, Dec 3/93; Dec 2/93; TRw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; NY Times, Dec 3/93; APn, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93)
NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)
A spokesman said that NASA had delayed loading the Hubble Space Telescope's replacement parts into Space Shuttle Endeavour because a fine, sandy substance had been found on two sealed plastic bags containing instruments needed to repair the telescope. A wind storm was thought responsible.  Officials were to inspect the instruments to make sure they had not been damaged. NASA did not believe the inspection would delay the mission's target liftoff of Dec. 1. (AP, Nov 2/93; RTw, Nov 2/93, Nov 4/98; B Sun, Nov 4/93)
NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)
USA Today reported that an article in Florida Today suggested that cuts in quality-control staffs at NASA and workers' fear of admitting error were creating potentially deadly problems for the Space Shuttle program. (USA Today, June 14/93)
An x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunctioned while scanning the space between stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, were attempting to correct the problem. The spectrometer measures low-energy x-rays emitted from the space between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped to prove or disprove the theory that a bubble of hot gas in the Milky Way Galaxy was produced by a nearby exploding star. Meanwhile, Endeavour crew members conducted medical tests and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school classroom presentation called "Physics of Toys." (NY Times, Jan 15/93; AP, Jan 15/93)
Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)
Reinhard Furrer, a former German astronaut, criticized the German government for planning to cut funds for manned space flights such as the U.S.-German Shuttle mission now orbiting the Earth. Furrer flew on a joint U.S.-German scientific mission in 1885. (RTw, Apr 27/93)
House-Senate conferees killed NASA's program to search for signs of intelligent civilization beyond Earth and reduced funding available for a reflight of the agency's lost Mars Observer mission. In approving a total agency budget of $14.5 billion, the legislators barely preserved a program to build a more powerful rocket booster for the Space Shuttle and provided very little funding for developing new technology needed for the National Aerospace Plane.  The planned Space Station was fully funded at $2.l billion for fiscal 1994. (W Post, Oct. 2/93; AP Oct 2/93)
Shuttle Discovery lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:29 a.m., ET, on an eight-day mission to study Earth's endangered ozone layer. Thursday's liftoff followed an earlier aborted launch. According to reports, the Shuttle, which carried a crew of five, lit up the night like a huge blowtorch as it rocketed into orbit. (AP, April 4/93; RT, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 4/93; USA Today, Apr 8/93; W Post, Apr 8/93; B Sun, Apr 8/93)
According to a report in the Baltimore Sun, Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off with a pair of pliers stuck on a rocket booster. Officials said the pliers posed no danger during liftoff, but the incident was getting much attention in management circles. A Kennedy space center spokeswoman said that the pliers were noted missing in a daily tool inventory at Discovery's launch pad on April 2 but that a proper lost-and-found report, which would have prompted a search, was not filed. Nasa was also investigating how a foot-long metal scrap that could have set off an explosion became lodged in one of four launch-pad posts that held up one of Shuttle Discovery's rocket boosters. (B Sun, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
NASA announced that April marked the 10th anniversary of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a space-based network developed to meet telecommunications needs of Space Shuttle, Space Station, and other low Earth-orbiting spacecraft missions. The TDRSS is equipped to support up to 24 user spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle, simultaneously. (NASA Release 93-60)
A NASA panel recommended that the space agency plan two Space Shuttle missions rather than the scheduled one to repair the Hubble telescope. The panel agreed that the repairs could be done, but suggested that because of the complexity of the task, a back-up mission should be planned. (UPI, May 25/93; AP, May 25/93)
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Columbus were to be injected with a saline solution and wired with catheters during next week's research mission in an attempt to help doctors understand the effects of weightlessness on the body. The two German astronauts on board would also have catheters in their veins during the launch in order to measure blood pressure.
NASA added a spacewalk to Space Shuttle mission STS-51 aboard Discovery, set for launch in July. The spacewalk would continue extravehicular activity tests that began with the addition of a spacewalk to NASA's first Shuttle flight in January of this year. (NASA Release 93-21)
President Clinton thanked the crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour for giving "a great deal of credibility" to his attempt to save the Space Station. The President called the crew on Tuesday, June 22. (USA Today, June 23/93; NY Times, June 23/93; W Times, June 23/93)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia left their medical and scientific studies on Tuesday, April 27, to work on repairing a malfunctioning toilet and waste-water system. Engineers believed that a device that squirts waste overboard from a storage tank got stuck and caused the tank to spring a small nitrogen leak. The astronauts rerouted the waste into two rubber-lined storage bags until the problem could be fixed. NASA said that the problem would not endanger the nine-day mission.	Earlier in the day, the astronauts carried out a series of medical and scientific experiments. (UPI, Apr 27/93; AP, Apr 28/93; RTw, Apr 27/93, Apr 28/93; NY Times, Apr 28/93; C Trib, Apr 28/93)
The Washington Times reported that Space Shuttle Endeavour had to delay firing a jet to avoid possibly coming in contact with a piece of space trash, in this instance, a 27-year-old spent Russian rocket. This was the fourth time in two years that Shuttle astronauts had to take measures to avoid trash in space. There were hundreds of thousands of pieces of trash floating in space as a result of space missions. (AP, June 23/93; W Times, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93)
NASA reported that Space Shuttle Discovery's astronauts had retrieved the $6 million satellite, called the Spartan, that they had released into space two days previously. When the Shuttle came to within 35 of the satellite, astronaut Ellen Ochoa grabbed it with the arm of the Space Shuttle's robot and placed it in its cradle in the Shuttle bay. The Spartan spent about 50 hours as a free-flying satellite with two automated telescopes gathering data about the sun and the solar wind streaming from it. (AP, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 13/93; W Times, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93; W Post, Apr 14/93; B Sun, Apr 14/93; P Inq, Apr 14/93; UPI, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; USA Today, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93, Apr 15/93; C Trib, Apr 15/93)
NASA delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to blast off on June 20, because of poor weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. A second launch attempt was expected for Monday morning, June 21. (RTw, June 20/93; UPI, June 20/93, June 21/93; Ap, June 21/93; NY Times, June 21/93; LA Times, June 21/93; W Post, June 21/93; USA Today, June 21/93; W Times, June 21/93; B Sun, June 21/93)
Technical breakthroughs in space have helped launch clinical advances on earth. Space Shuttle experiments, which focus on determining how best to maintain the health of astronauts aboard a future Space Station, continue to provide spin-offs for clinical medicine on earth, from programmable pacemakers to a better understanding of vestibular disorders. The cost, however, is very high, and the question remains whether the Space Station project represents a potentially giant leap for medicine or a small step for a select few. (Medical World News, Aug 15/93)
George E. Brown, Jr., Democrat from California and chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, said that if Congress allocated NASA less than $14.15 billion in the 1995 budget, he would probably oppose continuing the Space Station program in its present form. He said that he would submit a reduced NASA budget to Congress that kept Space Station funding intact but eliminated one Shuttle flight, the planned Mars Surveyor project, and other items. Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's annual appropriation, said the subcommittee needed to receive a higher 602 (B) budget allocation than its House counterpart to sustain NASA's programs. She added that if the Space Station lost in the House, she thought it would be difficult to maintain it. (W Post, May 20/94; NY Times, May 20/94; Fla Today, May 20/94; O Sen Star, May 20/94; Defense Daily, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; AvWk, May 23/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
NASA announced the members of the crew of the Space Shuttle mission for the fall of 1995 under the command of Brian Duffy. A Japanese National Space Development Agency specialist was included and one of the mission objectives was to retrieve a science satellite scheduled to be launched by a Japanese H-2 rocket in early 1995. The Shuttle would also retrieve another science satellite, the Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy (SPARTAN). In addition, two spacewalks would be conducted. (NASA Release 94-208)
The countdown began for the liftoff on March 3 of Shuttle Columbia. Columbia was scheduled for a basic 14-day research flight featuring materials development and protein crystal growth as well as medical experiments. (B Sun, Feb 28/94; AP, Feb 28/94; UP, Feb 28/94; Reuters, Feb 28/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science told the NASA Advisory Council that NASA wanted to launch one Discovery mission every 12 to 15 months on a Delta or smaller expendable launch vehicle (ELV). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center planned to issue a competitive procurement later in the year for up to 15 ELVs, paying $25 million to $30 million per vehicle. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
NASA Kennedy Space Center spokesman Bruce Buckingham said that that NASA had worked out a plan that would allow NASA employees to have the Labor Day weekend off and still would permit the launching of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (Fla Today, Aug 15/94)
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) in its report faulted NASA's effort to fit a program projected in the late 1990s to cost more than $20 billion a year into an annual budget of $14 billion. The CBO said such effort risked delay and failure, and the CBO offered the alternative of grounding the astronauts and ending the Space Shuttle program. Specifically, the report proposed one of the following: ending costly piloted space flight, concentrating instead on robot aircraft and new technology for industry; emphasizing a roboting spacecraft and conducting only four instead of eight Space Shuttle flights a year; concentrating on piloted space flight, building the Space Station and planning for manned missions to the moon and Mars, limiting robot missions to pathfinder projects for the moon-Mars effort. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA would not back away from the Administration's balanced aeronautics and space program. He added that any of the three CBO alternatives would destroy that balance and that NASA could accomplish daring and difficult missions on a tight budget. (NASA Editor's Note N94-27; B Sun, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; P Inq, Mar 25/94; NY Times, Mar 25/94; O Sen Star, Mar 25/94; W Post, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; LA Daily News, Mar 27/94; Federal Computer Week, Mar 28/94; O Sen Star, Mar 31/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, refitted over a 19-month period at a cost of $96 million to enable it to dock with Mir, was expected to arrive at Kennedy Space Center from its overhaul at Rockwell Space Systems Division in Palmdale, California. The plan was for Atlantis to dock with Mir during a series of 10 shuttle flights between 1995 and 1997. Other modifications were designed to make Atlantis safer. Atlantis's return means limited space at Kennedy Space Center for processing the various Shuttles. (Fla Today, May 27/94; AP, May 29/94; W Post, May 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 1/94)
Jim Doyle, spokesman for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that additional federal funding would allow the Magellan Spacecraft to continue studying Venus's interior and atmosphere at least through September 1994. Space Shuttle Atlantis launched Magellan in May 1989, and it arrived at Venus 15 months later. (AP, Feb 28/94; W Post, Mar 1/94)
A retrospective article looked at the role that NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California had played in the past, beginning with its establishment in 1947. It asserted that although now Dryden was used only for Space Shuttle landings when bad weather prevented the Shuttle from landing in Florida, it still managed to keep some 1,000 government and civilian employees busy. (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 30/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a Phase One Program Office at the Johnsonn Space Center, Houston, to direct upcoming Shuttle flights to the Russian Mir Station. Tommy Holloway was appointed manager of the office. (NASA Release 94-172)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's appropriation, wrote a major article on space policy for a space trade journal. In it she discussed the Space Station and NASA's various redesigns of it, and the lack of a clear mission and a clear purpose. She said the redesigned station cost too much and its early scientific capabilities were too limited. Specifically, she pointed out that in the summer of 1993, NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy promised the Senate Appropriations Committee with NASA oversight that there would be the same level of science capability on the new station as on Space Station Freedom. That meant twice the power and space available on the current Space Shuttle. However, by November 1993, the power for science had been cut to about half of that available on the current Shuttle. This meant that it was far more difficult to win congressional support for the Space Station, particularly as budgets became tighter. Mikulski questioned whether enough votes for the Station would be available if it meant "killing the increase for National Science Foundation grants, national service, and funding for environmental technology or climate change." Furthermore, to avoid defeat, the Station needed to be approved by the House by a reasonable margin. She maintained that "Space policy should no longer be driven by the domination of space station," adding that the United States needed to establish a consensus on space policy. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
The countdown began for the launch of Shuttle Columbia scheduled for July 8. (W Times, Jul 6/94; USA Today, Jul 6/94)
NASA stated that it planned to launch Space Shuttle Endeavour on August 18 for a 10-day Earth-monitoring mission. (AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 4/94; USA Today, Aug 5/94)
NASA announced the rescheduling of the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour to April 8 to allow further inspections of metallic vanes in the high pressure oxidizer preburner pump volute housings of its main engines. (NASA Release 94-028; AP, Apr 4/94; UP, Apr 4/94; Reuters, Apr 4/94; P Inq, Apr 5/94; W Times, Apr 5/94; USA Today, Apr 5/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronauts Norman E. Thagard and Bonnie J. Dunbar as prime and backup crew members for a three-month flight on Russian Space Station Mir in March 1995. Both astronauts flew on previous U.S. Shuttle flights and conducted various scientific experiments. (NASA Release 94-16)
The fact that each year a Space Shuttle liftoff was seen as more unremarkable than the preceding year testified to the small and particular miracles of engineering, mechanics, and electronics that made each mission fly. The process of mating the orbiter to an enormous external fuel tank and two solid rocket boosters, constituting the Shuttle, was described in some detail as well as the fueling of the Shuttle. (Destination Discovery, Nov 94)
Ulysses, a European spacecraft deployed by U.S. Shuttle Discovery in October 1990, took three and a half years to travel the 93 million miles from Earth to the sun's south pole. Between June and the fall of 1995, when it was due to pass the sun's north pole, it would exhaustively examine the sun--the first time the sun had been observed from pole to pole. Ulysses was to examine the sun's magnetic field, which influenced the solar cycles as well as the climate on earth. The spacecraft also was to search for the source of gamma and gravity rays and to examine solar flares. (W Times, Jun 12/94)
NASA announced it had begun planning for a new multidisciplinary life and microgravity sciences Spacelab research mission to be flown on Space Shuttle Columbia in mid-1996. (NASA Release 94-212)
Dr. Thomas S. Burks, executive vice president for research and academic affairs, and veterinarian Dr. Bradford S. Goodwin, professor and executive director for laboratory animal medicine and care at the University of Texas Health Science Center, discussed the scientific necessity of raising genetically uniform rats and mice. They are used as subjects for research throughout the community. NASA used four dozen aboard the Shuttle Discovery. (H Chron, Jan 20/94)
NASA announced the departure from NASA, effective April 11, of Space Shuttle astronaut Ronald J. Grabe. He was to become Vice President, Business Development, for Orbital Sciences Corporation's Launch Systems Group. (NASA Release 94-57)
NASA was scheduled to test fly Pratt & Whitney's new high-pressure oxidizer turbopump on only one of Discovery's three main engines in June 1995 before committing itself to the advanced design pump's use on all Space Shuttle engines. The new pump was intended to simplify Shuttle processing and increase the margin of safety. It was designed to fly 10 times before removal or replacement was required, compared with the single-flight ability of the current pump. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes in the Office of Space Flight (OSF) at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. These included the appointment of Bryan O'Connor, currently OSF Deputy Associate Administrator, to assume the post of Space Shuttle Program Director. O'Connor's position was to be assumed by Richard Wisniewski, who retired from NASA in 1990 after 35 years of government service. (NASA Release 94-66; WP, May 20/94)
A feature article described some of the findings of spacecraft Ulysses, which used Jupiter's gravity to enter an orbit perpendicular to those of the planets and for the preceding four months had been studying the sun's polar regions. These were hitherto unexplored areas, and Ulysses mapped the sun's magnetic field and its cosmic rays, providing a wealth of data about solar dynamics. Ulysses was launched from a Space Shuttle in October 1990. (NY Times, Dec 20/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
Space Shuttle Endeavour passed over four U.S. sites--forests in Michigan and North Carolina, waterways in Oklahoma, and desert lands in California--twice a day on its flight, allowing much data to be collected. Such data were now being studied as regarded Michigan's Upper Peninsula and specifically, the Hiawatha National Forest. They would provide insights as to how forests were affected by timber-cutting, development, and global warming. (Kalamazoo Gazette, Nov 13/94; Grand Rapids Press, Nov 14/94)
NASA unveiled its new Mission Control center in Houston with a flight simulation that pretended to rendezvous a Space Shuttle with a satellite. The demonstration went well and provided an opportunity to identify additional equipment needed, such as more display facility. The new center should be directing the Shuttle in orbit by the summer of 1995. (Federal Computer Week, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 21/94)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for September 1994, would include two firsts: atmospheric research using a laser, the Lidar In-Space Technology Experiment (LITE), and robotic processing of semiconductor materials. The mission would also feature the deployment and retrieval of a free-flying astronomical observer and the first untethered spacewalk by astronauts in more than 10 years. On August 31, NASA officials indicated there might be a delay in the contemplated September 9 launch because of problems with the craft's propulsion system. (NASA Release 94-135; AP, Aug 31/94; Reuters, Aug 31/94)
NASA announced the signing of a contract with the Paton Welding Institute in Kiev, Ukraine, to develop a plan for flying a space welding tool aboard the Space Shuttle in October 1997. The Ukrainian Universal Hand Tool was an electron beam welding device developed at the Institute and used by Salyut 7 cosmonauts in 1984 and 1986 in the first electron beam welding in space experiments. (NASA Release 94-196)
The deed to NASA's Computer Complex in Slidell, Louisiana was transferred to the city of Slidell at a ceremony attended by NASA Acting Deputy Administrator General John R. Dafley among others. For more than 30 years, the Slidell complex had provided support for the Space Shuttle external tank program as well as other Office of Space Flight administrative and program activities. However, these functions recently were moved to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Various plans were underway for ways in which the Slidell facilities could be used. (Sentry News, Dec 15/94)
NASA announced the names of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The 1995 group consisted of 10 pilots and nine mission specialists, including six civilians and 13 military officers, all chosen from among 2,962 applicants. International candidates were also to be included and these names would be announced later. (NASA Release 94-205)
NASA was scheduled to deliver in late October for Clinton Administration review a comprehensive plan for the United States to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV). Proposals were contemplated that would be funded by business with NASA providing the needed technologies, for two RLVs: the X-34 for small payloads and the X-33 single-stage-to-orbit that could lead to a replacement of the Shuttle. The goal was, eventually, to replace expendable launch vehicles (ELVs). With a declining budget NASA's future depended on cheap space transportation and thus far there was little evidence that such RLVs were likely in the near future. In late November it was reported that Boeing Company and McDonnell Douglas Corporation would announce on November 29 that they were joining to compete for initial contracts to build a next-generation Space Shuttle based on reusable rockets. McDonnell Douglas had led in the development of single-stage-to-orbit launch systems and Boeing was a major integrator of complex programs. (AvWk, Nov 7/94; WSJ, Nov 29/94; Reuters, Nov 29/94; AP, Nov 29/94; LA Times, Nov 30/94; USA Today, Nov 30/94; H Post, Nov 30/94; Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94; SP News, Dec 5-11/94; CSM, Dec 6/94)
An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)
A feature article, accompanied by photographs of Mount Rainier and of the newly exploding Russian volcano taken from the radar images brought back by Space Shuttle Endeavour, commended the extraordinary quality of NASA's Spaceborne Imaging Radar. It discussed the process by which more than 500 sites were reviewed and gave particular attention to efforts to further define ancient Ubar, buried beneath desert sand. (Newsday, Nov 15/94)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
Two Russian cosmonauts stepped outside Space Station Mir in order to reposition solar panels outside the Station. They were expected to spend five hours outside, and the repositioning of the panels should facilitate the visit of U.S. Shuttle Atlantis in 1995. (AP, Sep 13/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
Space Shuttle Columbia stopped at Huntsville en route to Rockwell International's facility at Palmdale, California, for scheduled maintenance. Thousands of people came to the airport to see the Shuttle. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 9/94)
NASA prepared to begin the countdown on September 27 for the scheduled September 30 launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on its environmental mission. The Shuttle was launched on schedule on September 30. (Reuters, Sep 26/94; USA Today, Sep 27/94; AP, Sep 28/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; USA Today, Sep 30/94; B Sun, Sep 30/94; Fla Today, Sep 30/94; AP, Sep 30/94; Reuters, Sep 30/94; W Post, Oct 1/94)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
NASA announced the names of the crew for the Space Shuttle mission to rendezvous and dock with the Russian Space Station Mir in October 1995. The mission commander was designated as Kenneth D. Cameron. (NASA Release 94-145)
Bernadette Cardenas, an aerospace engineer at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, filed a civil suit against astronaut Lt. Col. Charles (Sam) Gemar and his wife Charlene, also a NASA employee. The suit claimed the Gemars had harassed her mentally and physically; Mrs. Cardenas wanted to force Col. Gemar to submit to blood tests to establish paternity for her two-year-old son. NASA said the lawsuit would not prevent Gemar's participation in the forthcoming shuttle mission. (AP, Feb 24/94; NY Times, Feb 25/94; B Sun, Feb 25/94; USA Today, Feb 25/94)
At a press briefing at the Kennedy Space Center, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Jeremiah Pearson said NASA was currently undertaking a review to gauge the Shuttle program's health after budget cutbacks and to identify possible additional savings. The review was scheduled to be completed in early January. Bryan O'Connor, Shuttle program director at NASA Headquarters, said 13 teams at NASA field centers across the country were examining jobs, procedures, and requirements to improve efficiency. However, he indicated that much of 1994's $141 million cut in the Shuttle program's operating budget could be made up with expected reimbursements and reassignment of funds. For example, Congress had suggested that the program use a $22 million reimbursement from Japan for Shuttle flights to that end. (Fla Today, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94; AvWk, Oct 17/94; AP, Oct 24/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin Chang-Diaz would be payload commander for the Space Shuttle mission scheduled for early 1996 in which the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) would be flown for the second time. Because of the preparation time required for this mission designed to orbit the TSS at the end of a 13-mile-long tether to test techniques for managing aircraft at great distances and to study the electrodynamic effects of moving a conductive tether through the Earth's magnetic field, the selection was made early. (NASA Release 94-142)
NASA announced the signing of a contract modification with Rockwell International Space Systems Division, Downey, California. The contract provided for the production of the Multifunction Electronic Display Subsystem (MEDS) to be installed in each of the four Space Shuttle orbiters. MEDS is to replace some of the current electromechanical flight instruments and meters in the shuttle cockpit. (NASA Release C94-n)
Space Shuttle Endeavour, which had been rescheduled to lift off on April 8, was launched April 9 because of bad weather. In its cargo bay was the Space Radar Laboratory, weighing 23,000 pounds and containing $366 million worth of imaging systems. The system was to bounce radar waves off Earth in three frequency bands to produce three-dimensional maps of ocean currents, river valleys, forests and farm lands, the geology of volcanoes, and features under desert sands. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and the German and Italian space agencies developed the equipment. The radar developed a glitch after the first day, but ground control was able to repair it and the results were most successful. (NY Times, Apr 8/94; W Post, Apr 8/94; B Sun, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 8/94; USA Today, Apr 8/94; AP, Apr 8/94; UP, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 9/94; W Post, Apr 10/94; NY Times, Apr 10/94; B Sun, Apr 10/94; P Inq, Apr 10/94; UPI, Apr 10/94; Reuters, Apr 10/94; AP, Apr 11/94)
NASA was experiencing difficulties finding sufficient amounts of materials to fill the Shuttle's cargo bay in order to justify a planned ten Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir. It might develop that only six or seven flights would be needed according to NASA Shuttle chief Bryan O'Connor. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 1/94)
NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft had become the first robotic exploration vehicle in history to reach a polar region of the sun when it passed over the sun's southern polar area June 26 after a journey of almost four years from Earth. The European Space Agency built Ulysses, and Space Shuttle Discovery deployed it in October 1990. In February 1992, Ulysses spent nearly 11 days exploring unknown regions of Jupiter before it gained enough momentum to loop into an orbit that passed over the poles of the sun. The sun has a global magnetic field and magnetic poles, but many details concerning the polar caps and magnetic fields, including the influence of incoming cosmic rays, remain unclear. (NASA Release 94-104; Fla Today, Jun 29/94)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Columbia was to conduct the second flight of the International Microgravity Laboratory-2. The flight would entail world-wide research into the behavior of materials and life in the weightless environment of Earth-orbit. Experiments were to include studies of subtle forces that affect microgravity and the reaction of living organisms to microgravity. Scientists from NASA, the European Space Agency, the French Space Agency, the German Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan cooperated in planning the experiments. (NASA Release 94-96)
Astronaut Tom Jones on Space Shuttle Endeavour answered questions about radar mapping and the Earth's ozone layer from students at his former school in Stemmers Run. Among the areas Endeavour radar was mapping were traces of ancient rivers beneath the Sahara Desert. Other areas being targeted for mapping were the Andes and the East Australian Current as well as fires in China south of the Yellow River and flooding in the Midwest. Astronauts assured C-span television questioners that the mapping radar was strictly for scientific not military purposes. At the halfway point of the mission, NASA said Endeavour already had collected 95 percent of the data it was to gather. The astronauts were divided into two shifts of three persons each in order to work round the clock monitoring radar performance, taking pictures of the Earth, and recording observations on tape. An air pollution monitor aboard Endeavour found surprisingly high level of carbon monoxide in the Northern Hemisphere, according to NASA. NASA scientists on the ground were delighted with the quality of pictures and other data beamed by radar.
Naval Academy graduate Wendy B. Lawrence was scheduled to fly on Space Shuttle Columbia in December. After earning a Master's degree in ocean engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, she taught physics at the Naval Academy. (Capitol, Mar 15/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House of Representatives Science Committee, told the seven-member Space Shuttle crew that repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in September 1973, that their successful mission would help restore support for the space program. (Reuters, Mar 8/94; B Sun, Mar 9/94)
When Tropical Storm Gordon blew through Florida in November, a tugboat pulling NASA's $50 million external fuel tank for Shuttle Atlantis lost power and was rescued by a tanker. The tanker could claim salvage rights from NASA or claim the tank, and NASA had no insurance to cover law suits on the fuel tank. (O Sen Star, Dec 10/94)
NASA announced that November 3 was the launch date for Space Shuttle Atlantis and its six-person crew on an 11-day mission. The launch date was predicated on successful launch of the Wind spacecraft on November 1 aboard a Delta rocket. (NASA Release 94-173; H Chron, Oct 20/94; USA Today, Oct 28/94)
NASA announced the updated schedule of Space Shuttle/Space Station missions through calendar year 1997 and expendable launch vehicle missions through calendar year 2001. Included were 10 Space Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir between 1995 and 1997. (NASA Release 94-61)
NASA announced that the first cooperative space flight research between NASA and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) was intended to help scientists better understand the effects of microgravity on the growth of human bone and muscle cells during space flight. It might also increase understanding of changes in muscle and bone on Earth after severe injury, certain degenerative diseases, or prolonged bedrest. This research was to be a part of the April Space Shuttle mission. (NASA Release 94-55)
Russia marked its Space Day in a subdued mood, with the Baikonur Cosmodrome having become part of Kazakhstan and Russia's cosmonaut team decreased from 100 to 40 people. The Buran Space Shuttle was ended after its only unmanned test flight in 1988. But workers remaining at the Molniya complex in northwestern Moscow, established to construct Buran, hoped to work on the MAKS project involving small shuttles launched from the giant An-225 Mriya transport plane to carry cargo into space. (AP, Apr 12/94)
The media continued to give extensive coverage to the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour. One of the natural phenomena on which the radar photography concentrated was volcanoes. On October 1, it photographed Russia's Klyuchevsky Volcano on the Kamchatka Peninsula, which had erupted the previous day. Endeavour also scanned Hawaiian volcanoes and dormant Mt. Rainier and the Rwandan volcanoes where endangered gorillas lived. In addition, it sought traces of ancient river tributaries buried by the Sahara, forest fires and thunderstorms in various areas of the globe, and an earthquake that had occurred in Japan. Another goal was to map Earth's appearance in early autumn and note seasonal environmental changes between photographs taken in April and those in October. If the radar could determine small changes on Earth it could eventually be used to predict earthquakes or volcano eruptions. On October 6 German oceanographers dumped 106 gallons of diesel oil and 26 gallons of algae products into the North Sea to determine how well Endeavour's radar could detect oil slicks and differentiate them from algae. Workers on two oil-recovery ships started to clean up the mess as soon as Endeavour passed and expected to finish within two hours. To gather as much data as possible, the astronauts worked in two 12-hour shifts.
The nature of experiments scheduled to be performed by astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in its forthcoming flight was described. In the field of life sciences, the experiments were intended to reveal the role gravity played in the reproduction and early development of plants and animals. In the second area, materials science, in the absence of gravity, engineers hoped to show a potential for forging strong, new metal alloys, high-speed semiconductors, and other components for use in aerospace and electronics products. (H Chron, Jul 3/94)
Worldwide pollution was revealed among other things by the Measurement of Air Pollution by Satellite (MAPS) instrument, flown on Space Shuttle Endeavour, which showed atmospheric carbon monoxide levels. Not only can this pollution contribute to global warming but it also can make it more difficult for the atmosphere to cleanse itself. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
As the astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia neared and passed the halfway point of their mission, they continued medical and metal research experiments, growth studies with protein crystals, and physical exercises. Lettuce and other seeds flown on Columbia were to be planted after the shuttle returned and then tested. Apart from the desire for a hot shower, the astronauts had no complaints and hoped they might break the U.S. record of time in space flight. The study of spacecraft glow on March 12 experienced difficulty when the ultraviolet light detector malfunctioned. On March 14, the astronauts began tests of a robot arm targeting system. On March 17, the astronauts started packing up experiments in preparation for landing the following day. Columbia landed uneventfully on March 18, having completed 223 orbits over 5.8 million miles. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 10/94; AP, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 11/94; AP, Mar 11/94; UP, Mar 11/94; B Sun, Mar 12/94; W Post, Mar 12/94; NY Times, Mar 12/94; Reuters, Mar 12/94; W Times, Mar 12/94; LA Times, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 13/94; Reuters, Mar 13/94; UP, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 14/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; USA Today, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 14/94; UP, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 15/94; Reuters, Mar 15/94; UP, Mar 15/94; W Post, Mar 16/94; AP, Mar 16/94; C Trib, Mar 16/94; USA Today, Mar 17/94; W Times, Mar 17/94; AP, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 17/94; Reuters, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 18/94; AP, Mar 18/94; Reuters, Mar 18/94; B Sun, Mar 19/94; NY Times, Mar 19/94; W Times, Mar 19/94; W Post, Mar 19/94; USA Today, Mar 21/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center obtained an Andros robot to increase the safety of its workforce and save time and money. The robot could perform such tasks as deflating Space Shuttle tires and checking for bombs, which would be dangerous for humans. (Fla Today, Oct 30/94)
At a conference at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., officials of NASA and of Spacehab Inc., the Arlington, Virginia, company that built and leased the laboratories that fly in the Space Shuttle, described progress made in the more than 80 missions that had included research payloads. Other private and university researchers were encouraged to join in such projects. (UP, Sep 28/94)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off on schedule, and the seven astronauts, including the first Japanese woman in space, began their experiments. The embryonic newts were thriving, and the adult female newts had produced additional eggs. The astronauts also began performing tests to determine how their bodies were adapting to weightlessness. One effect of the absence of gravity was that astronauts tended to grow two or more inches in space because of an elongated spine; they would revert to normal height on Earth. Findings could help in treating back pain on Earth. Among the animals carried for experimental purposes were four pregnant newts. By July 17 the second newt had died for an undetermined reason. The scientists also levitated a pea-sized drop of gold inside an electromagnetic field to investigate ways to exploit the absence of gravity in manufacturing. The astronauts worked in two shifts around the clock in order to complete all but one of the planned 82 experiments. A blown fuse in the French-built electrophoresis unit kept the astronauts from conducting their final experiment before preparing to return to Earth. On July 20 the astronauts marked the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. Because of heavy rainstorms, the projected landing on July 22 was postponed; because of the delay, the mission set a new Space Shuttle flight duration record. In the course of the flight, a number of the eggs hatched, and scores of eggs were laid by the various animals aboard. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; C Trib, Jul 9/94; NY Times, Jul 9/94; W Post, Jul 9/94; W Times, Jul 9/94; Reuters, Jul 9/94;B Sun, Jul 10/94; W Post, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; UP, Jul 10/94; Reuters, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Times, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94; Reuters, Jul 11/94; B Sun, Jul 12/94; W Post, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; AP, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; UP, Jul 18/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; NY Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; AP, Jul 19/94; UP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 22/94; UP, Jul 22/94; Reuters, Jul 22/94)
NASA spokesman George Diller said that as a result of an engine leak discovered in California, NASA had decided to check the welds on all engine nozzles of Shuttle Discovery. This fact, combined with the decision to replace one of Discovery's auxiliary power units, might result in a delay of the scheduled February 2, 1995 launch of Discovery. (O Sen Star, Dec 20/94)
Terri Bracher, Patrick Air Force Base spokeswoman, said the first nighttime practice rescue operation for Space Shuttle crew who might be downed at sea is to be conducted on May 18 near Kennedy Space Center. More than 200 members of the Air Force, Air National Guard, Marines, Air Force Reserve, Coast Guard, and NASA were to take part. Rescuers were to use night vision goggles and NAVSTAR Global Positioning System receivers to find the floating crew members. (O Sen Star, May 17/94)
Former NASA astronaut and Space Shuttle commander Ronald J. Grabe assumed his new post as vice president of business development for the launch systems group of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC) in Sterling, Virginia. He explained that OSC's specialty was providing access to space for small satellites at reasonable cost. One of his priorities was to find new markets for OSC's Taurus and Pegasus rockets. OSC also was about to enter the communications field through its ORBCOMM satellite system. (W Post, May 23/94)
In connection with its April mission, Space Shuttle Endeavour was to carry a radar imaging experiment that would collect data on surface texture in several areas of the globe, including California's Mojave Desert and Death Valley. The movement of sand was determined by a complex interrelationship among wind velocity, wind intensity, and the surface texture of the ground. Diane Evans, a geologist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, explained that if the experiment works well it might become a permanent part of NASA's comprehensive study of global change. The experiment also was to study vegetation around the world; in order to see as much of the Earth as possible, the Endeavour was to be launched on a trajectory that would cover most of the globe, with the orbit ranging from 57 degrees north of the equator to 57 degrees south. (LA Times, Mar 28/94)
The National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC), the world's largest wind tunnel, turned 50 in 1994. The NFAC, located on 12 acres of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, tested World War II aircraft and continued to operate by testing the Space Shuttle and other aircraft and equipment. (UPI, Jul 25/94)
Laurie Boeder, NASA Associate Administrator for Public Affairs, discussed NASA's struggles to fund NASA Select, a television channel that covered Space Shuttle missions for broadcast on cable and use by commercial networks. (SP News, Apr 4-10/94)
The $20 million docking ring, known as the Androgynous Peripheral Docking System, which would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995, arrived from Russia after it had been tested in Russia, in California, and in orbit. NASA managers expressed confidence in the ring although they could not read the Russian plaque on it. (O Sen Star, Dec 7/94; Fla Today, Dec 7/94)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin spoke to workers at Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems in eastern New Orleans, praising the company's new contract with NASA to make lightweight Space Shuttle external fuel tanks, calling the tanks an essential part of the Space Station. (Times-Picayune, Apr 26/94)
Bryan O'Connor, overseer of Shuttle operations at NASA headquarters, said that NASA expected to receive shortly a Russian-built Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly that would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russia's Mir Space Station. A damaged tube delayed delivery of the docking component. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)
NASA announced that its prime contractor for Space Shuttle orbiters, Rockwell Aerospace, on September 11 received the Russian-built docking mechanism, the Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly (APDA). This mechanism would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to join the orbiting Russian Mir Space Station in June 1995. Work was scheduled to begin immediately at Rockwell's Space Systems Division to assemble the APDA with the Rockwell-built docking system hardware. (NASA Release 94-151)
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
NASA learned that instead of the anticipated $225 million cut in its Space Shuttle budget for 1995, Congress had cut an additional $141 million, for a total Shuttle budget cut of $366 million. President Clinton had signed the NASA 1995 spending bill, which allocated $3.18 billion for the Shuttle program out of a total NASA budget of $14.37 billion. The effects of the cuts on NASA operations remained to be determined. (Fla Today, Sep 30/94)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to develop and manufacture an improved, lighter version of the Space Shuttle External Tank. The Super Lightweight External Tank was to be made of aluminum alloys and weigh 8,000 pounds less than the current model. (NASA Release 94-32; AP, Feb 28/94; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
In the administration budget presented to Congress, NASA suffered a $281 million cut for the Space Shuttle program, the first cut in 22 years. The budget proposals increased amounts for new technology, aeronautics, computers, and global warming research but required cancellation of the Long Duration Orbiter, the Commercial Experiment Transporter, and the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. (Reuters, Feb 7/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 10/94)
NASA announced that in August 1994 scientists would have a chance to study how the Earth's global environment was changing when Space Shuttle Endeavour began its 10-day mission, carrying the Space Radar Laboratory on its second flight. The mission, which would feature various international scientific experiments, would be under the command of Michael A. Baker. (NASA Release 94-114)
NASA announced the appointment of Larry DeLucas, a former Space Shuttle payload specialist and an expert in protein crystallography, as acting senior scientist for the Space Station. (NASA Release 94-206; Phillips Business Information, Dec 14/94)
The celebration for the return of Space Shuttle Columbia to Palmdale, California for modifications and inspections was also the occasion for celebrating the return to work of some 200 laid-off Rockwell Corporation employees. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Nov 19/94)
Preparations for the launch, the launch itself, and experiments conducted aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia received extensive media coverage. Fueling began the morning of March 4 prior to the crew's boarding. The mission commander and the pilot wore newly devised long johns with tubes that plugged into water pumps to keep them cool while awaiting takeoff and during reentry. Most of the major experiments were to be operated from the ground so that the astronauts could concern themselves with medical tests, some mechanical structures, and observation of the 12 rats used in a bone density study. On March 5, one of Columbia's three auxiliary power units registered an unusually high pressure reading, causing concern; the readings returned to normal when the crew switched to other heaters. It developed that the high pressure apparently resulted from an ice buildup in one of the auxiliary power units. Meanwhile, several articles expressed concern that budget cuts endangered the safety of NASA flights, but NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin denied this was true. As the space flight progressed, two crew members at a time took turns in taking four hours off duty in view of the lengthy nature of the mission. (W Post, Mar 4/94; AP, Mar 4/94; UP, Mar 4/94; Reuters, Mar 4/94; W Times, Mar 5/94; NY Times, Mar 5/94; W Post, Mar 5/94; B Sun, Mar 5/94; P Inq, Mar 5/94; W Times, Mar 6/94; W Post, Mar 6/94; P Inq, Mar 6/94; Daily News, Mar 6/94; UP, Mar 6/94; Reuters, Mar 6/94; NY Times, Mar 7/94; AP, Mar 7/94; UP, Mar 7/94; Reuters, Mar 7/94; NY Times, Mar 8/94; CSM, Mar 8/94; W Post, Mar 8/94; C Trib, Mar 8/94; Reuters, Mar 8/94; AP, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94)
Although the November 3 mission of Space Shuttle Atlantis would be devoted primarily to the study of Earth's ozone layer, it would also entail a study of mammalian development in space, based on research on ten pregnant laboratory rats and their twin offsprings. The countdown for the launch was to begin on October 31. (Fla Today, Oct 22/94; AP, Oct 31/94; Tass, Nov 1/94)
The Justice Department joined a whistle-blower, David Vosoughkia, in a lawsuit accusing the Rockwell International Corporation of overcharging NASA by millions of dollars for contracts to build parts for the Space Shuttle. (Reuters, Apr 28/94; UP, Apr 28/94; NY Times, Apr 29/94; WSJ, Apr 29/94)
NASA announced that some 50 U.S., Canadian, and European scientists had begun the second phase of a detailed ecological study of the forests of Canada and the role these forests played in climate change. The Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study (BOREAS) was a large-scale, ground-based, and remote-sensing investigation of the way the forests and the atmosphere exchange energy, heat, water, carbon dioxide, and other trace gases. From April 11 to May 2, scientists were to study the forests during the annual snowmelt. The Focused Field Campaign-Thaw, the second of five parts of BOREAS, was to build on spaceborne data resulting from the first flight of the Space Radar Laboratory (SRL) aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour. BOREAS and SRL formed part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 94-65)
NASA announced the members of the mid-1995 Space Shuttle mission that was scheduled to carry a NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. The satellite was intended to provide for telecommunications needs essential to the success of Space Shuttle and low-Earth orbit spacecraft missions. The Space Shuttle was to be commanded by Terence T. Henricks. (NASA Release 94-141)
Franklin Chang-Diaz, a Costa Rican immigrant to the United States, addressed the National Hispanic University mathematics and science convocation in San Jose to tell Hispanic students how he became the first Hispanic in space. He flew with the NASA five-person crew with Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev on Shuttle Discovery in February. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 22/94)
The crew of NASA's November Atlantis Shuttle mission were scheduled to test the feasibility of an unusual rendezvous procedure for the second docking with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. They would fly Atlantis on a "plus R bar" (the radius vector from the target's center of mass to the Earth's center) to rendezvous with and retrieve the Crista-Spas atmospheric research satellite on the ninth day of the planned 11-day mission. The new approach would save fuel and not require any braking. Crista-Spas was to be deployed from Atlantis's robot arm within about 20 hours of Atlantis's launch. (AvWk, Oct 17/94; SP News, Oct 24-30)
The ashes of "Star Trek" creator Gene Roddenberry were flown on a Space Shuttle after his death in October 1991, at the request of his widow, according to a NASA spokesperson. (AP, Apr 28/94; UP, Apr 28/94; Reuters, Apr 28/94)
Boyce Mix, deputy manager for the Shuttle main engine program at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, said that technicians at Paragon Precision Products of Valencia, California, had used a super-strength glue for as many as six years to make unauthorized repairs on Space Shuttle engines, without the knowledge of company officers. A January inspection revealed the glue and the situation was corrected. (AP, Feb 11/94; Reuters, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; NY Times, Feb 13/94; USA Today, Feb 14/94)
Lockheed said it could arrange private financing for a low-cost, reusable launch vehicle (RLV) if the U.S. government would give it all the Space Shuttle and Titan business for at least five years. In return, Lockheed estimated that the government would get $2 billion a year savings. To make such a RLV, Lockheed would call on Rocketdyne for propulsion, Rohr Corporation for high temperature structures, and Martin Marietta-Denver for tanks for liquid oxygen and hydrogen. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
The flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour was aborted 1.9 seconds before liftoff as a result of automatic engine shutdown caused by an overheated fuel pump. In consequence NASA officials stated that they were moving the launch of Endeavour to the first week of October because of the time it would take to refurbish the craft. (UP, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94; NY Times, Aug 19/94; W Post, Aug 19/94; W Times, Aug 19/94; USA Today, Aug 19/94; AP, Aug 19/94; Fla Today, Aug 19/94; O Sen Star, Aug 19/94; NY Times, Aug 21/94; AvWk, Aug 22/94)
NASA announced the crew of the STS-60 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for flight from February 3 to 11, 1994: Mission commander, Charlie Bolden; Pilot, Ken Reightler; mission specialists, Jan Davis, Ron Sega, Franklin Chang-Diaz, and Sergei Krikalev, Russian cosmonaut with two long-duration flights aboard the Mir Station. His flight will begin a new three-phase era of cooperation: ten Shuttle--Mir missions, joint work on the core Space Station, and expansion of the Station to all other partners.
Jack Levine, Director of Flight Programs in NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology, said that after considering the findings of a technical review panel, NASA decided to cut off funding for the Commercial Experiments Transporter (Comet) in FY 94. Comet was conceived as an alternative to the Space Shuttle; it would use an expendable rocket to orbit commercial experiments, some of which would be brought back to Earth aboard a recovery capsule after 30 days. Costs exceeded estimates and for that reason and the panel's findings, NASA decided to discontinue the program. (Defense Daily, May 5/94)
The countdown began for the launch of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (AP, Sep 6/94; UP, Sep 6/94; Reuters, Sep 6/94; W Post, Sep 7/94; USA Today, Sep 7/94; AP, Sep 7/94; UP, Sep 7/94; NY Times, Sep 9/94; USA Today, Sep 9/94; W Post, Sep 9/94; W Times, Sep 9/94; CSM, Sep 9/94; Daily Press, Sep 9/94; Virginian-Pilot, Sep 9/94)
Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
NASA announced the naming of Italian scientist Umberto Guidoni to the Columbia Space Shuttle mission in early 1996. He would be involved with experiments dealing with the Tethered Satellite System, with which he had previous experience. (NASA Release 94-169)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle astronaut William E. Thornton would retire from NASA on May 31. (NASA Release 94-87)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced agency plans to proceed with the use of the nearly completed facilities at Yellow Creek in Iuka, Mississippi, originally designed for use with the proposed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), for use with the manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. NASA and the Thiokol Corporation worked out plan implementation, which was scheduled to take approximately two and a half years. Thiokol plans to move all of its nozzle operations to the Yellow Creek facility. In view of the federal government's investment of taxpayer money in the construction of the Yellow Creek facility, NASA was committed to obtaining maximum return while seeking to mitigate the economic impact on the region resulting from the ASRM termination. (NASA Release 94-68)
NASA was preparing three rendezvous with Russian Space Station Mir to launch the new cooperative effort between Washington and Moscow. In the first, scheduled for February 1995, Shuttle Discovery would simulate docking with Mir but not in fact touch it. In June 1995, Shuttle Atlantis would actually dock with Mir and remain together for four days, ultimately taking aboard U.S. astronaut Norm Thagard who would have joined Mir in March. In October 1995 Atlantis would be outfitted with an Orbiter Docking System that would be installed on the Space Station to facilitate future rendezvous. (AFP, Dec 16/94)
The previous week NASA had released documents laying the ground rules for what was certain to be a heated competition among U.S. aerospace contractors. Final documents were scheduled to be released in mid-November. NASA's need was for a revolutionary rocket to replace the Space Shuttle, a Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV). It was to be a cooperative project between NASA and industry, with industry participating in the funding of the RLV. The goal was an operational single-stage-to-orbit rocket that would replace the Space Shuttle in 2010 or 2012. (SP News, Oct 24-30/94)
A Russian television program, "Science Today," commented on the roles of the Russian Energiya-Buran and the U.S. Space Shuttle systems in reducing the costs of placing payloads in space. In this connection the program promoted the potential of the Russian-Ukrainian project "Maks" based on an existing aircraft, the Mriya. The Russian Maks program was commended by G. Le. Lozino-Lozinskiy, general designer of the "Molniya" and British Aerospace agreed it was necessary to begin building winged transport systems with the Maks and presented the Maks system to the European Space Agency. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 29/94)
NASA announced that the official launch date of Space Shuttle Columbia would be March 3. During the 14-day flight, a five-person crew was to conduct numerous scientific experiments ranging from materials processing to biotechnology and environmental monitoring. (NASA Editor's Note N94-18; AP, Feb 16/94; Reuters, Feb 16/94; W Times, Feb 17/94)
Disagreements continued to exist between the United States and Russia over the Salyut FGB "space tug" with regard both to the tug's price and the cost of launching it, which Russia wanted the United States to pay. Khrunichev Machine Building Enterprise was in the early stage of working on the tug. An agreement was worked out on November 10 about the medical certification process for joint flights, under which each country would accept the medical certification of the other's space flight personnel until prelaunch examinations were performed 30-45 days in advance of Russian Soyuz flights and 10 days in advance of U.S. Shuttle flights. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA announced the completion of the second of two shipments of solar panel modules, marking delivery of the first U.S. Space Station flight hardware for NASA's cooperative space endeavors with Russia. The shipments each consisted of 45 solar panel modules developed for the Mir cooperative solar array project, an effort that brought together NASA's advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's proven structures and mechanisms. Eighty-four of the modules were scheduled to be integrated with Russian-made frames in 42 hinged parts. The completed array would be returned to the United States to be taken to Mir on the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release 94-217; Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
A report by the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on the Shuttle-Mir Rendezvous and Docking Missions criticized the lack of one person being in charge of the Shuttle-Mir phase one (1995-97) project. Accordingly, NASA was moving to remedy the situation and make the Space Station program structure similar to the existing Space Shuttle program structure. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)
NASA announced the names of the remaining members of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for the fall of 1995 aboard Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 94-195)
An article analyzed the role played by lasers in advancing atmospheric science. Reference was made to the end of the last Space Shuttle flight when NASA was gathering data simultaneously from different altitudes over the same spot on Earth with three laser systems--one on Discovery and two on research aircraft. A fourth, ground-based Lidar (light detection and ranging) at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, also gathered data concurrently. This combination should significantly advance technology toward the goal of a permanent, automated Lidar satellite. The article provided scientific details of the flights undertaken and Discovery's operation of Lite, the Lidar In-space Technology Experiment. (AvWk, Oct 3/94)
NASA announced that it would continue to study how the Earth's environment was changing and how human beings affected that change during the upcoming flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis. This, the third flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Also during the mission astronauts would deploy and retrieve a free-flying satellite designed to study the middle and lower thermospheres and would perform various experiments covering life sciences research and microgravity processing. The flight, commanded by Donald R. McMonagle, was scheduled for launch on November 3. (NASA Release 94-175)
A lengthy article on the Clinton Administration's science and technology policy dealt with these two fields and the President's goals in their regard. The government spent more than half of its research and development money on developing usable technologies. The remainder was divided almost evenly between applied research and basic research. However, the availability of funding was a serious problem. Funding increased significantly during the Cold War but scientific disasters such as the failure of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island electric power plant and the explosion of the Challenger Space Shuttle eroded public support and federal funding. The accomplishments of the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in consolidating the two weather satellite systems of the Defense Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration as well as the NSTC's initiative in coordinating space launch policy among NASA and the Defense, Commerce, and Transportation departments were commended. (Government Executive, Nov 94)
An obituary of Myron S. Malkin described him as the physicist who was the first director of the Space Shuttle program from 1973 to 1980. He served as a consultant to NASA and was in the control room for the Shuttle's first flight in April 1981. (AP, Oct 25/94; NY Times, Oct 26/94)
A feature article on astronaut Eileen Collins, based at Ellington Field, indicated that she was scheduled to be the first woman to pilot a Space Shuttle when the flight occurred in February 1995. (Texas, Jun 12/94)
Shuttle Discovery launched three pairs of stainless steel spheres as part of a study of space debris in which ground stations were to track junk that could pose a collision hazard for spacecraft. On February 8 it left a small German satellite, Bremsat, in orbit to conduct six science experiments. (Reuters, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 10/94; AP, Feb 10/94)
NASA announced the addition of Jerry M. Linenger to the crew of the fall 1994 flight of Space Shuttle Discovery. The mission of this flight was scheduled to be complex, including a rendezvous, proximity operations, and a spacewalk; thus crew operations needed to be more efficiently distributed. (NASA Release 94-31)
In a speech to the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the Marshall Space Flight Center's top priority was safe Space Shuttle propulsion. The second priority was the Center's share in the Space Station program and the third priority was the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, and X-ray telescope scheduled to be launched in the late 1990s. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
As a result of an investigation by NASA's Inspector General, Omniplan Corporation, with offices near the Johnson Space Center, four related companies, and five employees, together with the Chief Executive Officer Ralph Montijo Jr. and his wife, Guillermina, were named in a federal grand jury indictment. They were charged with conspiracy to present false claims to NASA, embezzling from an employee benefits plan, money laundering, and making false statements to NASA, the Internal Revenue Service, the Small Business Administration, and the Defense Contract Audit Agency. The company had been previously indicted for allegedly swindling $4 million from NASA and its own employees. Omniplan subcontracted through Rockwell Space Operations Company to write flight plan documentation for the Space Shuttle. The government filed a lawsuit to try to recover $3.75 million. (H Post, May 28/94)
NASA announced the postponement of the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia until March 4 because of a severe storm. (AP, Mar 2/94; Reuters, Mar 2/94; NY Times, Mar 3/94; P Inq, Mar 3/94; USA Today, Mar 3/94)
NASA announced that its geologists were using radar images and photographs taken during Endeavour's recent Space Shuttle mission to study possible new lava flows from Mount Klyuchevsky on Russia's Kamchatka peninsula. The daily Shuttle tracking of the eruption provided the most detailed documentation of such an eruption ever obtained from orbit. (NASA Release 94-179)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
Space Tec Ventures, a Hampton, Virginia, company created by Joseph Casas, helped NASA's Langley Research Center in Virginia build a laser scheduled to be be used to monitor Earth's environment from space. The laser was to measure the amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and was to be aimed at Earth from Space Shuttle Endeavour's cargo bay. The firm built two other lasers that were scheduled for NASA flights in August and September.
Harry Holloway, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications, stressed that both the Spacelab and Mir were critical elements in NASA's orbital research program. During the next three years, NASA was scheduled to fly four Spacelab missions and five of the scheduled 10 Shuttle flights to Mir were to use the long Spacelab module to conduct priority research in fluid physics and combustion. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
NASA announced members of the crew for the second Wake Shield Facility Shuttle flight aboard Endeavour, scheduled for mid-1995, under the command of David M. Walker. (NASA Release 94-112)
During a visit to Cape Canaveral with his crewmates, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Titov familiarized himself with the Spacehab module that was scheduled to be carried on his Shuttle flight in February 1995. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham at Kennedy Space Center said the tether launched by the Space Shuttle was working well. It could be used to move satellites around in different orbits in space. Originally about 12 miles long, atomic oxygen and tiny meteorites ate it so that it was now only about five miles long. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/94)
Alex Roland, a professor of military history and technology at Duke University, wrote a feature article in the "Outlook" section in which he maintained that promoters of the costly Space Station and the Space Shuttle were forcing abandonment of science experiments that would be more valuable. (W Post, May 22/94)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Endeavour was to be launched in April to study Earth's global environment. The Space Radar Laboratory was to consist of the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Measurement of Air Pollution from Satellite. Of these instruments, the German Space Agency (DARA) and the Italian Space Agency (ASI) were to provide the X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar. An international team of 49 science investigators from 13 nations were to conduct the experiments. In addition, the mission was to include NASA's Get Away Special experiments that allow average persons a chance to perform experiments in space; it was also to be the first cooperative initiative with the National Institutes of Health using a special cell culture system. (NASA Release 94-38)
Richard DalBello, assistant director for space programs in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that NASA's competion for a reusable rocket to replace the Space Shuttle was on hold while White House budget officials mulled over the technical, financial, and political prospects for the program. The White House Office of Management and Budget must sign off on the NASA plan before NASA officials invited the U.S. aerospace industry to submit competing designs for the rocket. Most U.S. aerospace firms already had competing blueprints for a reusable rocket. (SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
Space Shuttle Columbia was moved to the launch pad to begin preparations for a July launching at Kennedy Space Center. (Reuters, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 18/94)
Shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral carrying for the first time a Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had spent 15 months aboard Mir Station, and five American astronauts. Discovery's eight-day research flight was to include deployment and retrieval of the Wake Shield Facility, designed for growing experimental semiconductor materials, and various microgravity and life science experiments. (AP, Feb 3/94; UPI, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Times, Feb 4/94; P Inq, Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY Times, Feb 4/94; USA Today, Feb 4/94; WSJ, Feb 4/94; C Trib, Feb 4/94; AP, Feb 4/94)
Before setting the final date for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, NASA engineers were studying the results of tests conducted on Space Shuttle Endeavour's main engine that shut down 1.9 seconds before takeoff, aborting the launch. (AP, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 4/94; B Sun, Sep 4/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; Fla Today, Sep 4/94)
The requirements for Rockwell International's Space Systems Division in integrating a Russian-built mechanism into airlock hardware it had manufactured so Space Shuttle Atlantis could dock with Space Station Mir were described. The docking assembly would be the first in what could be a long line of hybrid U.S.-Russian space hardware. Rockwell executives were confident they could meet the May 1995 launch date for Atlantis. Rockwell's Russian partner was NPO Energia, with whom it had worked some 20 years previously on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Some of the complications of the collaboration were discussed. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
More than 700 Space Shuttle support personnel at NASA's Kennedy Space Center had been on strike for 15 weeks in a labor dispute with contractor EG&G Corporation. The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, the labor union representing the striking workers, said negotiations were deadlocked over an EG&G demand to limit health insurance benefits for its employees. NASA denied charges that safety had been compromised during the three Shuttle flights launched since the strike began July 5. On October 21 negotiators reached a tentative agreement in their meeting at the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service headquarters in Washington, D.C. The contract proposal covered health insurance, wages, and pensions. The contract remained to be approved by three EG&G subcontractors and then ratified by the striking union members. (Defense Daily, Oct 14/94; AP, Oct 21/94)
NASA announced the selection of Kathryn C. Thornton and Catherine G. Coleman for the 16-day Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for launch in the fall of 1995 aboard Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 94-47)
NASA announced that Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to take off in March on a two-week mission to conduct various experiments entailing such areas as materials processing, biotechnology, microgravity, medical concerns, and environmental monitoring. (NASA Release 94-25)
Free-lance journalist Alcestis Oberg maintained that following the November elections NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin planned to cut jobs at Johnson Space Center drastically. According to the article, Goldin hoped to reduce the Space Shuttle operations work force by 50 percent in five years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of 30 percent in 1995. (H Post, Oct 20/94)
One of the six ball-screw housings, the $95 million Russian docking system shock absorber, failed its test and the Russian builder wished to replace all six. This might delay the June 8, 1995 launch of Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir. (O Sen Star, Dec 15/94)
NASA announced the selection of 34 scientists to participate in the experiment definition phase of the Neurolab Space Shuttle mission. This was to be a 14- to 16-day mission jointly with the National Institutes of Health, devoted to brain and behavioral research and was scheduled for launch in early 1998. Various domestic and international partners also were participating, such as Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, and Nigeria. (NASA Release 94-100; Reuters, Jun 22/94)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth after making an additional orbit because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. In spite of its inability to release the Wake Shield Facility, that satellite was the site for growing high-grade semiconductor films while attached to Discovery. Discovery also conducted 12 experiments in Spacehab, a commercial laboratory, in the cargo bay. (NY Times, Feb 12/94; B Sun, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; AP, Feb 12/94)
NASA expects to select a single prime contractor for its Space Shuttle program within a year and turnover shuttle operations in 1998. (W Post, Aug 22/95; USA Today, Aug 22/95; Space News, Aug 28/95; WSJ, Aug 22/95; AP, Aug 21/95; UPI, Aug 21/95; AvWk, Aug 28/95)
A team of aerospace executives has recommended that NASA modify the Space Shuttle program�s management structure. The team was headed by former Johnson Space Center Director Christopher Kraft. The report to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recommends separating developmental activities from flight operations. The Kraft report endorses the themes of reducing the role of civil service employees, increasing contractor accountability, and reducing the number of government-to-contractor interfaces. (NASA Release 95-27; NY Times, May 22/95 & Apr 14/95; W Post, Jun 7/95; Fla Today, Mar 2/95 & Apr 5/95; Reuters, Mar 13/95; AvWk, Mar 6/95, Mar 20/95, Apr 10/95 & Jun 12/95)
A Soyuz TM-21 has launched the first U.S. astronaut to the Mir station. Astronaut Norman E. Thagard, M.D., lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on March 14, and the Soyuz docked with Mir on March 16. Thagard and the other Soyuz cosmonauts will spend three months on Mir, then return aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis. (NASA Release 95-25; NY Times, Mar 14/95, Mar 15/95 & Mar 17/95; W Post, Mar 14/95, Mar 15/95, Mar 17/95 & Apr 23/95; USA Today, Mar 14/95 & Jun 7/95; Fla Today, Apr 2/95 & Jun 7/95; Space News, May 1/95; Reuters, Mar 13/95; AP, Mar 13/95, Mar 3/14 & Apr 9/95; UPI, Mar 11/95; AvWk, Mar 20/95 & Apr 17/95)
A contract for the design and development of the International Space Station was signed today by NASA and the Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division. This 400-ton Space Station will be a catalyst for global cooperation, bringing together resources from the United States, Russia, Japan, member nations of the European Space Agency, Canada, and Italy. The new contract was for $5.63 billion. Assembly will begin in November 1997 with the launch of the U.S.-purchased Russian FGB �space tug� a power and propulsion module. It will be followed in December 1997 with Node 1, that would connect laboratory and crew modules and allow the Space Shuttle to dock. (NASA Releases 95-2 & 13; Space News, May 1/95; AvWk, Apr 10/95)
NASA announced that it planned a February 2 liftoff for the Shuttle Discovery, whose astronauts were to attempt the first rendezvous of a space shuttle with the Russian Space Station Mir. The planned eight-day flight was considered a rehearsal for a series of Shuttle-Mir docking missions set to begin in late May or early June. The STS-63 Mission was to be commanded by James D. Wetherbee, with Eileen M. Collins as pilot. (NASA Release, 95-5; H Chron, Jan 19/95; AFP, Jan 19/95; APn, Jan 18//95; NASA Note to Editors, N95-4)
Woodpeckers riddled the insulating foam of the external fuel tank on top of the Space Shuttle Discovery, causing the shuttle to be moved to a hangar for repairs. Its mission to launch a communications satellite is delayed until July. (NY Times, Jun 3/95 & Jul 13/95; W Post, Jun 1/95 & Jun 3/95; USA Today, Jun 2/95; Fla Today, Jun 3/95 & Jun 5/95; Space News, Jun 5/95; AP, Jun 2/95 & Jun 8/95; Reuters, Jun 1/95; UPI, Jun 1/95; AvWk, Jun 5/95 & Jun 12/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis (STS-74). On its second visit to Space Shuttle Mir, Atlantis added a permanent Russian-built docking port. The 15-foot, 9,000 pound docking tunnel came with two new solar arrays, one built in Russia and one provided by NASA, that would be assembled later. The link up, which occurred on November 15, required the pilot, Kenneth Cameron, to aim for a target about three inches in diameter and connect at a speed of less than one-tenth of a mile per hour. The quarter-million-pound spacecraft docked with Mir, of about the same weight, as they sped through space at 17,500 mph. They remained docked for three days. Mission STS-74 ended on November 20, paving the way toward assembly of the International Space Station beginning in November 1997.
Two-time Space Shuttle astronaut Dr. James P. Bagian has left the astronaut corps for a position with the Environmental Protection Agency�s National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory in Ann Arbor, Michigan. (NASA Release 95-142)
A temporary government shutdown is being considered. Although the Space Shuttle would remain in orbit, NASA TV(the entity that provides footage of the astronauts during the mission(could be closed. (CSM, Nov 15/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-73). During the mission Columbia provided a calm, stable platform for 16 days of on-orbit research using the Microgravity Laboratory (USML-2) Spacelab that consisted of over 40 fluid-physics, material science, and biotechnology experiments. Columbia landed on November 5. Columbia�s window was nicked by space debris. The Space Shuttle also received a 1 cm crater in its cargo bay door, the biggest impact to date. (NASA Release 95-152; NY Times, Oct 21/95, Oct 22/95, Oct 27/95 & Nov 5/95; W Post, Oct 29/95 & Nov 6/95; Fla Today, Oct 27/95, Nov 3/95 & Nov 4/95; USA Today, Nov 6/95; Space News, Nov 6/95 & Dec 4/95; AvWk, Nov 13/95)
Images from the international Space Radar Laboratory (SRL) may help researchers find previously unknown settlements near the ancient city of Angkor in Cambodia. The radar data was obtained during the October flight of the Space Shuttle Endeavour. SRL�s complementary radars, the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (X-SAR), is a joint mission of the United States, German and Italian space agencies. (NASA Release 95-12; Space News, Feb 27/95; Science, Feb 17/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis (mission STS-71). This first docking mission with Russian Space Station Mir occurred almost 20 years after the Apollo-Soyuz linkup in July 1975. The joined spacecraft had a record mass of about 200 tons and held a record 10 people�6 Americans and 4 Russians (8 men and 2 women). After five days of joint operations 245 miles above Earth, during which Mir�s current crew underwent extensive medical testing in a shuttle cargo bay laboratory, the Mir-18 crew returned with Atlantis, having been replaced by two Russian cosmonauts.
Veteran Space Shuttle astronauts Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr., Richard N. (Dick) Richards and Pierre J. Thuot have left the Astronaut Office. Ken Reightler will join Lockheed Martin, Houston, as the Program Manager for Engineering, Test and Analysis. Dick Richards remains at NASA, moving to the Space Shuttle Program Office to serve as the mission director for the second servicing mission for the Hubble Space Telescope. After three Shuttle flights, Thuot will teach astronautics courses at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 95-104; AvWk, Jul 10/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Discovery (mission STS-70) marked the 100th Human Spaceflight. This event occurred 34 years after Alan Shepard�s historic 15-minute sub-orbital flight into space. STS-70�s primary objective was deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-G. Discovery used a new version of a main engine which took a decade to develop. (NASA Releases 95-32, 59 & 71; NY Times, Jul 14/95; W Post, Jul 14/95; USA Today, Jul 14/95, Jul 17/95; Fla Today, Jul 11/95, Jul 12/95, Jul 16/95 & Jul 17/95; AP, Jul 12/95, Jul 13/95 & Jul 20/95; UPI, Jul 12/95 & Jul 21/95; Reuters, Jul 20/95 & Jul 21/95; AvWk, Jul 17/95)
NASA�s Galileo spacecraft has confirmed it has reached the inside of Jupiter�s magnetosphere. Direct measurements of the Jupiter system may now begin. Final tuning of the flight path is scheduled for December 2. On December 7, Galileo�s previously deployed atmospheric probe will plunge into Jupiter�s cloud tops and descend into the giant planet on a parachute. An hour after the probe mission is completed, Galileo will begin to fire its onboard rocket beginning a two year mission of close-up studies of the planet�s large moons, Jupiter itself, and the magnetosphere. The spacecraft was launched aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis and an Interim Upper Stage (IUS) on October 18, 1989. (NASA Releases 95-207 & 215; NY Times, Dec 3/95, Dec 7/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec 11/95; W Post, Dec 4/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec 11/95; USA Today, Dec 1/95, Dec 7/95 & Dec 8/95; Fla Today, Dec 7/95; WSJ, Dec 7/95; Time, Dec 11/95; Newsweek, Dec 18/95; AvWk, Nov 27/95, Dec 4/95 & Dec 11/95; Science, Dec 15/95)
The United States and Russia began taking practical steps toward merging their manned space programs.  NASA expected to begin shuttle flights to the Mir Space Station as a step in a joint venture to build a space station. The agreement called for seven flights through 1997 in which U. S. space shuttles would dock with Mir and allow the exchange of crews. One shuttle mission in 1995 would supply solar arrays that would combine U.S. advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's expertise in space structures and mechanisms in order to boost Mir's electrical output by six kilowatts. (AvWk, Jan 2/95; San Diego Union-Tribune, Jan 4/95)
A new Mission Control center at the Johnson Space Center began operating about 10 hours after the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery. It replaces the 30 year old Mission Control which began controlling manned space flights in Houston rather than at Cape Canaveral, Florida. A network of 200 computer work stations are replacing the lumbering and inflexible, but highly reliable mainframe computer. Launchings and landings, the most dangerous parts of space flight, will be monitored from the original Mission Control at least through the end of the year to be sure there are no glitches with the new center. (NY Times, Jul 15/95;W Post, Jul 16/95; Fla Today, Feb 12/95 & 15/95; Space News, Dec 11/95; H Chron, Jul 9/95; AP, Jul 15/95; Reuters, Jul 14/95; AvWk, Jul 31/95)
Astronomers using NASA�s Astro-2 observatory announced the definitive detection of one of the two original building blocks of the universe-the element helium created in the Big Bang explosion. The evidence was found using the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope (HUT), one of three ultraviolet instruments on the Astro-2 observatory which was operated in the payload bay of the Space Shuttle Endeavour during its 17-day mission in March. Johns Hopkins University astronomers were able to detect the helium in the light from a distant quasar called HS1700+64, about 10 billion light years away. The astronomers were essentially looking at the universe when it was a quarter of its present age.
Launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour (STS-67) on a 17-day mission. The mission included the use of three unique ultraviolet telescopes mounted on the Astro 2 observation platform. It built on the findings of Astro�s first flight in December, 1990, when the Instrument Pointing System was balky. (NASA Release 95-18; NY Times, Mar 3/95, Mar 7/95, Mar 12/95 & Mar 13/95; W Post, Mar 3/95, Mar 7/95 & Mar 10/95; Reuters, Mar 5/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour (STS-69). It deployed and retrieved two scientific spacecraft. One was the second flight of the Wake Shield Facility-2, a 12-foot diameter disk for growing semiconductor films. The other was the Spartan 201 on its third flight. Its mission was to study the outer atmosphere of the Sun and its transition into the solar wind that constantly flows past the Earth. (NASA Releases 95-121 & 164; NY Times, Sep 3/95, Sep 14/95, Sep 15/95, Sep 16/95, Sep 17/95, Sep 18/95 & Sep 19/95; W Post, Sep 8/95, Sep 11/95, Sep 12/95, Sep 17/95, Sep 18/95 & Sep 19/95; USA Today, Sep 11/95 & Sep 13/95; Fla Today, Sep 11/95, Sep 12/95, Sep 14/95 & Sep 17/95; CSM, Sep11/95; AP, Sep 7/95, Sep 8/95, Sep 10/95, Sep 12/95, Sep 15/95 & Sep 18/95; Reuters, Sep 9/95, Sep 11/95 & Sep 14/95; UPI, Sep 7/95; AvWk, Sep 11/95 & Sep 18/95)
NASA announced the crew members for the Shuttle Columbia STS-75 mission in early 1996. This flight was to be the second of the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) and also marked the third devoted to orbital investigations using the US Microgravity Payload.
Launch of Space Shuttle Discovery (mission STS-63). On February 6 Discovery approached to within 37 feet of the Kristall module of the Russian Space Station Mir, where the two 100-ton spaceships flew in formation for a time. This rendezvous was a dress rehearsal for the first in a series of seven shuttle docking flights to Mir that would begin in June. This series, which will involve the Space Shuttle Atlantis, is intended to give the United States and Russia an unprecedented opportunity to combine flight operations, ground control, training activities, and research.
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASA’s Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as “the first day of a new space program in America.” Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve “very good” safety ratings.(Associated Press, “NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry,” 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, “NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 30 September 1996; United Press International, “NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 1 October 1996.)
Hurricane Fran delayed the launch of Shuttle Atlantis. NASA managers decided to move the Shuttle off the launchpad when it became clear that the hurricane’s path lay through the southeast region of the United States. Because of the slow rollback of the vehicle from the launchpad to the assembly building, managers determined that they would not be able to meet the scheduled 14 September departure date.(NASA, “Atlantis Moved to VAB; STS-79 Delayed,” launch advisory 96-181, 4 September 1996.)
The experimental DC-XA flight vehicle completed a successful test flight, flying nearly 2,000 feet (610 meters) above the desert of the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico and landing safely. NASA researchers and administrators hoped that the rocket would one day replace the Space Shuttle as the primary means of space exploration. The reusable, unpiloted rocket, taking off and landing from a vertical position, would cut significantly the costs of delivering payloads into orbit. NASA announced that the vehicle had been renamed Clipper Graham, in honor of Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham. Graham, who died on 31 December 1995, had served as an advisor to President Ronald Reagan and had been an early proponent for the development of reusable rockets. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed optimism that NASA would be able to replace the Shuttle with the DC-XA flight vehicle: “We are going to fly the [S]huttle safely until we can replace it. But, by God, we are going to replace the [S]huttle.”(NASA, “Revolutionary New Launch Vehicle Renamed for Space Pioneer,” news release 96-114, 7 June 1996; Associated Press, “Reusable Rocket Ends Flight,” 7 June 1996.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. “Rich” Clifford and Linda M. Godwin made an historic spacewalk outside the orbiting Mir space station. For the first time, astronauts exited Mir with the Shuttle docked at the station. Clifford and Godwin, wearing jet packs as a precaution, scaled the passageway connecting Shuttle Atlantis with the Mir complex, installing several experiment boxes on the outside of the space station. Some of these boxes were “cosmic dust catchers,” meant to gather samples of the materials that might smash into orbiting space stations. The spacewalk and associated experiments were part of ongoing research in preparation for the construction of the new International Space Station. NASA regarded the spacewalk as more dangerous than usual, because the Shuttle was docked with Mir and, thus, unable to give chase quickly if one of the astronauts broke away from the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Spacewalking Astronauts Venture Outside Atlantis-Mir Complex,” 27 March 1996; Todd Halverson, “Walkers Prepare for Historic Trek Outside Mir Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 March 1996. 50 Houston Chronicle, “United Space Alliance Taps New Top Officers,” 27 March 1996.)
NASA and the scientific community celebrated the 15th anniversary of the Space Shuttle program. NASA had adopted the Shuttle as a means of controlling the costs of exploring space. However, NASA conceded that, since its deployment, the Shuttle had flown only nine times per year, compared with the 24 to 60 Shuttle flights per year anticipated. Furthermore, the cost of flying the Shuttle had reached almost US$500,000 more per mission than expected. During its first 15 years, the Shuttles had flown 76 missions, including 51 following the Challenger accident. The Shuttles had transported 545 tons (490,000 kilograms or 490 tonnes) of payloads to space, bringing back to Earth 18.5 tons (17,000 kilograms or 17 tonnes) of payloads. During the same period, 440 astronauts from 12 countries flew aboard the Shuttles. NASA experts predicted that the Shuttle would remain the primary vehicle of space exploration well into the 21st century.(Martin Burkey, “A Lean, Mean Teen: Shuttle Turns 15,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 April 1996; Seth Borenstein, “Costly History Dogs Shuttle on Anniversary,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 12 April 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
NASA commemorated the 10-year anniversary of the Challenger tragedy. In advance of the anniversary, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin reaffirmed NASA’s dual commitments to exploring the frontiers of the universe and to maintaining the highest safety standard possible. According to Goldin, “the best way to honor the memories of the crew of Challenger, and of all the men and women, who have given their lives to explore the frontiers of air and space, is to continue their bold tradition of exploration and innovation.” In the decade following the accident, NASA had instituted multiple safety changes in the Shuttle program, including the nine changes in the program’s structure recommended by the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission). By the end of January 1996, NASA had launched 49 Shuttle missions since the Challenger accident and had successfully deployed the HST. Memorial observances at KSC and JSC took place at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger exploded.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Changes and Accomplishments Since 1986,” news release, January 1996; NASA, “Administrator Goldin Issues Statement on Challenger Observance,” news release 96-2, 16 January 1996.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely after a successful nine-day mission. The Shuttle crew accomplished its primary task of capturing a Japanese satellite. The early-morning landing, in which the Shuttle returned to Earth under a shroud of darkness, was a rare occurrence.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks,” 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, “Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal,” news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttle’s appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, “Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans,” 21 October 1996.)
China announced it would participate in an international collaborative space research project for the first time in its history. Chinese scientists planned to assist their colleagues from Russia and the United States in the future Discovery mission. Although China had no plans to send an astronaut on the Shuttle, Chinese aerospace engineers volunteered to construct the sophisticated magnets needed to build a magnetic spectrometer. The project was the first time the usually secretive Chinese space science program had opened itself to outside scrutiny.(United Press International, “China To Assist U.S. Space Program,” 3 October 1996.)
Lockheed Martin won the contract to design and build the X-33 test vehicle, a scaled-down model of the reusable launch vehicle (RLV) that NASA planned as an eventual replacement for the Space Shuttle. NASA set a budget of US$941 million for the project. In announcing the new contract, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed NASA’s high hopes for the project: “We want to develop technologies that will allow industry to build a vehicle that takes days, not months, to turnaround; dozens, not thousands of people to operate; reliability ten times better than anything flying today; and launch costs that are a tenth of what they are now. Our goal is a reusable launch vehicle that will cut the cost of sending a pound of payload to orbit from [US]$10,000 to [US]$1,000.” Lockheed planned to invest US$220 million in the RLV project. The X-33 plan built upon the successful engineering of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA), launched from White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The agreement between NASA and Lockheed Martin split the risk between government and industry. Although NASA passed over Rockwell International for the contract, Rockwell designed the vehicle’s engine.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Selected To Build X-33,” news release 96-128, 2 July 1996; Jeff Cole, “Lockheed Wins $1 Billion Pact for the Shuttle,” Wall Street Journal, 3 July 1996; Curt Suplee and Steven Pearlstein, “Lockheed Martin Gets Spacecraft Project,” Washington Post, 3 July 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
Mission STS-75, the 19th mission of Shuttle Columbia, launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral,
Lockheed Martin announced its intention to cut 200 jobs at its facility for the production of external fuel tanks for NASA’s Space Shuttle. NASA’s budget reductions had caused the layoffs, according to Lockheed. Lockheed Martin’s facility in New Orleans employed more than 2,500 workers in 1996.
Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) at Edwards Air Force Base in California commemorated its 50th anniversary with a celebration called Discovery Through Flight Research. The Center got its start when five aeronautical engineers from Langley Research Center arrived to explore flight beyond the speed of sound, in preparation for the X-1 tests, featuring pilot Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager at the controls. Researchers at DFRC contributed to a wide variety of aeronautical achievements, including breaking the sound barrier and helping launch the Space Shuttle program. At the age of 50, DFRC employed 900 government and civilian contractor employees.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Marks Half-Century of Achievements,” 25 September 1996. 136 Associated Press, “Ancient Spacecraft,” 1 October 1996.)
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin’s efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldin’s mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, “NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston,” 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin’s Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
Former NASA astronaut Robert F. Overmyer died while test piloting the experimental Cirrus VK-30 aircraft near Duluth, Minnesota. Overmyer was performing a series of stalls at an altitude of more than 8,000 feet (2,400 meters) when the aircraft “departed from controlled flight.” Overmyer had served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1959 to 1986, becoming a NASA astronaut in 1969, and piloting Shuttle Mission STS-5 in 1982. After leaving NASA and the Marine Corps in 1986, Overmyer worked for McDonnell Douglas Aerospace.(Edward H. Phillips, “Overmyer Dies in Crash,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 144, no. 14 (1 April 1996): 29.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour’s crew used the spacecraft’s 50-foot (15-meter) robotic arm to snare NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology Flyer (OAST-Flyer) satellite. The OAST- Flyer, valued at US$10 million, weighed 2,600 pounds (1,200 kilograms).(Associated Press, “Shuttle’s Astronauts Grab a 4-Ton Japanese Science Satellite from Its Orbit,” 17 January 1996; Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Dodges Military Satellite on Way To Retrieve Japanese Craft,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 1996; Michael Cabbage, “Satellite Stowed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1996.)
NASA discovered the second of two misplaced hand tools left inside the propulsion system of the recently landed Shuttle Atlantis. Although the Shuttle had experienced no problems during its 10-day flight, NASA formed an investigative panel to determine who had left the tools inside the Shuttle’s engine compartment after completing work. Inspectors had discovered the first missing tool inside the electronic control compartment of the Shuttle’s reusable rocket booster when they retrieved the booster from the Atlantic Ocean shortly after the launch. Workers discovered the second tool during a routine postflight inspection of Atlantis’s rocket engine compartment. Although the tools likely posed no threat to the safety of the Shuttle crew, a NASA representative said that, for safety reasons, NASA intended to find out how workers had made the error and, if possible, to identify the Shuttle contractor responsible.(Mark Carreau, “Another Wrenching Experience for Shuttle,” Houston Chronicle, 3 October 1996.)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel reported its findings on the safety of the Space Shuttle program, concluding that aggressive cost-cutting measures had not increased risks. The review responded to critics who had suggested that measures, such as outsourcing flight operations, had been too drastic, causing a precipitous decline in NASA workers’ morale. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, responsible for making NASA a more fiscally lean organization, praised NASA’s “clean bill of health.” However, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel warned NASA about challenges that would arise during the assembly of the ISS, cautioning those in favor of cutting the budget against trimming NASA’s funds too drastically.(NASA, “Panel Review Finds Space Shuttle Safe,” news release 96-257, 13 December 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking upon Mission STS-78. The Shuttle carried U.S. astronauts Terrence T. Henricks, Kevin R. Kregel, Richard M. Linnehan, Susan J. Helms, and Charles E. Brady Jr.; French astronaut Jean-Jacques Favier; and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thrisk. NASA planned to use an orbiting research laboratory to conduct a variety of experiments during the mission. In addition to its human cargo, the Shuttle transported the payload for the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences, used to conduct research on musculoskeletal physiology and on the responses of living organisms to a low- gravity environment.(NASA, “Life and Microgravity Science Research Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-78,” news release 96-116, June 1996; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 103.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The mission, lasting nearly 17 days, set a new space endurance record for the crew. The astronauts had bested their previous record by nearly 7 hours. Columbia had carried into space a torch for the 1996 Olympic relay, and upon landing, two members of the crew joined the Olympic torch relay team in a special ceremony. The astronauts had overcome several small malfunctions to conduct the successful mission and land the Shuttle on time. Less than 2 hours before the Shuttle’s scheduled arrival, the crew had discovered a clogged cooling line, but the astronauts were able to flush ice from the system to clear the line. In addition, the mission brought to light a potential ongoing problem for Columbia. In studying the launch, NASA officials had observed gas and flames issuing from the rocket boosters, probably through the O- ring joints used to connect the booster’s fuel segments. Although Columbia’s crew was not in danger, NASA officials decided that the Shuttle would not launch again until scientists had determined how well the new water-based adhesive would function under extreme heat. NASA had discontinued the adhesive used previously on the rocket boosters, because the adhesive was an ozone-depleting agent.(William Harwood, “Record Shuttle Flight Ends; Problem May Delay Next Launch,” Washington Post, 8 July 1996; Associated Press, “Columbia Ends 17-Day Mission,” 8 July 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission,” 10 March 1996.)
For the first time in its history, NASA allowed a researcher to direct an experiment from his home university, rather than from Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Martin Glickman led a group of scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, taking control of a crystal experiment aboard Shuttle Columbia. Both NASA and the scientific community praised the experiment as a crucial step in the relationship between astronauts and academic scientists. Because they did not have to travel to NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, the scientists were able to use their own instruments and data systems. Using remote control, they repeatedly cooled and heated the crystal samples on the Shuttle. Scientists hoped that allowing universities to control experiments from their own institutions would facilitate greater student participation in experiments conducted in space.
NASA canceled a spacewalk for the astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia when the astronauts could not open the outer air lock. After communicating for more than 2 hours with Mission Control in Houston, with officials instructing them to “put as much force as you feel comfortable applying to the handle,” Columbia’s crew ended preparations for the spacewalk. During the spacewalk, the astronauts had intended to test a large crane and various power tools planned for the ISS.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Called Off as Air Lock Hatch Won’t Open,” Washington Post, 28 November 1996.)
Shuttle, allowing it to hover at this distance while the Shuttle maneuvered into position to pick it up.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-75—Press Kit,” news release 96-27, February 1996; William J. Broad, “Shuttle Blasts Off for High-Wire Act To Unfurl 12.5 Miles of Electrical Cable in Space,” New York Times, 23 February 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Mission To Deploy Space Power Ball on 12.5-Mile Tether,” Washington Post, 23 February 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Forced to remain in space an additional day because of bad weather, Columbia and its crew had set an endurance record of nearly 18 days in space, only one day short of the previous record of 17 days. Heavy fog in Florida was the cause of the landing delay.(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Sets a Record for a Mission,” 7 December 1996.)
scientists had designed to harness new sources of power for the Space Shuttle. An attempt in
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttle’s reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rocket’s three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, “Astronaut’s Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks,” New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
The television series Home Improvement aired an episode showing members of Shuttle Columbia’s crew in scenes shot in space. The Shuttle’s crew had captured the film during Mission STS-73 in October 1995. The airing marked the first time that NASA had allowed the filming of operations in space, specifically for a television series. The NASA crew included Kenneth D. Bowersox, Catherine G. Coleman, Frederick W. Leslie, Kathryn C. Thornton, and Albert Sacco Jr. Bowersox, who had appeared previously on Home Improvement, praised the event as a public relations achievement for NASA.(Ann Hodges, “‘Home Improvement’ Project Takes On a New Kind of Space,” Houston Chronicle, 12 February 1996.)
NASA and the Italian Space Agency released the investigative report on the failed tethered satellite system (TSS) experiment conducted during Shuttle Columbia’s Mission STS-75 in February 1996. The 358-page report, produced by a board established to investigate the incident, concluded that a breach in the layer of insulation surrounding the tether conductor, possibly the result of contact with debris, led to the failure. According to the report, the breach in insulation allowed an electrical current to jump from a copper wire in the tether to an electrical ground, causing the breakage: “the tether failed as a result of arcing and burning of the tether, leading to a tensile failure after a significant portion of the tether had burned away.” The board noted that NASA scientists had already announced findings regarding tether current and voltage measurements, concluding that the unexpected breakage of Columbia’s tethered satellite did not indicate any fundamental problem with the concept of the TSS. Furthermore, the board recommended that during future experiments, scientists should take greater precautions to ensure that neither debris nor high-voltage arcing compromised the tether’s strength.(NASA, “Tethered Satellite Investigation Report Released,” news release 96-112, 4 June 1996; Reuters, “Damaged Insulation Ruined Test in Space,” 5 June 1996; Associated Press, “Study Finds Metal Debris Punctured Tether Pulled by Satellite,” 5 June 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia conducted an overnight experiment on the effects of space travel on the body’s biological clock. Four astronauts slept with special caps equipped with electrodes to monitor their brain and muscle activity. Astronauts in space have no exposure to the once-daily rising and setting Sun, which helps trigger a regular sleep pattern on Earth. In space the Sun rises and sets more than a dozen times each “day.” NASA administrators planned the experiment because they recognized the value of restful sleep for astronauts working in space and were concerned that sleep loss would become a greater disadvantage the longer an astronaut stayed in space. With the ISS on the horizon, NASA researchers considered the possible effects on astronauts of record-setting stays in space a significant issue. “Sleep disruption is something that has to be taken seriously,” said Timothy H. Monk, the lead researcher on the project.(Reuters, “Shuttle Mission Probes Body Clock,” 24 June 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nation’s oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASA’s Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASA’s final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbia’s launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttle’s mission.(Reuters, “Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly,” 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites,” New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-80—Press Kit,” news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, “Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope,” 20 November 1996.)
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. O’Connor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. O’Connor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, O’Connor had voiced some concerns about NASA’s planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, O’Connor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, O’Connor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. O’Connor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, “O’Connor To Leave NASA,” news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns,” Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
Republican presidential candidate Patrick J. Buchanan announced that he would cancel a controversial political advertisement using images of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Responding to harsh criticism from New Hampshire residents, Buchanan removed the footage of Challenger from the television spot. Buchanan stated that the purpose of the advertisement, his first in the crucial primary state of New Hampshire, was to demonstrate his service to President Ronald Reagan during difficult times. However, in the home state of teacher-astronaut Christa McAuliffe, who had died in the accident, many residents felt that the campaign’s use of the images exploited the event for political gain. The political controversy brought to the foreground the lingering public dismay over the lost Challenger, even as the 10-year anniversary of the tragedy neared.(Howard Kurtz, “Television Ad Backfires on Buchanan,” Washington Post, 12 January 1996; Associated Press, “Buchanan Chastised for Using Challenger Image in TV Ad,” 12 January 1996.)
Researchers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that tests aimed at improving the efficiency of Space Shuttle engines would likely translate into substantial savings for commercial airlines as well. Researchers had learned that locating an engine’s turbine airfoils in the “optimum position” could cut down the flow of fluttering wakes of gases. When wakes occur, an engine requires additional energy to run and generates higher temperatures. NASA researchers predicted that the findings would have special application for the Boeing 777. Improving efficiency by a half percent would save hundreds of gallons of fuel per flight. The researchers had based the new positioning of the turbines upon the simple principle evident when a bike racer drafts behind a competitor⎯because the first rider takes the full brunt of the wind, the second can travel equally as fast with less exertion. The engineers found that by aligning turbines in the most efficient positions, the engine derived a similar drafting.(NASA, “Applying NASA Shuttle Engine Test Findings May Save Airlines Millions in Fuel Costs,” news release 96-254, 12 December 1996.)
NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russia’s Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-François Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, “Crew Named to Sixth Shuttle–Mir Docking Mission,” news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
In a postflight inspection, NASA engineers discovered that one loose screw had caused the hatch on Shuttle Columbia to jam, preventing the astronauts from taking their scheduled spacewalks. The screw had probably dislodged during takeoff, falling into the gears of the hatch. NASA had decided to cancel the spacewalks, rather than force the hatch open and risk damaging it permanently. With the Shuttle scheduled to launch again in one month, NASA faced the question of whether to remove and replace the gearboxes on all the hatches inside the Shuttle as a precautionary measure.(Associated Press, “Loose Screw Caused Stuck Hatch on Shuttle,” 12 December 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Hatching Up Plan in Case Emergency Spacewalk Is Needed,” 2 December 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour tested new NASA spacesuits in extreme cold. In preparation for work on the ISS, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott stood nearly motionless in space for 35 minutes, in temperatures nearing 100° below 0°F (-73.33°C), to test the suit’s insulating capacity. In completing the exercise, Scott became the second African American man to walk in space. The newly improved suits, produced at a cost of US$10 million each, proved an effective barrier against the cold. The gloves and the boots of the suits contained heating elements. NASA made the thermal improvements to the spacesuits after the astronauts became cold during the February 1995 spacewalk, causing its early termination.(Michael Cabbage, “Staying Warm in Cosmic Cold,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 January 1996; Jet Magazine, “Navy Captain Winston Scott Becomes Second Black To Walk in Space,” 5 February 1996, 24. 11 Kathy Sawyer, “Two Planets Discovered that Might Sustain Life,” Washington Post, 18 January 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent Shuttle–Mir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-79—Press Kit,” news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Arrives for Astronaut’s Long-Awaited Pickup,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California’s Mojave Desert. The nine-day mission nearly came to an abrupt halt when Atlantis’s crew had difficulty opening the Shuttle’s cargo bay doors during descent. After considering an emergency landing, NASA controllers directed Atlantis’s crew to open the doors manually. The crew successfully performed this necessary maneuver only to confront dangerous weather that prevented their landing at Kennedy Space Center.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back Safely After Mir Mission,” 1 April 1996. 13)
Endeavour’s crew successfully tested a giant inflatable antenna, deploying the structure and gathering data during its orbit. Project Manager Steven Bard, a NASA scientist at JPL, called the successful test a giant step toward developing lightweight, cost-effective equipment for space research. The silver, inflatable antenna, about the size of a tennis court, cost US$14 million to develop. The Shuttle astronauts used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to launch the small satellite carrying the antenna. The crew situated Endeavour about 400 feet (122 meters) immediately above the antenna, to observe its behavior after deployment, but when the antenna made some unexpected tumbling rotations, the astronauts moved the Shuttle to a safer distance. After completing the test, the astronauts set off a series of small explosions to cut loose the antenna. Before the mission began, NASA officials had determined that deflating and recapturing the antenna would be too risky and costly to attempt.(William Harwood, “Inflatable Antenna Passes Test,” Washington Post, 21 May 1996; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Deploys Giant Antenna,” Washington Times, 21 May 1996.)
NASA announced that the tethered satellite experiment had failed. The 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, attaching the 0.5-ton (450-kilogram or 0.45-tonne) satellite to Shuttle Columbia, broke unexpectedly just as the tether had nearly reached its full extension. Before the tether broke, the experiment to use an orbiting satellite to produce electricity had been proceeding smoothly. The astronauts had been in the process of extending the satellite from the Space Shuttle for more than 5 hours, when they noted a decrease in tension and realized that the tether and satellite had broken away. NASA Commander Andrew M. Allen responded to the break immediately, directing the Shuttle away from the satellite to prevent a collision. However, the satellite never came close to the Shuttle; it was more than 18 miles (29 kilometers) away only a few minutes after breaking free. NASA officials could not immediately identify the cause of the break. The astronauts aboard the Shuttle managed to record images of the satellite trailing away from the Shuttle. This footage, a black and white rendering of the tether disappearing into space, reached Flight Command Center in Houston, Texas, shortly after the event. “Those are some tether dynamics we did not want to see,” stated one Mission Control operative. NASA dismissed the idea of attempting to retrieve the satellite, explaining that, although it was technically possible, such a mission would be too dangerous and too costly in consumption of fuel.(NASA, “STS-75 Mission Control Status Report No. 10,” 26 February 1996; Steve Marshall, “Satellite Tether Snaps; Shuttle Safe,” USA Today, 26 February 1996; William Harwood, “Science Satellite Is Lost as Shuttle Tether Breaks,” Washington Post, 26 February 1996.)
Peter H. Diamandis, President of Angel Technologies Corporation, an aerospace firm located in St. Louis, Missouri, offered a US$10 million prize to the first private aviators to complete a suborbital flight into space. Diamandis stated that the object of the prize was to motivate private companies to invest in space exploration, someday making spaceflights open to the public. “We’re looking to spark a constructive competition,” Diamandis explained. To claim the prize, the privately financed and built aircraft would have to ascend to 62 miles (100 kilometers) high, twice within a period of two weeks, delivering three passengers safely to space and back. Diamandis claimed that creating an entirely reusable Space Shuttle would considerably decrease the cost of going to space, opening the space frontier to people who had not trained as professional astronauts. Diamandis intended to announce the winner of the “X Prize” on 18 May, beneath the St. Louis Gateway Arch. Creator of the Voyager and top contender for the prize Burt Rutan, as well as NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, planned to attend the award ceremony.
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Columbia, consulting with NASA ground support, decided to cut short their planned 16-day mission because of the potential for an explosion in the Shuttle’s electronic generator. NASA decided to abort the mission after the crew had attempted for two days to fix the balky generator. Despite the fact that the Shuttle’s two other generators could provide enough power for the Shuttle, NASA’s procedure required the Shuttle’s return, to prevent subsequent problems. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway clarified that the astronauts faced no imminent danger and that terminating the mission was a precaution rather than an emergency. “The conservative thing to do is land on Tuesday,” Holloway said at a news conference. Columbia’s early return to Earth in Mission STS-83 was only the third time in the history of the Shuttle program that NASA had ended a mission early. The astronauts had time to complete only a few of the planned 33 experiments on the mission, which cost nearly US$500 million.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Flight Cut Short as Risk Persists,” Washington Post, 7 April 1997; Warren Leary, “Power Problem on Shuttle Forces a Tuesday Landing,” New York Times, 7 April 1997; Associated Press, “Deteriorating Generator Cuts Short Mission,” 6 April 1997.)
NASA announced that it had rescheduled for July 1997 Space Shuttle Columbia’s Microgravity Science Laboratory (MSL) mission, cut short in early April because of a fuel cell problem. The quick repair and relaunch plan used the same crew and set the same objectives as the initial Mission STS-83. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated, “we are now in the position to do everything possible to complete the MSL mission with minimal impact to downstream flights.” He also pointed out that the attempt to complete the MSL mission provided NASA with a “unique opportunity to demonstrate our ability to respond to challenges.” In its decision to insert Columbia’s Mission STS-83 into an already arranged Shuttle docket, NASA acknowledged that it would have to push back slightly other flights, already staffed and planned.(NASA, “Microgravity Science Laboratory Mission Set for July; Remaining 1997 Shuttle Manifest Adjusted Slightly,” news release 97-81, 25 April 1997; Seth Borenstein, “Space Shuttle Columbia Gets Chance To Finish What It Started,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 18 April 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earth’s ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASA’s trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, “one word for our mission would be diversity.” With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, “August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch,” news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study,” USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, “Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia lit more than 200 small fires, testing the flammability of dozens of gases and materials. The experiments took place under the direction of Paul D. Ronney, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Southern California. Ronney explained that the experiments had as much application for Earth as for space. According to Ronney, the weaker the flame in space’s weightless environment, the cleaner its fuel would burn on Earth. The astronauts found that, without the effect of gravity, the flames often formed the shape of a ball and heat did not rise. The experiments created some attention for Mission STS- 94, largely overshadowed by the success of the Pathfinder mission to Mars.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests of Tiny Fires Spur Delight,” 9 July 1997; Wayne Tompkins, “Columbia Crew Ready for Hot Time in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 July 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, less than three days after its liftoff. The mission, planned for 16 days, ended early, and the Shuttle completed the return flight without incident. Columbia weighed more than 236,000 pounds (107,000 kilograms) at landing, the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, because of its load of unused supplies for experiments. Almost immediately after the safe landing, NASA officials began to consider repeating the flight as soon as possible, to allow the Shuttle crew to accomplish its original objectives and to avoid the substantial cost of launching an entirely new mission.(William Harwood, “Columbia Lands After Aborted Mission,” Washington Post, 9 April 1997. 66)
Shuttle Discovery ended Mission STS-82 with a safe landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The early morning landing occurred later than NASA had planned because of cloudy weather in Florida. NASA praised Discovery’s crew for its work refurbishing the HST.(William Harwood, “Discovery Lands: Shuttle Back from Hubble Repair Mission,” Chicago Sun-Times, 22 February 1997.)
NASA researchers, astronauts, and scholars gathered in Washington, DC, for a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, disclosing and discussing details of experiments conducted aboard the Shuttle during two 1996 missions. The event commemorated the one-year anniversaries of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory and the third U.S. Microgravity Payload. Scientists predicted that discoveries made aboard the Shuttle flights in 1996 would eventually lead to technological advances. Research on numerous topics, from the climate of the universe to human biology, could lead to production of cheaper metals and alloys or new synthetic drugs. Highlights from the research presentations included the announcement of the discovery that space-grown crystals are of much higher quality than those grown on Earth; the description of experiments intended to uncover the effect of space on the production of metal and alloys; and the presentation of evidence that the microgravity environment of space had enabled scientists to make more precise measurements of the physical properties of elemental gas.(NASA, “Significant Discoveries from Space Shuttle Experiments To Be Presented at Conference,” news release 97-23, 5 February 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery, carrying a crew of seven astronauts, launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a mission to service the HST. NASA planned the 10-day Shuttle Mission STS-82 to upgrade significantly the scientific capabilities of HST, as well as to perform standard maintenance on the US$2 billion instrument. The spaceflight was the second servicing mission for HST since its deployment in April 1990 aboard Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-31. The astronauts planned to conduct at least four spacewalks to install new components, such as the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer. A NASA scientist described the improvements as “replacing 1970’s technology with 1990’s technology.” In addition to the work conducted on the HST, Discovery’s crew planned to move the telescope a few miles farther into the atmosphere, improving its chances for a longer operating life. Astronomers hypothesized that the potential gains from refurbishing the HST outweighed the risks of tampering with its already spectacular abilities, justifying the US$800 million cost of the mission. The head of the HarvardSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics speculated that the refurbished HST could lead to “a whole different kind of science.”(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-82—Press Kit,” news release 97-18, February 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Starts Space Telescope Mission,” New York Times, 12 February 1997; Associated Press, “Improved Hubble Telescope To Give Astronomers New View of the Universe,” 8 February 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Earth on Mission STS-87 with great fanfare, executing an unusual 180° roll 6 minutes into the 81⁄2-minute flight, a maneuver planned to put the Shuttle in radio contact with communication satellites. The launch itself took place at the “exact moment on the exact day as planned” for the sixth consecutive mission. The six-person crew included Takao Doi, a Japanese astronaut who planned to make his country’s first spacewalk; Kalpana Chawla, the first Indian-born woman to travel into space; Leonid K. Kadenyuk, the first Ukrainian to fly on a U.S. Shuttle; and U.S. astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Steven W. Lindsey, and Winston E. Scott. The crew planned to conduct a spacewalk to test instruments and procedures for the ISS. The Shuttle also carried the U.S. Microgravity Payload-4, which the astronauts planned to use to test the responses to conditions in space of a variety of materials and liquids.(NASA, “Solar and Microgravity Research Highlight Final Shuttle Mission of 1997,” news release J97037, November 1997; William Harwood, “Columbia Corkscrews into Orbit,” Washington Post, 20 November 1997; Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Blasts Off with Multinational Crew,” 19 November 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Executes Flip on Its Way into Orbit,” 16 November 1997.)
Crew aboard Shuttle Columbia successfully released and operated the Autonomous Extra- vehicular Robotic Camera Sprint (AERCam Sprint). The 35-pound (16-kilogram), spherical camera propelled itself around the Shuttle after astronaut Winston E. Scott had released it during a spacewalk. The camera used periodic jet thrusts to maneuver, responding to control commands made from inside Columbia. The US$3 million camera transmitted images of Columbia and its crew back to Earth, providing unique vantage points for observation. The astronauts, who retrieved the small robotic device without any complications, concluded that it would be a helpful technology for future Shuttle missions and the ISS.(Seth Borenstein, “Robot Set for 1st Space Walk in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 1997; Associated Press, “Free-Flying Camera Flits High Above Columbia, Sends Down Video,” 3 December 1997.)
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Discovery successfully tested a new robotic arm, considerably smaller than Discovery’s massive 50-foot (15-meter) crane, intended for tasks of higher precision. Discovery’s crew used the arm to unlock a cargo bay door and lift a small box. NASA had engineered the Japanese-made robotic arm for US$100 million, expecting that it would eventually serve astronauts aboard the ISS. Of the robotic arm’s test performance, astronaut Stephen K. Robinson stated simply, “it operated beautifully.”
Space Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, just after sunrise, returning its seven-person crew to Earth. The landing marked the conclusion of a successful, 16- day mission, during which the astronauts completed 33 laboratory experiments. The low-cost mission was the first reflight in NASA’s history, concluding the research agenda planned for the April 1997 mission that NASA had terminated as a safety precaution. Although the press coverage of events on Mars and Mir had overshadowed the Columbia crew’s efforts, NASA Mission Manager Teresa B. Vanhooser stated confidently that scientific journals would give the mission due respect.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Returns Full of Research Information,” 17 July 1997.)
Astronaut F. Story Musgrave retired from NASA after 30 years of service and six Shuttle flights. During his more than 1,200 hours in space, Musgrave had flown on the first voyage of Challenger and had been a member of the first crew to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Flying aboard STS-80 in 1996, Musgrave became the oldest person to fly in space. NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations David C. Leestma said of Musgrave, “throughout the Shuttle program, from its earliest stages to the present, Story has been instrumental in developing the techniques crew members use to perform spacewalks.”(NASA, “Astronaut Story Musgrave Retires from NASA,” news release 97-188, 2 September 1997.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
NASA announced that planned major modifications of Space Shuttle Atlantis, as well as routine inspections, would take place at the Boeing Company’s facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. United Space Alliance, the company contracted for the maintenance and operation of the Shuttle program, had recommended the changes. According to estimates of the U.S. General Accounting Office, completing the renovations in California, rather than in Florida, would cost NASA an additional US$20 million because of higher labor costs. NASA explained that if the engineers had done the work in Florida, the launch schedule at KSC, along with the need for Atlantis to make a prolonged stay for extensive modifications, would have threatened future Shuttle flights. The changes planned, including rerouting the Shuttle’s fuel lines, involved more than routine maintenance. NASA also pointed out that its most experienced engineers worked at the Palmdale facility, and that workers at the facility had already made similar modifications to Shuttles Discovery and Endeavour. Moreover, NASA maintained that permitting KSC to focus on Shuttle launches and missions would be the most efficient use of its resources. Nevertheless, immediately after the announcement, some observers criticized NASA’s continued use of Boeing’s private facility in preference to that of the government-owned KSC. NASA’s previous intimation that the Palmdale facility would be “mothballed” for Shuttle repair and maintenance intensified critics’ reaction to the announcement.(Seth Borenstein, “Despite Boost in Cost, Atlantis To Get Tuneup in California,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 January 1997; NASA, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Modification Work To Be Performed at Palmdale Facility,” news release 97-11, 16 January 1997; Todd Halvorson, “Atlantis Overhaul To Be Done Out West,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 January 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to “serve as a bridge to America’s future in space.” In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttle’s launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, “Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83,” news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire,” 5 April 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger surprised onlookers at KSC when he bounded off Shuttle Atlantis only minutes after its landing. Physicians credited Linenger’s excellent condition after spending more than four months aboard the Mir space station to his regimen of orbital exercise. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was on hand to greet Linenger and the other astronauts returning home on Atlantis. The Shuttle’s safe landing returned Linenger to Earth after 132 days in space⎯the second longest stint by an American.(Los Angeles Times, “Returning Astronaut Surprises Even Himself; Shuttle: Four Months on Mir Sap Less Strength than Traveler Jerry Linenger Expected. He Credits the Exercising He Did in Orbit,” 25 May 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
John E. Blaha became the first astronaut to leave the U.S. Space Shuttle carried by medical personnel. Blaha was experiencing weakness upon his return to Earth’s gravitational conditions, and NASA’s doctors wanted to gauge immediately the effects of long-term weightlessness on his body. Blaha remarked upon landing that he could hardly move, saying that he was “absolutely stunned” at the difficulty of returning to a gravity-controlled environment. NASA’s doctors focused specifically on Blaha’s dizziness and on his weakened bones and muscles, hoping to learn how to improve health plans for astronauts living aboard the ISS. Blaha had maintained an arduous schedule of exercise aboard Mir, to mitigate the weakening effects of the weightless environment. In addition, he had made the return flight aboard Atlantis lying down in a Shuttle seat, to minimize the crush of gravity.(William Harwood, “Atlantis Astronaut Wobbly on His Return to Gravity,” Washington Post, 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Carried off Shuttle, a First for NASA,” 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Returning Astronaut Sheds Right Stuff Image, Is Carried off Shuttle,” 22 January 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a “once-in-a-career opportunity” for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, “Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94,” news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission,” Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, “Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April,” New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission,” 1 July 1997.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) unveiled its key contribution to the ISS, two satellites named after stars⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi, which Japan planned to launch aboard an H-2 rocket. The satellites would make it easier to perform unpiloted docking experiments on the ISS. Japan’s interest in robotic space research fueled the proposal, which complemented NASDA’s plan to build an unpiloted space shuttle to ferry Japan’s experiments to the ISS.
Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 12-day mission devoted to environmental research. The crew hoped that the atmospheric data gathered during the mission would help scientists understand the ozone damage and climate change affecting Earth.(Mark Carreau, “We’re Very, Very Happy, Shuttle Crew Says of Flight,” Houston Chronicle, 20 August 1997.)
Flight International published a story claiming that, more than 10 years after the explosion of Challenger, aerospace engineer Ali Abu Taha had discovered new evidence in Time-Life photographs demonstrating that a breach and a fire in Challenger’s right solid rocket booster (SRB) had caused the explosion. One photograph, taken about 20 seconds after liftoff, revealed a 3-meter-long (10-foot-long) flame issuing from an SRB joint, and another clearly showed a white object separating from the same SRB seconds later. The discovery seemed to support Taha’s controversial theory that the booster had caught fire at liftoff and burned continuously until the explosion occurred. In contrast to Taha's findings, which focused on dynamic liftoff loads, the congressionally mandated Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission) had reported that faulty O-rings caused the tragedy. Automatic cameras set up around the Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch site had taken the photographs that Taha used as evidence for his theory, images never released to the public. Taha’s photographic analysis also revealed that the explosion had propelled Challenger’s crew compartment thousands of meters away from the explosion, partially explaining why investigators had taken 40 days to locate the shell. Taha suggested that a shock wave had killed the crew instantly, although NASA had never found evidence of a shock wave. News of the photographs and of Taha’s research kept alive the debate surrounding the decade-old accident.(Tim Furness, “New Evidence Reveals Fire on Doomed Challenger’s Booster,” Flight International, 5−11 February 1997.)
U.S. Senator D. Robert “Bob” Graham (D-FL) announced a plan to lease room aboard NASA Space Shuttles and the ISS to private entities, to offset the costs of space exploration. Graham announced his plan during a news conference at a new Cape Canaveral, Florida, air station dedicated to commercial launches. Congress had banned the use of the Shuttle for commercial purposes after the Challenger accident. Some space experts believed that Graham’s plan would take advantage of a strong commercial market for the retrieval of satellites from space. Graham’s plan joined a list of other initiatives of the mid-1990s, designed to merge government and private space interests to ease costs for the federal government.(Seth Borenstein, “Graham: Let’s Make Money in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 December 1997.)
Returning from the Neurolab mission, Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly, despite a malfunctioning hydraulic unit. Most of Columbia’s 1-hour-long descent relied on two hydraulic units, because the cooling system for the third unit had failed. To prevent the third unit from overheating, the crew turned it on just minutes before landing. After the landing, Mission Control congratulated the Neurolab astronauts on “a historic mission that elevated neuroscience research to record heights.” During the 16-day Neurolab flight, the team had accomplished a number of experiments never before performed in space, including the first direct nerve recordings, the first joint recording of sleep and breathing, the first embalming of animals, and the first surgery on animals. Because only the rodents aboard Columbia were accessible during the flight, astronauts and scientists did not immediately know how the other animals, including fish, snails, and crickets, had fared. A quick inspection after landing, however, “revealed that only 25 of 225 baby swordtail fish survived the mission, a much higher mortality rate than expected.” The baby rats also had a higher mortality rate than expected; 52 of the 96 baby rats had died in orbit after their mothers refused to nurse them. NASA veterinarians had expected a dozen deaths from natural causes. Animal rights groups criticized the experiments.(USA Today, “Scientists To Study Effects on Critters,” 4 May 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Mission’s Data Has Scientists Feeling Antsy: Neurolab Analysis Begins Today,” USA Today, 4 May 1998.)
A computer failure aboard Mir partially affected the space station’s solar panels, causing the panel to fail to generate sufficient electricity and requiring the crew to use the Soyuz capsule thrusters for steering. To conserve energy, the crew turned off nonessential equipment, including the air conditioner and lights. Although they replaced the computer with a new one, the crew was unable to load the necessary software. The crew feared the failure might delay Space Shuttle Discovery’s launch to Mir, planned for 2 June.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Cosmonauts Replace Mir Computer,” 31 May 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Mir Space Station Has a New Problem—Computer Failure Causes Solar Panels To Turn from Sun,” Seattle Times (WA), 31 May 1998.)
NASA astronauts presented four employees of Boeing Reusable Space Systems with the Silver Snoopy, one of the most prestigious honors available to people working on NASA’s Space Shuttle program. Mark Brewer of the orbiter electrical-avionics team, Jeffrey Lewis of the mid- module-major assembly team, Michael Argent of the external-tank, umbilical and payload latch- assembly programs, and Larry Echaves of the configuration-management team each received a letter of commendation, a poster, a certificate, and a Silver Snoopy pin that had flown in space.(Romy Jacobson, “Hailing the Right Stuff; NASA Honors Boeing Workers,” Los Angeles Daily News, 20 May 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery undocked from Mir, carrying back to Earth Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, the last of seven U.S. astronauts to live aboard the station, and marking the completion of Phase I of the ISS program. Before closing the hatches, Mir Commander Talgat A. Musabayev presented Shuttle Commander Charles J. Precourt with a huge wrench that had been used in spacewalks and would be flown to the future ISS.(Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Discovery Undocks from Mir, Completes Historic Last Linkup,” 8 June 1998.)
Ending one of NASA’s “most successful and historic missions” with a rare night landing, Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after its weeklong linkup with the new ISS. Before departing the ISS on 13 December, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow flew around the station slowly, while the crew photographed the ISS, permitting ground controllers to see the station for the first time. NASA’s Deputy Station Chief Frank L. Culbertson Jr. remarked that the mission was as historically significant as that of Apollo 8, the first piloted mission to the Moon, and that the hardware of ISS was the foundation of “what will put humanity in space forever.”(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup”; United Press International, “Shuttle Lands in Florida,” 15 December 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-88,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-88.html.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
Astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas was unable to fit into his Russian-made emergency spacesuit before boarding Mir, but after initial orders that Thomas spend the first night in the Space Shuttle, Mission Control granted him permission to board. The suit was necessary only in case of emergency evacuation aboard Soyuz. Once aboard Mir, Thomas altered his spacesuit, adjusting and removing some straps in the armpit and torso areas. After the alterations, the suit fit exactly as it should, ensuring that Thomas would not have to return to Earth with Endeavour on Thursday.(Steve Marshall, “Mir Spacesuit, Astronaut Prove To Be a Poor Fit,” USA Today, 26 January 1998; Washington Post, “Astronaut Moves into Mir Despite Spacesuit Problem,” 26 January 1998; Washington Times, “Thomas Finally Fits in on Mir: Crucial Alterations Made to Space Suit,” 27 January 1998.)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
The Alabama Engineering Hall of Fame inducted into its roll of honors James B. Odom, an engineer at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) who had served NASA for 33 years in the International Space Station, Space Shuttle, and HST programs. The Hall of Fame also honored Marshall’s X-ray Calibration Facility, which had tested and calibrated x-ray telescopes since the 1970s. MSFC’s X-ray Calibration Facility supported the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility in achieving a resolving power 10 times greater than any previous x-ray telescope.(Huntsville Times (AL), “MSFC Facility, Ex-official To Be Lauded,” 21 February 1998.)
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA planned to reserve an additional US$750 million of federal funds over the next two years, enabling Lockheed Martin to continue work on a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Lockheed Martin and NASA had signed an agreement in 1996 to develop the X-33 suborbital test craft. At that time, the federal government had pledged to dedicate US$900 million to develop the craft and fund 15 suborbital test flights, beginning in the spring of 1999. Goldin explained that if the test program exceeded the original ceiling of US$900 million, the US$750 million funding pool would be available, beginning in the year 2000, to develop the X-33 replacement vehicle.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, "More NASA Money for Shuttle Replacement,” 3 February 1998.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour Mission STS-89 successfully launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite forecasted thunderstorms. The crew of STS-89 included Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Joe F. Edwards Jr., Payload Commander Bonnie J. Dunbar, and Mission Specialists Michael P. Anderson, James F. Reilly, Salizhan S. Sharipov, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, who would replace David A. Wolf on Mir. This was the eighth Shuttle–Mir docking, but the first for an orbiter other than Atlantis and the first overseen by Launch Director David A. King. NASA had appointed two new rotational launch directors, David A. King and Ralph R. Roe Jr., following the retirement of veteran Launch Director James F. Harrington III.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts,” 23 January 1998; Seth Borenstein, “Weather May Keep Endeavour on Ground,” Huntsville Times (AL), 21 January 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-89,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-89.html (accessed 11 June 2007); NASA Kennedy Space Center, “KSC Launch Director Harrington To Retire; Successors Named,” news release 223-97, 17 December 1997, http://www- pao.ksc.nasa.gov/kscpao/release/1997/223-97.htm (accessed 5 August 2008).)
402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.” Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, “Space Station Accord Signed,” 30 January 1998; Associated Press, “Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station,” 29 January 1998; NASA, “Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington,” news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery successfully retrieved the Spartan spacecraft, thus completing a priority project of the nine-day mission. The crew had deployed the satellite on 1 November, to record observations of the Sun’s outer atmosphere and the solar wind. Spartan had lagged 40 miles (64 kilometers) behind the Shuttle, in free flight, as it recorded the data. The flight was the last in a series of four flights begun in 1993 to “gather observations at different points in the [S]un’s 11-year cycle of magnetic activity.” NASA had originally scheduled the mission for November 1997, but astronauts had “failed to send a crucial command” before releasing the satellite, so Spartan had gathered no data. The crew had also tested an experimental laser range-finding device mounted in the Shuttle, aiming at targets on Spartan.(Washington Times, “Glenn Reports No Space Sickness as Discovery Releases Sun Gazer,” 2 November 1998; Washington Times, “Astronauts Snag Sun Observer To Complete a Primary Mission: Glenn, 77, Undergoes More Tests of His Response to Space,” 4 November 1998; New York Times, “Shuttle Easily Regains Satellite, and Photos,” 4 November 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs,” 22 January 1998.)
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
Elizabeth H. Moore, Head of the Art and Archaeology Department of the School of Oriental and African Studies, the University of London, and Anthony Freeman, a radar scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), discussed new radar imagery of Angkor, Cambodia, during a press briefing at JPL. The researchers announced that the Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar (AIRSAR), developed by JPL to produce radar maps, had helped them to detect and locate a distribution of prehistoric mounds and undocumented temples to the northwest of Angkor. The three-dimensional maps, created using radar interferometry, revealed evidence of temples and earlier civilization that were absent or incorrectly marked on modern topographic maps and early twentieth-century archaeological reports. These discoveries brought into question long-standing ideas about the urban evolution of Angkor. The 1996 AIRSAR Pacific Rim Deployment on board a NASA DC-8 jet was a follow-up to a 1994 study of Angkor that used Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR) on board Space Shuttle Endeavour during Mission STS-59, producing the radar images used to create the three- dimensional maps. Unlike SIR-C/X-SAR, AIRSAR had P-band with a longer wavelength, able to penetrate the forest canopy. AIRSAR also flew in a mode that allowed it to measure topography and create three-dimensional images of the surface.(NASA, “New Insights into Ancient Angkor by NASA Radar To Be Subject of Press Briefing,” news release N98-11, 5 February 1998; NASA, “NASA Radar Reveals Hidden Remains at Ancient Angkor,” news release 98-28, 12 February 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Unseen Angkor,” 12 February 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
NASA Launch Integration Manager Donald R. McMonagle announced that Space Shuttle Columbia’s tune-up would take place at the Boeing Company’s facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. NASA Launch Integration and Shuttle operator USA advised Boeing officials “to get ready to map out a plan for Columbia’s work in California.” The announcement, following the recent notification about significant job cuts, was more bad news for KSC officials. NASA officials had proposed in 1996 that KSC handle much of the Shuttle’s maintenance and modification but had decided that the facility was “too busy with launches to handle [S]huttle renovation.” Alan Buis, a Boeing representative, suggested that, because Columbia would be getting “a complicated internal glass cockpit, Palmdale is ‘a logical choice’.”(Seth Borenstein, “California Plant Gets Shuttle Work Again,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2 p.m. (EDT), returning the U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, to Earth after four and one- half months in space. Thomas, unlike some of his predecessors, took the medical advice typically given to astronauts returning from a lengthy stay in space and allowed medical personnel to carry him off the Shuttle, rather than attempting to walk on his own.(Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Space Shuttle Returns with Last Mir Astronaut,” 12 June 1998.)
After problems with one of two network-signal processors caused a 24-hour delay, Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-90) blasted off on the Shuttle program’s final Neurolab mission, carrying 26 experiments for basic research in neurosciences to “expand understanding of how the nervous system develops and functions in space.” Test subjects aboard the Shuttle included crew members, rats, mice, crickets, snails, and two kinds of fish. The Neurolab mission was the joint effort of NASA, several U.S. partners, the space agencies of Canada, France, and Germany, the ESA, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan. Crew members included Commander Richard A. Searfoss; Pilot Scott D. Altman; Mission Specialists Richard M. Linnehan, Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams, and Kathryn P. Hire; and Payload Specialists Jay C. Buckey Jr. and James A. Pawelczyk. Mission Specialist Hire was the first KSC employee that NASA had selected as an astronaut candidate. Mission STS-90 was Columbia’s 25th flight.(NASA, “Neurolab Shuttle Mission To Launch April 16,” news release N98-25, 3 April 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-90,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-90.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The study’s principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenn’s Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenn’s crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenn’s disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, “Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight,” New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 41⁄2 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, “NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday,” 3 December 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-95 launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr.; Pilot Steven W. Lindsey; Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Stephen K. Robinson, and Pedro Duque; and Payload Specialists Chiaki Mukai and John H. Glenn Jr. The primary objectives of STS-95 included conveying a variety of science experiments inside the SPACEHAB module; deploying and retrieving the Spartan free-flyer payload; performing operations with the HST Orbiting Systems Test; and transporting the International Extreme Ultraviolet Hitchhiker payloads. The historic mission also returned veteran astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. to space. Thirty-six years after Glenn had first orbited Earth, the seventy-seven-year-old astronaut became the oldest person to fly in orbit. As a veteran of NASA’s early Mercury program, Glenn had been the first American to orbit Earth. On 20 February 1962, in a flight lasting 5 hours, Glenn had orbited Earth three times in a tiny capsule. After he had passed a battery of medical tests and participated in astronaut training, NASA had selected U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. as a crew member of STS-95, so that scientists could study “how space travel affects an aging astronaut’s body.”(Bill Sammon, “Senator Upholds Status as Hero with His Return to Orbit,” Washington Times, 30 October 1998; John Noble Wilford, “Pioneer Returns as Crewman in the Shuttle,” New York Times, 29 October 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-95, John Glenn’s Flight; SPACEHAB,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-95.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discovery’s drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, “Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery,” Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-95,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
Astronauts and physicians Jay C. Buckey Jr. and Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams performed the first surgeries ever conducted on living specimens while in orbit. The two doctors injected chemical markers into the hind legs of six of the surviving baby rats to determine the role of gravity in the development of muscles. The crew anesthetized the baby rats before injecting them with the pink florescent chemical, the first time scientists had performed such a procedure in zero-gravity conditions. In addition to studying how muscles and nerves develop in space, the crew studied whether anesthesia really works without the help of gravity, whether patients have more difficulty recovering from anesthesia in space, and how wounds heal in space. Two other astronauts successfully completed “the most difficult medical procedure ever attempted on someone in space.” The astronauts guided tiny needles into the nerves behind their knees, in an experiment aimed at understanding and easing the blood pressure problems and dizziness that astronauts suffer after returning to Earth. An estimated 500,000 Americans experience the same symptoms every day when they stand up. The needle enabled the astronauts to “listen” to electrical impulses, as the brain sent messages to the nerve.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Surgeons Hope Rats Will Survive,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 April 1998; Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Crew Performs First Space Surgery,” 29 April 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 April 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Astronauts Listen to Brain-Nerve Chatter,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery attempted, but failed, to fix the spacecraft’s high- speed data-transmission system. NASA believed the source of the problem was in an electronics box in the cargo bay, but stated that only a spacewalk would enable the crew to reach the box. NASA Mission Operations representative Robert E. Castle Jr. remarked that, even with a spacewalk, the astronauts would probably not be able to repair the malfunction. Because of the lack of the high-speed data transmission system, scientists could not view the data that the AMS had collected. Although the Shuttle had stored the data on board, NASA was unable to determine whether the data was useful, or whether the instrument’s adjustment was correct.(Marcia Dunn, “Discover Astronauts Unable To Fix Communications Link,” Buffalo News (NY), 6 June 1998. 505 Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Unable To Spot Mir Hull Breach,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Test Fails To Find Leaks in Mir,” Seattle Times (WA), 7 June 1998.)
Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, opened a new Collaborative Engineering Center equipped with virtual reality, teleconferencing, and cutting-edge technology. Using a combination of a joystick and computerized voice commands, engineers could control the three-dimensional, virtual space station, which included a docking Space Shuttle orbiter.(Akweli Parker, “NASA Reshaping the Way It Works,” Virginian-Pilot (Norfolk, VA), 16 January 1998.)
The contractor operating the Space Shuttle program, United Space Alliance (USA), announced that it would cut 500 jobs at KSC by 30 January, to reduce total workforce by 10 percent. The announcement raised concerns in Congress about Shuttle safety.(Robyn Suriano, “500 KSC Layoffs Jan. 30 Expected: Budget Shortfall Will Reduce Work Force 10 Percent,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1998; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Latest Round of KSC Layoffs Needs Congressional Scrutiny,” 15 January 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martin–built Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASA’s Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Rocket Explosion,” 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, “Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite,” Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
NASA announced the selection of veteran cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev for the crew of Mission STS-88, the first American ISS assembly mission. In December 1998, Krikalev would join aboard Endeavour Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, and James H. Newman. NASA had assigned Mission STS-88 the task of attaching the U.S.-built Unity module to the Russian-built Zarya control module, scheduled to launch in November 1998. Krikalev had been a member of two Mir space station crews and had flown aboard the Space Shuttle as a member of the Mission STS-60 crew in February 1994. During Mission STS-60, Krikalev had operated the robotic arm and supported a variety of experiments in materials science.(NASA, “Future Space Station Resident Joins Assembly Crew,” news release 98-137, 30 July 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery encountered its first malfunction during Mission STS-91, when the KU- band system failed to switch on after Discovery’s crew deployed its antenna upon reaching orbit. The KU-band downlink carries broadcasts with a high rate of data. The system failure prevented the Shuttle crew from sending televised images or high rates of information to Mission Control. This problem had never occurred before. NASA spokesperson James Hartsfield stated that it was unclear whether the trouble originated with the antenna, transmitter, or other associated equipment. Hartsfield also mentioned that the failure would “prevent immediate analysis of data from the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer.” The S-band antennas worked normally, and the crew was able to talk with ground controllers as usual.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91”; Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Shuttle Soars Toward Final Mir Docking, but Antenna Won’t Send TV Signals,” 3 June 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Lightweight Tank Perfect on First Flight; KU-Band a Problem,” 4 June 1998.)
Research scientists working on a US$33 million experiment to search for antimatter in space, spoke at a news conference, announcing that the communication-system breakdown on Space Shuttle Discovery had ruined their tests. The astronauts had been unable to repair Discovery’s main antenna system, which had broken shortly after launch, rendering the Shuttle unable to transmit high-speed data or video back to Earth. Scientists working on the project needed continuous, high-speed data to calibrate the AMS, which was searching space for rare subatomic particles known as antimatter. However, using a patchwork system, they had only been able to receive a few minutes of data each hour, which meant that, although they could see that the AMS was working, the spectrometer was not providing them with enough data to fine tune the magnet. According to Project Manager James Bates, the scientists had failed to accomplish their objectives because of the malfunction.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Physics Testing Thwarted; A Glitch Has Undermined an Antimatter Experiment,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 June 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discovery’s crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-François Clervoy.
NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, “Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit,” news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, “Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission,” 9 February 1999.)
After two delays, Space Shuttle Columbia launched on Mission STS-93 from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, under the command of Eileen M. Collins, NASA’s first female Shuttle commander in 38 years of human spaceflight. Commander Collins’s crew comprised Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby and Mission Specialists Steven A. Hawley, Catherine G. Coleman, and Michel Tognini. Columbia carried on board the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, previously known as the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as well as secondary payloads and experiments⎯the Southwest Ultraviolet Imaging System to capture ultraviolet imagery of the Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter; plant growth experiments; biological cell-culture studies; and the Treadmill Vibration Information System and High Definition Television System, which the crew planned to test. NASA had scrubbed both of the Shuttle’s earlier launch attempts late in the countdown, halting the 20 July launch 6 seconds before blastoff because of a technical malfunction and the 22 July launch because of stormy weather. The U.S. Air Force and the Boeing Company postponed a commercial launch to permit NASA a third chance to deliver Chandra into orbit. However, the Shuttle continued to have problems. During the 8-minute climb into outer space, a 0.5-second-long short circuit shut down computers controlling two of the Shuttle’s three main engines. Furthermore, Columbia was 4,000 pounds (1,800 kilograms) short of liquid oxygen fuel in its external fuel tank, leaving the craft in orbit 7 miles (11 kilometers) lower than planned. Fuel carried aboard the orbiter made up the shortfall. Seven hours into the flight, the crew deployed Chandra into orbit, accomplishing its primary mission.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts Off with Woman in Command,” 23 July 1999; Brad Liston for Reuters, “Shuttle Roars into History After Launch Problems,” 23 July 1999; Beth Dickey, “After Hiccup at Liftoff, Shuttle Puts Telescope into Space,” New York Times, 25 July 1999; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-93, Chandra X-ray Observatory,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-93.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts captured the HST using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Discovery had to alter its approach to the space telescope, because the telescope’s failed gyroscopes had “left the telescope a little shaky,” but Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and his crew had prepared for such a scenario. A fully operational HST would have had its aft pointed at the center of Earth; Brown would have carried out a straightforward approach, rising up from below until the robotic arm simply locked on. Without its gyroscopes functioning, the HST slowly rotated at one revolution per hour. Therefore, controllers activated backup gyroscopes to eliminate the rotation as much as possible, permitting Brown to fly around the HST and properly position the Shuttle’s robotic arm. As both spacecraft traveled around the Earth at 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour with Brown at the controls, Discovery moved closer to the HST until French astronaut Jean-François Clervoy had removed the 43-foot (13-meter), 25,000-pound (11,300-kilogram) telescope from orbit and anchored it in the Shuttle cargo bay.(Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Capture Hubble Telescope for Repairs,” Washington Times, 22 December 1999; William Harwood, “Discovery Catches Up with Hubble for a Service Call in Space,” Washington Post, 22 December 1999.)
Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASA’s four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a “long-overdue tune-up.” The orbiter’s overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbia’s fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tuneup,” 25 September 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
NASA’s Inspector General Roberta L. Gross published findings and recommendations on behalf of NASA’s Office of Inspector General, regarding Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr.’s proposed Triana satellite project, named for Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Christopher Columbus’s 1492 voyage who had first spotted North America. The Triana project would call on NASA to provide “continuous, satellite-generated images of the Earth for posting on the Internet.” Gross suggested that it was “ill-advised for the financially strapped [A]gency to fund a new system to collect pictures of Earth when many images” were already widely available. Gross said the Triana project would cost four times as much as the Vice President’s US$50 million estimate, noting that NASA had already spent US$41 million on the project, even though Congress had not yet endorsed it. She criticized NASA for “pressing forward with the project without fully assessing the scientific value of photographing the Earth.” NASA had scheduled the satellite for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in December 2000.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “Assessment of the Triana Mission” (final report no. G-99-013, Washington, DC, 10 September 1999), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-99-013.pdf (accessed 3 March 2008); Steve Lash, “Gore’s Pet Project Not Worth Its Cost, NASA Auditor Says,” Houston Chronicle, 17 September 1999. 784 Greg Schneider, “AlliedSignal Technical Gets a New President; Adamson Is Former Astronaut, Shuttle Executive, Engineer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 21 September 1999; NASA Johnson Space Center, “Biographical Data: James C. Adamson,” http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/adamson-jc.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the “spacecraft ground and flight control at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland].” In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
NASA announced that, after Space Shuttle Columbia’s return to Earth on the night of 27 July, engineers had found “three little holes” in its right engine nozzle, confirming that the Shuttle had leaked hydrogen fuel during liftoff. The holes, 0.25 inches (0.64 centimeters) in size, had caused the craft to lose up to 5 pounds (2.3 kilograms) of fuel during each second of its 81⁄2-minute climb to orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Confirms Hydrogen Leak in Columbia Shuttle,” 29 July 1999.)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
NASA announced its decision to ground the entire Space Shuttle fleet while technicians continued detailed inspections of the fleet’s wiring. During the first month of inspections, following the discovery that faulty wiring had caused a short circuit during Columbia’s 23 July launch, technicians had located dozens of nicked or exposed wires. Shuttle managers had decided to extend the inspections to allow technicians to examine additional parts of each Shuttle. Technicians had replaced damaged wiring, encased some wires in plastic tubing, added Teflon wrapping to others, and replaced some connectors, to protect the wiring systems against future damage. Manager of the Space Shuttle Program Ronald D. Dittemore explained that the wiring problems “appeared to have been caused by work-related mechanical damage”⎯from being rubbed or stepped on or from having “heavy objects set down on them.” The age of the wiring, normal wear, or vibrations from Shuttle operations did not appear to have caused the damage.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded by Damage to Wiring,” New York Times, 4 September 1999. 219)
Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
Although crosswinds caused a late touchdown, Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely after its eight-day servicing mission to HST. NASA managers had instructed Discovery to fly an extra orbit before landing, while Mission Control monitored the weather on the ground. NASA had shortened the mission to eight days from the scheduled 10 because of numerous launch delays, and because Discovery must return to Earth before New Year’s Eve to avoid potential Y2K computer problems.(Washington Times, “Shuttle Back on Earth after Hubble Repairs,” 28 December 1999; Robyn Suriano, “‘Welcome Back to Earth’, Discovery: Shuttle Astronauts Come in for Late but Safe Landing,” USA Today, 28 December 1999.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
At the 14th Annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented the George M. Low Award, NASA’s highest honor for quality and technical performance, to four U.S. companies: 1) Barrios Technology Inc. of Houston, Texas, for its small-business product; 2) Kay and Associates of Edwards, California, for small-business service; 3) Raytheon Support Services Company of Annapolis Junction, Maryland, for the large-business service category; and, 4) Thiokol Space Operations of Brigham City, Utah, for the large-business product category. NASA had evaluated the recipients for performance, delivery according to agreed cost and schedule, innovation, management leadership, alignment of organizational goals with NASA’s strategic plans, customer orientation, and adherence to the Total Quality Management philosophy. Thiokol Corporation, which had won the Low Award in 1991 and Marshall Space Flight Center’s Contractor Excellence Award in March 1999, had manufactured the reusable solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, as well as providing launch support and refurbishment services for the motor. Over the past seven years, Thiokol had never delayed its delivery of hardware. Its cost reduction efforts had saved NASA US$152 million.(NASA, “Four Aerospace Firms Win NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release 99-53, 22 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-053.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); Cordant Technologies Inc., “Thiokol Propulsion Wins NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release, 3 May 1999.)
New York Governor George E. Pataki awarded NASA astronaut Eileen M. Collins of Elmira, New York, the state’s highest award, the Jackie Robinson Empire State Freedom Medal, for her achievement as the first female Space Shuttle Commander. Collins had been Commander of the historic Mission STS-93. During that mission, she and her crew had deployed the Chandra X- ray Observatory, the heaviest, largest, and most powerful x-ray telescope ever launched into space. Governor Pataki described Collins as “a bold pioneer of the reaches of space” and remarked that “her talent, intelligence and courage set an example that every woman and every man can hope to duplicate in their lives.” Every year New York presents the Empire State Freedom Medal, established in 1997, to “those who best demonstrate the qualities of determination, dignity, fairness, and honor that were exemplified by Jackie Robinson, who broke major league baseball’s color barrier.”(NASA, “First Female Shuttle Commander Eileen Collins Receives Jackie Robinson Medal,” news release 99- 125, 27 October 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
NASA announced that it had completed negotiations for a contract worth up to US$1.73 billion, to purchase 73 Space Shuttle reusable solid rocket motors from the Thiokol Propulsion company. Each Shuttle flight used two of these motors as the primary component of the Shuttle solid rocket boosters, providing 6.6 million pounds (2.9 million kilograms) of thrust, 71.4 percent of the thrust needed for liftoff. The contract covered the manufacture and delivery of the new motor components through September 2004, as well as postflight review of the last motors flown through 2005.(NASA, “NASA, Thiokol Complete $1.7 Billion Shuttle Motor Agreement,” news release c99-c, 24 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/1999/c99-c.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, “Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails,” news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Hubble Trouble,” 15 November 1999.)
NASA announced it had completed negotiations on a US$625.6 million contract with Lockheed Martin Michoud Space Systems to purchase the last set of materials required to build 60 new Space Shuttle external fuel tanks. Although it was the sixth and last in a series of purchases of fuel tanks, this was the first purchase NASA had made consisting entirely of super lightweight tanks. The tank’s design was the same as that of the lightweight tank design NASA had previously used, but the new tanks were 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) lighter, and used a new aluminum lithium alloy. NASA and industry partners had developed the lighter alloy, 30 percent stronger than the material used to manufacture the lightweight tank, to enable the Shuttle to deliver ISS components into the proper orbit.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “NASA Completes Purchase of Material for 60 Shuttle External Tanks,” news releases 99-069, 28 April 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-069.html (accessed 5 February 2008).)
Commander Eileen M. Collins became the first woman to “land a spaceship of any kind, anywhere,” when she guided Space Shuttle Columbia to a safe late night landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, the 12th nighttime touchdown in the Shuttle program’s 95-flight history. A few hours after the landing, NASA confirmed that hydrogen fuel had leaked from one of the craft’s main engines during liftoff on 23 July. Columbia’s mission, lasting just five days, was the shortest planned flight in nine years.(Atlanta Journal (GA), “Shuttle Columbia: Woman Commander Kept Cool During Snafus,” 28 July 1999; Los Angeles Times, “1st Shuttle Led by Woman Lands Safely in Florida,” 28 July 1999.)
United Space Alliance finalized its investigation into the loose pin that had delayed the October launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, reporting that the pin had come from the Vehicle Assembly Building. Technicians had incorrectly installed the pin, intended to secure a platform above part of the Shuttle’s fuel tank. During the Shuttle’s transport to the launchpad on 8 September, the 4- inch (10-centimeter) metal pin had fallen 73 feet (22 meters), landing on a fuel line near one of the tank’s connections to the Shuttle. After inspectors had found the pin on 10 October, NASA officials had delayed Discovery’s launch 24 hours, so that technicians could remove the pin, preventing damage during liftoff.(Kelly Young, “Pin Found on Shuttle from VAB,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 November 2000.)
NASA released the research results of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic 1998 voyage aboard Shuttle Discovery. The report detailed the 88 experiments conducted on Mission STS-95, the most of any Shuttle mission. NASA responded to some critics, who called the mission a publicity-driven flight with little scientific value, disclosing that Glenn himself had participated in 10 experiments during the mission. After becoming the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962, Glenn had returned to space 36 years later to achieve another record⎯the oldest man to fly in space.(Associated Press, “Scientific Results of Glenn’s Mission Released by NASA,” 28 January 2000.)
Despite unexpected problems, astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery installed a 9-ton (8,200-kilogram or 8.2-tonne) structural truss on the Unity module of the ISS, completing one of the major objectives of the mission. The Z1 truss held four mass gyroscopes and the station’s main Ku-band and S-band communications antennas. In addition, the truss provided a temporary attachment point for a set of solar arrays scheduled to arrive during a December Shuttle mission. The astronauts faced several obstacles during the installation process. A short in the Shuttle’s payload circuitry disabled the computerized camera system needed to orient the truss for attachment, causing a 21⁄2-hour delay. However, the astronauts were able to wire a backup computer into an alternate power source, restoring power to the Space Vision System, which NASA had programmed to “determine the truss’s precise location and orientation with respect to the station by measuring the locations of the targets on its surface as viewed from different payload bay cameras.” The astronauts had to delay their work again when the Space Vision System failed to generate reliable data during certain orbital lighting conditions, requiring astronaut William S. McArthur to recalibrate the system.(William Harwood, “Structural Truss Added to Spine of Space Station: Shuttle Astronauts Overcome Camera System’s Short Circuit,” Washington Post, 16 October 2000.)
Science and business leaders from the United States and Singapore signed an agreement to collaborate on biotechnology research conducted in space. The pact, focused on improving drugs and crops, outlined experiments planned for a 2001 Shuttle Columbia mission. U.S. Senator Christopher Bond (R-MO) called the agreement an “important step toward increasing scientific knowledge.”(Associated Press, “Singapore, U.S. Scientists Sign Accord on Outer Space Research,” 14 January 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-97, carrying to the ISS Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Joseph R. Tanner, Marc Garneau, and Carlos I. Noriega. The purpose of STS-97, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 4A, was to connect solar arrays, to prepare a docking port for the U.S.-made Destiny module, to install Floating Potential Probes, to install camera cable outside the Unity module, and to transfer supplies, refuse, and equipment between the ISS and the Shuttle.(NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-97, International Space Station Assembly Flight 4A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-97.html (accessed 30 October 2008). 1054 Chicago Tribune, “20-Year-Old Pleads Guilty to Hacking into NASA Computers,” 3 December 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
As a part of its “Celebrate the Century” program, the U.S. Postal Service unveiled a stamp commemorating the Space Shuttle Program. The stamp with the Shuttle’s image joined 12 other stamps with images recalling significant American memories of the past century, such as video games, the fall of the Berlin Wall, personal computers, and Cabbage Patch Dolls. The Space Shuttle stamp was part of the celebration of the 1980s portion of the millennium. Kennedy Space Center Director Roy D. Bridges Jr. issued a statement thanking the Postal Service for the honor.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Joins American Icons in Commemorative Stamp Collection,” news release 00- 12, 12 January 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discovery’s crew⎯Commander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthur⎯was transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report discussing workforce and safety issues of NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. The report assessed the impact of workforce reductions on the Shuttle program; the challenges that NASA would face as it addressed its workforce issues; and the status of planned safety and supportability upgrades to the Space Shuttle. GAO identified 26 technical skills needed at JSC in Houston, Texas, as well as at other facilities in Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi. In addition, GAO found that the decrease from 3,000 to 1,800 federal employees in the Shuttle program workforce since 1995 had placed NASA at a “critical juncture.” The Shuttle launch rate had dropped from eight launches in 1997 to three in 1999, a trend on the cusp of reversing itself in the aftermath of the July 1999 launch of Russia’s Zvezda module. Moreover, GAO reported signs of overwork and stress among NASA staff. Worker demographics⎯twice as many workers over age 60 as under age 30⎯had compounded the problem of a declining workforce. NASA officials welcomed the report, although the results reflected “a much harsher assessment of [S]huttle safety issues [than the assessment] prepared by NASA itself in response to an electrical short that accompanied the July 1999 launching of the [S]huttle Columbia.” GAO also reported that NASA had terminated downsizing plans in December 1999 and had initiated efforts to begin hiring new staff. Although it was developing safety and supportability upgrades, which it would implement over the next five years, NASA still faced programmatic and technical challenges, such as a demanding schedule and undefined design and workforce requirements.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Shuttle: Human Capital and Safety Upgrade Challenges Require Continued Attention” (report no. GAO/NSIAD/GGD-00-186, Washington, DC, August 2000), http://www.gao.gov/ archive/2000/n200186.pdf (accessed 9 May 2008); Mark Carreau, “Undersized Work Force Puts NASA at ‘Critical Juncture’,” Houston Chronicle, 31 August 2000.)
SkyCorp signed a commercial Space Act agreement with NASA providing that SkyCorp deploy into orbit, either from the Space Shuttle or from the ISS, a satellite containing an Internet server. NASA and SkyCorp planned to test the idea as a “proof of concept” for a Low Earth Orbit 544 satellite constellation, offering Internet access on a global scale. SkyCorp chose to launch an Apache server on a small satellite containing an Apple 500 MHz Power Mac G4. The agreement with NASA outlined SkyCorp’s novel idea of launching a partially assembled satellite aboard a Space Shuttle. Astronauts would assemble the craft in space before tossing it from a Shuttle or ISS airlock into an independent orbit. SkyCorp named its concept Gossamer. Typically, engineers assemble a satellite fully on Earth, and it must withstand the stress of launch. A satellite built according to the Gossamer concept would only need to retain structural integrity in microgravity, greatly simplifying guidance, navigation, and control requirements.(SkyCorp, “SkyCorp Announces Space Act Agreement with NASA To Fly First Internet Webserver in Space,” news release, 20 October 2000; Keith Cowing, “SkyCorp Signs Agreement with NASA To Fly the First Webserver in Space⎯and It Will Be a Mac G4,” SpaceRef.com, 23 October 2000.)
NASA awarded Lockheed Martin Space Systems a US$1.15 billion six-year contract to produce 35 additional super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle Program, the sixth production of tanks and the first composed entirely of super-lightweight tanks. The contract covered the manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of the tanks, as well as the operations and maintenance of NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans and activities at MSFC and KSC. Jerry W. Smelser, Manager of MSFC’s External Tank Project Office, described the contract as designed to “assure the delivery of a quality product and to reward the contractor and employees on the basis of performance.”(NASA, “NASA Awards $1.15 Billion Contract for Shuttle External Tanks,” news release C00-p, 30 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-p.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
The U.S. Department of Justice filed a lawsuit against Rockwell International Inc., Boeing North American Inc., and United Space Alliance for concealing millions of dollars in fraud committed by a subcontractor. According to the suit, the subcontractor had used funds from the Shuttle program to purchase homes, jewelry, and vacations. The subcontractor accused of the fraud had pled guilty to all charges five years earlier, and the culpability of the major aerospace companies in concealing the theft was the last significant legal matter to come to trial. The three companies claimed that they had cooperated with government investigations into the 180 felony fraud violations and were not liable for the actions of the rogue subcontractor.(Associated Press, “Government Sues Three Companies, Including Boeing North American, over Space Shuttle Program Fraud,” 12 January 2000.)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum for “its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built.” NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists’ knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners,” news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
NASA Director of Media Services Brian D. Welch died after suffering a heart attack. Welch, who had led many of NASA’s public outreach efforts, was responsible for its news operations, for NASA Television, and for NASA’s Internet efforts. Welch had begun his career as a cooperative-education student of public affairs at LARC in 1979. In 1981 he had become editor of Space News Roundup, the newspaper of NASA’s JSC. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Welch had worked as a public affairs mission commentator, Deputy News Chief at Mission Control Center, Manager of JSC’s Mission Commentary Team, and Newsroom Manager during Shuttle flights. NASA had appointed Welch as Chief of News and Information in 1994, and he had become Director of Media Services in 1998. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke of how Welch’s sudden death had stunned NASA, saying that Welch’s “love and enthusiasm for spaceflight and exploration” was “infectious,” and describing Welch’s passionate approach to his work as the true embodiment of “the spirit of this agency.”(NASA, “Brian Welch, NASA Director of Media Services, Dies,” news release 00-187, 27 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-187.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery arrived at the ISS. Shuttle Commander Brian Duffy successfully executed the rendezvous without the Shuttle’s radar, relying on a star-tracking system and on handheld lasers operated by his crew. The Ku-band antenna had failed after launch, disrupting the radar and television link. The Shuttle docking was NASA’s first conducted without radar.(Associated Press, “Bad Antenna Blacks Out Shuttle’s Television,” Charleston Gazette (SC), 13 October 2000; New York Times, “Astronauts Rendezvous with Space Station,” 14 October 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Discovery Docks Safely with Space Station,” 14 October 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. successfully unfurled the second panel of the solar array (colloquially referred to as a solar wing) that the crew had deployed on the ISS on 3 December. Jett used computer commands to unfold the panel a few feet at a time, a process that took nearly 2 hours. No problems occurred until the crew had extended the panel almost fully, when it became clear that a panel on each blanket was stuck to a neighboring section. Endeavour’s crew turned the Shuttle to allow the Sun to warm the blankets and fired thrusters to shake the array, snapping the wing into place. The panel began generating electricity before it reached its full 115 feet (35 meters). To NASA’s relief, the panel was stretched tight. Once the crew had completed the process, Commander Jett radioed to Mission Control that they had two tensioned blankets, and Mission Control replied, “Great work, gentlemen. We think you’ve earned your solar wings.”(Associated Press, “Astronaut Manages To Spread Station’s 2nd Wing,” USA Today, 5 April 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Finnish Adding Solar Wing to Station,” New York Times, 5 December 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The mission’s crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission,” 8 September 2000; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASA’s special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Voss’s mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the class’s trip to NASA to watch Endeavour’s launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.”(Billy Cox, “Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending the 100th mission of the Shuttle program. Poor weather conditions had prevented the Shuttle’s scheduled landing in Florida on 22 October. Edwards had opened as a backup site on 23 October, but wind and rainy weather had prevented a landing at either site until 24 October. The landing was the first Shuttle landing at Edwards since poor weather had prevented a Shuttle landing in Florida in March 1996. In the early years of the program, Shuttles had typically landed at Edwards Air Force Base, but later, both launches and landings became the functions of KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida.(Washington Times, “Shuttle Lands at Edwards for First Time since 1996: Marks 100th Mission of U.S. Program,” 25 October 2000; Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Discovery Lands in California,” 25 October 2000.)
Russian police announced that cosmonaut German S. Titov, the Soviet Union’s second man in space and the first person to spend more than one day in orbit, had been found dead at home at the age of 65. Although the police had not reported an official cause of death, the media speculated that the cause was either carbon monoxide poisoning or a heart attack. Titov had spent 25 hours and 18 minutes aboard the tiny Soviet Vostok-2 spacecraft on 6 and 7 August 1961. Fellow Soviet Yuri Gagarin had made the first flight on Vostok-1 on 12 April, flying for less than 2 hours, and U.S. astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. had followed Gagarin’s mission with a 15-minute, suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. Titov worked on the Buran program during the 1980s, attempting to create a Russian space shuttle, but the Soviet Union abandoned the project after the Russian shuttle had made one unpiloted flight. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Titov had entered politics, representing the Communist Party on the defense committee of the State Duma lower house.(Reuters, “Russia’s 2nd Cosmonaut, German Titov, Dies in Sauna,” 21 September 2000. 285)
Mitsuyuki Ueda of the Aeronautics and Space Development Division of Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced that Japan had decided to freeze the development of an unpiloted space shuttle, which was four years behind schedule, because of problems in Japan’s shuttle program, as well as in its H-2 rocket program. Japan had originally conceived its planned 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18.1-tonne) shuttle in the 1980s, modeling it after the U.S. Space Shuttle, and designing it to conduct scientific experiments and to carry into space payloads of up to 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes). Technical and financial setbacks within Japan’s shuttle program contributed to the freeze. In addition, because the original plan had called for Japan to launch the space shuttle aboard a Japanese-designed H-2 rocket, a launch failure of an H-2 rocket had influenced the decision to halt Japan’s shuttle program. In the failed launch of November 1999, officials had to destroy the rocket in midair, leading an advisory panel to suggest that Japan’s planned shuttle should launch from a reusable high-speed jet plane, rather than atop a rocket.(Associated Press, “Japan Freezes Plans To Make Unmanned Space Shuttle,” 2 August 2000.)
President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after completing the 11-day Mission STS-97 at the ISS, where the crew had installed and deployed the station’s new solar array. Shortly before touchdown, the ISS sailed above KSC, a “reminder of the pressure” on NASA to support more flights to the ISS as the station’s assembly accelerated. Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore remarked that the successful mission of Endeavour to the ISS was “a good way to end this year⎯a very successful five missions.”(William Harwood, “Endeavour Returns from Station Work,” Washington Post, 12 December 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour docked successfully with the International Space Station (ISS), the first Shuttle docking at an inhabited ISS. William M. Shepherd, Commander of the ISS, noted the festive mood at the space station, even though the two crews would not meet in person until later in the mission. Soon after Endeavour docked, Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to lift the 49-foot-long (15-meter-long) tower containing the solar array out of the cargo bay, where it would remain suspended 10 feet (3 meters) above the Shuttle while the crew slept.(Steven Siceloff, “Endeavour Docks at Station: Astronauts To Attach Arrays Today,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 December 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
Hatches between the ISS and Space Shuttle Endeavour opened for the first time, and the three members of the space station crew, who had been living aboard the ISS for five weeks, received their first visitors. ISS Commander William M. Shepherd commended Endeavour’s crew for their installation of the giant solar array on the space station. The two crews spent their day together transferring supplies, such as food, water, mail, and gifts, to the space station and removing trash, damaged items, and unneeded items for return to Earth.(Reuters, “Hatch Is Opened; Endeavour, Space Station Crews Become One,” Chicago Tribune, 9 December 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Crew Visits Space Station,” 9 December 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Crew Greets First Visitors,” New York Times, 9 December 2000.)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the world’s leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the company’s missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Society’s Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, “Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist,” Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, “International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, when wind and rain caused the diversion of the Shuttle and its seven-person crew from its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. The completed mission had been unique, with NASA deliberately paring down its research goals because of the anticipated arrival during Endeavour’s stay at the ISS of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft carrying space tourist Dennis A. Tito. Shuttle Commander Kent V. Rominger greeted the press upon landing, commenting on the crew’s installation of the ISS’s robotic arm and the computer problems that had plagued the space station during the visit. Rominger explained that he and the other astronauts had worked with 500 computer experts on the ground to achieve partial restoration of the ISS’s hard drives and software applications.(Warren E. Leary, “As Shuttle Returns to Earth, Tourist Adjusts to Space Station,” New York Times, 2 May 2001; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Diverted to California Due to Bad Weather,” 1 May 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lands in Clear California/Cloud Hangs Over Russia Relations,” Houston Chronicle, 2 May 2001.)
John F. Yardley, who had worked at the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation, serving as the Launch Operation Manager for the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft and the Technical Director for the Gemini program before joining NASA in 1974, died at the age of 76. NASA had awarded Yardley its Public Service Medal in 1963 and in 1966 for his work on the Mercury and the Gemini. From 1981 to 1989, Yardley had been President of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Yardley “as responsible as any individual for getting the Space Shuttle Program off the ground.(NASA, “John F. Yardley, Human Space Flight Pioneer, Dies,” news release 01-130, 27 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “John Yardley, 76, Dies; Had Central Role in Space Flight,” New York Times, 28 June 2001.)
Cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS to clear an obstruction that had prevented the pilotless Progress Russian supply ship from docking securely to the space station. The crew believed that the obstruction was a rubber seal from a supply ship that had left the ISS on 22 November. NASA had delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour for five days because of concern that Endeavour’s arrival at the space station could cause the insecurely docked supply ship to wobble, possibly damaging the ISS. However, Dezhurov and Tyurin were able to remove the obstruction during their 3-hour spacewalk, thereby clearing the way for Endeavour to launch on 5 December.(Warren E. Leary, “Endeavour Is Set for Launching After Docking Problem Is Solved,” New York Times, 4 December 2001; Los Angeles Times, “With Space Debris Cleared, Shuttle Launch Set,” 4 December 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California after three days of bad weather had prevented its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew received a congratulatory call from President George W. Bush, praising their successful 13- day mission. By the time that Atlantis and its crew departed the ISS, the Shuttle had significantly boosted the space station’s orbit, leaving the ISS orbiting at about 237 miles (381 kilometers) above Earth. While attached to the space station, Atlantis had used a series of engine bursts to push the ISS approximately 16 miles (26 kilometers) higher than its previous position. Shuttle crew had also unloaded food and supplies, including an enormous Russian carbon-dioxide removal unit, for the use of the three-person ISS crew during their visit.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back on Earth After Dismal Three Days,” 21 February 2001; Associated Press, “Atlantis Leaves Space Station in a Higher Orbit,” 16 February 2001.)
NASA announced that it had canceled the X-33 rocket development project, an endeavor that many in the space industry had hoped would produce a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. NASA ended the five-year program after having invested nearly US$1 billion in developing a reusable launching vehicle. The X-33 program, contracted to Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company, had sought to build the world’s most technologically advanced space vehicleshaped like an arrowhead and protected by a heat-resistant metallic covering. Because of its capability to ascend to space without having to drop weight by discarding boosters after launch, the new vehicle would have significantly improved on the Shuttle. NASA officials had hoped that the X- 33 would lead to development of the VentureStar vehicle, for transporting people and cargo into space. Operating at considerably less expense to NASA than the Space Shuttles, the VentureStar would permit more space missions per year. NASA’s decision to cut funding for the X-33 was part of its general effort to reduce its budget. NASA officials in charge of the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) had determined that, although the X-33 program had yielded significant new knowledge, it had not advanced to a point at which NASA engineers could readily implement the new technology. Arthur G. Stephenson, the Director of NASA’s MSFC, which had managed the program, called the decision to deny further funding “a very tough decision.”(NASA, “NASA Reaches Milestone in Space Launch Initiative Program; Also Announces No SLI Funding for X- 33 or X-34,” news release 01-31, 1 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Ends Project on Rocket Meant To Replace Space Shuttle,” New York Times, 2 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Kills $1.3 Billion Space Plane Project,” Washington Post, 2 March 2001; Los Angeles Times, “NASA Ends X-33 Project that Sought To Cut Spaceflight Costs,” 2 March 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:23 p.m. (CDT), marking the end of Mission STS-105. During the mission, the Shuttle crew had delivered supplies and equipment to the ISS, carried Expedition 3 crew members to the ISS, and transported the Expedition 2 crew back to Earth. In addition, astronauts Daniel T. Barry and Patrick G. Forrester had each performed two spacewalks to attach equipment to the exterior of the ISS, spending a total of 11 hours and 45 minutes outside the space station. STS-105’s total duration was 11 days, 21 hours, and 13 minutes.(NASA, “STS-105: A New Crew Arrives at the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-105/ (accessed 10 November 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of two missions as part of its Discovery Program, which had as its objective low-cost, highly focused scientific missions using innovative methods to enhance scientific understanding of the solar system. One of the missions NASA had selected was Dawn, a spacecraft that would orbit the solar system’s two largest asteroids, Vesta and Ceresto, to help scientists understand early planetary formation in the solar system. The other mission, Kepler, was a space-based telescope that would search for Earth-like planets outside of the solar system, to help scientists learn more about planetary formation and the possibility of life on other planets. NASA had selected the missions―both scheduled to launch in 2006―from a pool of 26 proposals made earlier in 2001.(NASA, “NASA Selects Missions To Explore Two Large Asteroids and Search for Earth-Like Planets,” news release 01-254, 21 December 2001; NASA Discovery Program, “Discovery Mission: Kepler,” http://discovery.nasa.gov/kepler.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
Crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour and the ISS held a brief ceremony to mark the three-month anniversary of the 11 September terrorist attacks. The tribute included playing both the Russian and U.S. national anthems in the Space Shuttle and at ISS Mission Control Centers at NASA’s JSC in Houston. Moreover, Endeavour carried U.S. flags and Marine Corps flags that had flown at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the Pennsylvania State Capitol; shields and patches worn by New York City police officers; a New York Fire Department flag; and a poster with pictures of the firefighters who had died in the attacks. Also aboard the Shuttle were 6,000 American flags, which Endeavour would return to Earth, and NASA would distribute to the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks and their families.(NASA, “Shuttle, Station Crewmembers To Honor September 11 Victims,” news release N01-74, 10 December 2001.)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASA’s JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Center’s goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSC’s Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director,” news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
The government of France named NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin as Officer of the Legion of Honor, the country’s highest award. Napoleon had created the Legion of Honor in 1802 to honor civil and military service to France. The award honored Goldin for his contribution to the cooperation of France and the United States in space endeavors. NASA and the French space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales, had collaborated on Earth observation and Mars exploration, and French astronauts had flown on the Space Shuttle. Ambassador François Bujon de l’Éstang presented the award to Goldin at the residence of the French Ambassador.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Receives French Legion of Honor Award,” news release 01-202, 31 October 2001.)
Astronauts Thomas D. Jones and Robert L. Curbeam Jr. made their third and final spacewalk from Space Shuttle Atlantis, finishing the installation of the ISS’s science laboratory Destiny. The spacewalk was the 100th in the history of U.S. space exploration. Two days earlier, Jones and Curbeam had conducted a spacewalk to install a window shutter for Destiny, allowing the astronauts residing inside the ISS an unparalleled view of Earth. Overall, the mission to install the vital and expensive Destiny module went smoothly. Atlantis’s crew worked quickly to connect the necessary cables, hatches, and wires to equip the new research center. The successful installation also allowed NASA to accept a transfer of leadership from the Russian Space Agency. Using the newly installed computers in the Destiny module, U.S. flight controllers took control of the ISS on 13 February 2001.
NASA announced that it would delay Shuttle Missions STS-104 and STS-105 for several weeks because of a series of computer problems on the ISS. The computer difficulties had limited the control of the new robotic arm delivered to the ISS in April 2001. Despite the efforts of the astronauts aboard the ISS and of hundreds of experts on the ground, the malfunctions had continued to render control of the Canadian-built robotic arm impossible. NASA officials had determined that, until the situation was resolved, NASA would have to delay an Atlantis mission, scheduled for 20 June, and a Discovery mission, scheduled for 12 July, both carrying cargo that the arm must move. The delay also meant that the ISS crewYury V. Usachev, James S. Voss, and Susan J. Helmswould remain aboard ISS longer than originally planned.(Warren E. Leary, “Problems with Space Station’s Robotic Arm Delay Shuttle Visits,” New York Times, 1 June 2001; Mark Carreau, “Glitch Postpones 2 Space Station Missions,” Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2001.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis accomplished the primary objective of Mission STS- 104, successfully installing the Joint Airlock on the ISS. The crew used the space station’s massive, Canadian-made robotic arm, which had not operated properly for several months, to hoist the enormous entryway out of the Shuttle’s cargo bay and to move it into position for installation. Astronaut Susan J. Helms commanded the robotic arm, while spacewalking astronauts Michael L. Gernhardt and James F. Reilly helped line up the hatch for its final installation. The robotic arm successfully accomplished its first construction task, drawing applause from NASA’s Mission Control, as did the opening of the US$164 million Joint Airlock. Although the ISS Partnership planned improvements and additions to the space station far into the future, the mission marked the end of a major stage of assembly for the ISS.(New York Times, “2nd Entry Installed on Space Station,” 16 July 2001.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space held a hearing on safety and workforce issues related to NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. According to newspaper reports, much of the testimony addressed the effects of budget cuts on the safety improvements for the Space Shuttles. Subcommittee members and witnesses reportedly were critical of the budget cuts and concerned about their possibly detrimental effects on Shuttle safety. Individuals providing testimony at the hearing were NASA Deputy Associate Administrator William F. Readdy, Allen Li of the General Accounting Office (GAO), Michael James McCulley of United Space Alliance, Richard D. Blomberg, chair of the ASAP, and Bryan D. O’Connor, former chair of the NRC’s Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Shuttle Safety, 107th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2001; Tamara Lytle, “Experts Fear for Shuttle Safety as NASA Budget Is Trimmed,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-108/UF-1 launched at 5:19 p.m. Eastern Standard Time (EST) from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew members were Commander Dominic L. Gorie, Pilot Mark E. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani; and ISS Expedition 4 crew members, Daniel W. Bursch, Carl E. Walz, and Yuri I. Onufrienko. One of the main objectives of the mission was to transport the Expedition 4 crew to the ISS and return Expedition 3 crew members to Earth. Another mission objective was to transport approximately 3 tons (2.7 tonnes or 2,700 kilograms) of supplies to the ISS. Much of the payload was contained in an Italian-built Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) called Raffaello. In addition, Endeavour carried a host of scientific payloads, including some experiments created by schools and universities in the United States and numerous other countries.(NASA KSC, “STS-108 (107),” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-108/mission-sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008); NASA KSC, “Space Shuttle, Mission Archives: STS-108,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008). 156 NASA, “It’s About TIMED: NASA Spacecraft Will Use Lofty Perch To Study Gateway to Space,” news release 01-226, 19 November 2001; Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, “TIMED: A Mission To Explore One of the Last Frontiers in Earth’s Atmosphere: Mission,” http://www.timed.jhuapl.edu/WWW/mission/mission.php (accessed 6 January 2009).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canada’s contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISS’s exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crew―Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakov―included astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttle’s fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, “Endeavour’s International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand,” news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, “Endeavour’s Mission Will Extend Space Station’s Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19,” news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1―comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richards―launched from NASA’s KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2―Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms―would replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttle’s 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a “moving van” for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, “Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew,” news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station,” New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew,” 8 March 2001; Reuters, “USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission,” 8 March 2001.)
Lockheed Martin confirmed that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) had decided not to fund the company’s development of the X-33 space plane, a possible replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Since 1996, Lockheed Martin had been developing a pilotless prototype of the X- 33, a reusable spacecraft that would be able to launch without shedding fuel tanks or boosters and to land like an airplane. However, the development of lightweight fuel tanks had taken the project off schedule and over budget, and NASA had decided in March 2001 to forego continued funding for the X-33, although it was, reportedly, 75 percent complete. When Lockheed Martin had subsequently attempted to secure another government sponsor for the project, the U.S. Air Force had expressed interest in the project and submitted to the Pentagon a proposal to fund the space plane. However, the DOD had since determined that the project was too costly to undertake.(Michael Cabbage, “Air Force Decides Not To Revive Lockheed’s X-33 Space Plane,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98/ISS-5A lifted off from NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the most expensive and crucial component of the ISSthe United States–built Destiny science laboratory. Mark Stephenson of the Boeing Company, which had built the US$1.4 billion research module, called the vessel “the crown jewel” of the ISS. NASA had set high stakes on the Destiny laboratory, which was so expensive and complicated to build, that NASA could not afford to assemble a backup module. Therefore, any problem in the transport and connection of the Destiny module would set back the ISS several years. NASA had delayed Atlantis’s mission for three weeks when engineers discovered evidence that faulty wiring might compromise the Shuttle’s safety. The vital mission brought the ISS closer to becoming the permanent and highly functional research station that NASA and the international space community had long awaited. The Destiny laboratory measured 28 feet (9 meters) long, weighed more than 30,000 pounds (13,600 kilograms), and held 13 computers. NASA expected to control the ISS using the computers and communications equipment built into Destiny. Because of the Space Shuttle’s cargo, some officials speculated that Atlantis’s mission was the most important for NASA’s research agenda ever undertaken. One NASA spokesperson called the Destiny module “the cornerstone for space-based research aboard the orbiting platform.” The STS-98 crew consisted of Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell; Pilot Mark L. Polansky; and Mission Specialists Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Thomas D. Jones, and Marsha S. Ivins.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-98,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-98.html (accessed 2 February 2009); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Shuttle Flight No. 102 Will Transport $1.4 Billion Lab Module,” Washington Post, 8 February 2001; Kelly Young, “Atlantis To Deliver Destiny,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 2001; Associated Press, “Shuttle Totes Space Station’s ‘Crown Jewel’,” 8 February 2001; Associated Press, “Countdown Begins for Launch of NASA Lab,” 5 February 2001; NASA, “Atlantis Set To Deliver International Space Station’s Destiny,” news release 01-16, 5 February 2001.)
NASA launched Space Shuttle Discovery STS-105/ISS-7A.1 at 4:10 p.m. Central Daylight Time (CDT). Shuttle crew consisted of Mission Commander Scott J. Horowitz, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, Mission Specialists Daniel T. Barr and Patrick G. Forrester; and Expedition 3 crew members, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., Vladimir N. Dezhurov, and Mikhail Tyurin. One of the main purposes of the mission was to transport the Expedition 3 crew to the ISS, returning Expedition 2 crew members to Earth. Another objective was to use an Italian-built, 9,000-pound (4,100-kilogram) Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) called Leonardo to deliver supplies to the ISS. Leonardo would deliver six resupply stowage racks, four resupply stowage platforms, and two scientific experiment racks for the station’s laboratory. Discovery’s payload also included NASA’s scientific project, the Materials International Space Station Experiments (MISSE).(NASA, “STS-105: A New Crew Arrives at the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts-105/ (accessed 7 November 2008); NASA KSC, “STS-105,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-105/mission-sts-105.html (accessed 7 November 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of crew members for three missions to the ISS scheduled for 2002. Mission STS-112, scheduled for launch in July 2002, would comprise Commander Jeffrey S. Ashby and crew members Sandra H. Magnus, Pamela A. Melroy, Piers J. Sellers, David A. Wolf, and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. The crew for STS-113, scheduled to depart in August 2002, would consist of Commander James D. Wetherbee and crew members John Bennett Herrington, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Christopher J. Loria. The mission would also transport Expedition 6 crew members Valery G. Korzun, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson to the ISS, returning to Earth Expedition 5 crew members Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, and Donald A. Thomas. Finally, the crew of STS-114 would include Commander Eileen M. Collins and crew members James M. Kelly, Soichi Noguchi, and Stephen K. Robinson. STS-114, scheduled to leave for the ISS in November 2002, would transport Expedition 7 crew members Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, and Sergei I. Moschenko.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names 23 Astronauts and Cosmonauts to Shuttle Flights in 2002,” news release H01-167, 17 August 2001.)
Engineers at NASA’s KSC completed the installation of a new main engine for Space Shuttle Atlantis. Modifications of previous engine designs included a new high-pressure fuel turbopump, strengthened and made more durable by a casting process, rather than by welding. During the roughly 81⁄2 minutes that the engines operate during a Shuttle launch, they must perform at temperatures reaching 6,000°F (3,300°C). The improvements continued NASA’s practice of regularly updating the Shuttle’s components.(NASA, “New Main Engine Promises Even Safer Shuttle Ride,” news release 01-79, 26 April 2001.)
NASA opened a new command and control center that would allow researchers on Earth to participate in scientific research conducted aboard the ISS. The new facility, located at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, featured state-of-the-art communication and research technologies. Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson described the new center as a significant part of NASA’s ongoing plan to make space research more efficient and useful: “From this facility we will manage fundamental scientific research that can only be done in spaceresearch that will lead to knowledge to benefit all humanity here on Earth.” NASA planned to staff the 13,000-square-foot (1,200-square-meter) facility 24 hours per day to support research aboard ISS. In addition to its link to the ISS, the new facility was equipped to monitor payload resources, facilitate data transfer, and communicate with universities and research centers throughout the world. The new command post opened only days before Space Shuttle Atlantis’s scheduled trip into space to carry the Destiny research laboratory module to the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Opens Space Station Command Post,” news release 01-15, 2 February 2001; Shelby G. Spires, “MSFC Opens Science ‘Mission Control’ Today,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 February 2001.)
After a one-day delay because of rain, Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-104 landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, having completed its mission successfully. The crew had installed a new hatch, allowing spacewalkers easier access in and out of the ISS. Officially called the ISS Airlock and also known as the Joint Airlock, the new pressurized unit gave ISS spacewalkers a portal that oxygen-nitrogen tanks could quickly pressurize. NASA planned for all future spacewalks on ISS to begin and end at the new site. In addition to installing the airlock, Atlantis’s crew delivered to the ISS the EarthKAM, a new camera that U.S. high school and middle school students could direct from the ground, enabling them to take pictures of some 2,000 points of interest on Earth, thus, participating in ISS research.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573; Washington Post, “Shuttle Lands After Extra Day in Space,” 25 July 2001.)
NASA announced the first significant group of awards for its Space Launch Initiative (SLI)a program dedicated to finding safer and more cost-effective modes of sending humans into space. NASA’s SLI board had awarded a total of US$767 million in contracts to 22 groups. NASA clarified that the purpose of the contracts was to find a long-term solution to replace the costly Shuttle program. Therefore, NASA intended that grantees focus on conceptual designs rather than on vehicle specifics. NASA had designed the program to facilitate the development of a new space vehicle by the middle of the 21st century. Those receiving the funds had to meet ambitious standards; NASA wanted awardees to design a craft that would be 10 times safer than the Space Shuttle, with 100 times higher rates of crew survival, at a 10th of the cost of the current Shuttle program. The SLI board had consulted more than 100 experts to determine which proposals should receive funding.(Marshall Star (NASA MSFC), “NASA Awards $767 Million in SLI Contracts,” 24 May 2001, 1, 6; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Begins Bid To Improve Its Launchings,” New York Times, 18 May 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, returning to Earth the crew of Expedition 1―Commander William M. Shepherd, Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, and Soyuz Commander Yuri P. Gidzenko. The Expedition 1 crew had lived and worked aboard the ISS since 31 October 2000. Commander James D. Wetherbee and Pilot James M. Kelly guided Discovery to a smooth night landing, the 17th night landing in the history of the Space Shuttle program and the 12th in the history of KSC.(NASA JSC, “STS-102, Mission Control Center Status Report # 27,” 21 March 2001, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts102/STS-102-27.html (accessed 2 February 2009).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, to honor the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks, NASA would carry American flags into space and give the flags to survivors of the attacks and families of the victims. NASA called the memorial to the people who had lost their lives in the events of 11 September “Flags for Heroes and Families.” Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to launch on 29 November 2001, would carry nearly 6,000 flags. NASA would later have the flags mounted on specially designed memorial certificates and would distribute them to survivors and to victims’ families.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Launches ‘Flags for Heroes and Families’ Campaign,” news release 01-195, 11 October 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 12:55 p.m. (EST), bringing to an end Mission STS-108. During the mission, Endeavour had transported crew members of Expedition 4 to the ISS to begin their residency on the orbiting space station and had returned to Earth the Expedition 3 crew members, ending their 117-day stay aboard the ISS. In addition, astronauts Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani had completed numerous tasks during a 4-hour spacewalk, including installation of insulation on mechanisms that rotated the station’s main solar arrays. The crews of Endeavour and the ISS had collectively transferred more than 5,000 pounds (2,270 kilograms) of crew provisions, experiments, and other supplies to the ISS from Endeavour’s mid-deck and from the Raffaello MPLM. The mission’s total duration had been 11 days, 19 hours, and 55 minutes.(NASA KSC, “Space Shuttle, Mission Archives: STS-108,” http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
The crew of Space Shuttle Atlantis successfully installed the Destiny laboratory on the ISS. Using the Shuttle’s robotic arm, astronaut Marsha S. Ivins moved the module from the Shuttle’s payload area to its place on the side of the ISS. After patching up a small leak from one of the module’s coolant lines, two spacewalking astronauts connected electrical, fluid, and data lines between the ISS and the Destiny laboratory. After carefully completing the installation, astronauts opened a hatch connecting the new module to the rest of the ISS. The additional 3,750 cubic feet (106 cubic meters) of space made the ISS the largest spacecraft ever. Astronaut Kenneth D. Cockrellalong with William M. Shepherd, the first to enter the Destiny modulereported, “The lab looks and feels and smells great, and looks like all the hard work has really paid off. It’s a beautiful piece of hardware in here.”(William Harwood, “Spacewalking Astronauts Attach Lab Module to Space Station,” Washington Post, 11 February 2001; USA Today, “Space Station Module Gives Crew More Space,” 12 February 2001; Washington Post, “Astronauts Open Hatch to Destiny Laboratory; Alpha Now Largest Orbiting Outpost,” 12 February 2001; Associated Press, “Astronauts Install Lab on Station,” 12 February 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-104/ISS7A lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bound for the ISS. Steven W. Lindsay served as Flight Commander, Charles O. Hobaugh piloted the spacecraft, and Mission Specialists Janet L. Kavandi, Michael L. Gernhardt, and James F. Reilly rounded out the crew. The launch was the first using NASA’s upgraded hydrogen turbopumps in the Shuttle’s three main engines. The pump was the last in a series of Shuttle improvements that NASA had made to reduce maintenance and improve safety of the Shuttle.
President George W. Bush released details of NASA’s new Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP) in an amendment to his budget request for FY 2003. The ISTP included a number of changes in NASA’s spaceflight programs that, together, would encompass a comprehensive effort to coordinate NASA’s investments in the ISS, the Space Shuttle program, and the replacement vehicle for the Shuttle. The new plan would provide more resources for completing the assembly of the ISS, as well as an increase in the number of annual Shuttle flights to the ISS. Shuttle flights to the ISS would increase from four to five flights annually, enabling transport of more researchers and more science-based payloads. Moreover, the ISTP would restructure the Space Launch Initiative (SLI), making the program’s immediate objective the development of the Orbital Space Plane (OSP), rather than development of a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. The OSP, which would be smaller than the Shuttle, would function as both the crew transport vehicle and the emergency escape vehicle for the ISS, and NASA would use the Shuttles for heavy cargo delivery. NASA stressed that, although the ISTP would change NASA’s five-year budget plan, the program’s costs would remain within the original FY 2003 budget.(NASA, “NASA’s Integrated Space Transportation Plan Released,” news release 02-220, 13 November 2002; Warren E. Leary, “NASA To Delay Decision on Shuttle Replacement,” New York Times, 14 November 2002.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 lifted off at 4:44 p.m. (EST) from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The object of STS-110/ISS Assembly Flight 8A was to attach to the ISS a 43-foot-long (13-meter-long) truss structure called the Starboard Zero (S Zero or S0). The mission’s payload included several science payloads, the S0 Truss, and the Mobile Transporter (MT). NASA had designed the MT to move the completed truss and to act as a work platform for a mechanical arm, which the crew would install in the future. The crew included Mission Commander Michael J. Bloomfield and astronauts Stephen N. Frick, Lee M. E. Morin, Ellen Ochoa, Jerry L. Ross, Steven L. Smith, and Rex J. Walheim.(NASA, “Framework for Expanding Station Research: STS-110,” press kit, 20 March 2001, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-110/spk-110.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008); William Harwood, “Shuttle on Haul to Space Station,” Washington Post, 9 April 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:58 p.m. (EDT), ending a mission of 13 days, 20 hours, and 35 minutes. During STS-111, the crew had used the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2, to move the MBS from Endeavour to the Mobile Transporter (MT) on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. In addition, crew members Franklin R. Chang- Diaz and Philippe Perrin had performed three EVAs lasting a total of 19 hours and 31 minutes. During the first EVA, the astronauts had installed a Power and Data Grapple Fixture to the ISS’s P6 Truss, the sixth truss segment on the port side of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, and moved six micrometeoroid debris shields from the Shuttle to a portion of the ISS called the PMA-1 (Pressurized Mating Adapter-One) for eventual installation on the Russian-made Zvezda service module. During the second spacewalk, the crew had connected data, power, and video cables between the MT rail car and the MBS; positioned the Payload Orbital Replacement Unit Accommodation (POA) on the MBS; and completed the installation of the MBS platform. In the final EVA, Chang-Diaz and Perrin had performed repairs on the ISS’s Canadarm2, restoring the instrument to full operational status. In addition, STS-111 had returned the members of Expedition 4Daniel E. Bursch, Yuri I. Onufrienko, and Carl W. Walzto Earth.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-111,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-111.html (accessed 18 August 2008); NASA, “Continuing the Human Presence in Space: STS-111,” press kit, 16 May 2001, 24–29, http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/history/shuttle_pk/ pk/Flight_110_STS- 111_Press_Kit.pdf (accessed 2 January 2009).)
The Office of Space Flight at NASA Headquarters decided that Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California would no longer perform major modifications to Space Shuttle orbiters. Instead, NASA’s KSC, already responsible for preparing the Shuttles for launching, would also provide the modifications. The Palmdale facility had served as the manufacturing site for all orbiters since the Space Shuttle program’s inception, as well as providing periodic maintenance and safety upgrades. Based on cost and risk assessments, the Office of Space Flight had determined that maintaining two modification facilities for four Shuttle orbiters was no longer financially feasible, and that performing such work at KSC would minimize associated costs and risks. The change was part of NASA’s effort to absorb President George W. Bush’s proposed budget cuts. Because it overhauled one of the four Shuttle orbiters every two to three years, NASA estimated that transferring this work to KSC would save approximately US$30 million per overhaul.(NASA, “Kennedy Space Center To Perform Shuttle Modifications,” news release 02-22, 5 February 2002; Mark Carreau, “NASA To Overhaul Shuttles in Florida,” Houston Chronicle, 6 February 2002.)
NASA officials stated that NASA had used Web sites such as Yahoo! and eBay to find discontinued electronic equipment. NASA had continued to use electronic components such as 8-inch-floppy-disc drives, circuit boards, and computer chips, not in the Space Shuttles themselves, but in equipment used to service and support the Shuttles. For example, NASA had purchased outdated medical equipment to acquire the increasingly scarce Intel 8086 computer chip, a variant of the chip used in IBM’s first personal computers in 1981. NASA had continued to use the Intel 8086 chip in diagnostic equipment for the Space Shuttle booster rockets, also developed in the early 1980s. Although NASA planned to develop various systems with new hardware, some crucial systems remained dependent on antiquated electronic parts.(William J. Broad, “For Parts, NASA Boldly Goes . . . on Ebay,” New York Times, 12 May 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although O’Keefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
NASA released two reports of an audit conducted by the independent firm Pricewaterhouse- Coopers, noting several problems with NASA’s system of financial management and record keeping. In one report, PricewaterhouseCoopers stated that NASA had not provided auditors with timely and sufficient documentary evidence of its financial transactions. Thus, auditors could not determine the accuracy and completeness of NASA’s reported financial obligations, expenses, and equipment, including those related to the ISS and Space Shuttle programs. The audit did not state that waste or fraud characterized NASA’s financial management; rather, the report concluded that NASA’s incomplete financial records obviated any definitive assessment of its finances. In the second report, the auditors enumerated several problems with NASA’s internal controls over financial reporting, but also stated that they would not provide an opinion on the merit of those internal controls.(Karen Masterson and Mark Carreau, “NASA Bookkeeping in Disarray,” Houston Chronicle, 1 March 2002; PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Report of Independent Accountants” (report, Washington, DC, 22 February 2002), http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oig/hq/igfy01fsaudit.pdf (accessed 5 August 2008); PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Report of Independent Accountants on Internal Control” (report, Washington, DC, 22 February 2002), http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oig/hq/lrreport022602.pdf (accessed 5 August 2008).)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe selected astronaut Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist. In this post, Lucid became responsible for ensuring that NASA’s programs were of scientific merit. At the time of the selection, Lucid was a spacecraft communicator supporting the Space Shuttle and ISS missions. A veteran of five Space Shuttle flights, Lucid had been one of the first six women selected to become an astronaut and the only woman awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor. Lucid replaced Kathie L. Olsen, who had occupied the position since May 1999. Olsen had accepted an appointment as the Associate Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut, Dr. Shannon Lucid, Selected as Chief Scientist,” news release 02-27, 12 February 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:50 p.m. Central Standard Time (CST). The Shuttle’s crew members comprised Commander James D. Wetherbee and astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, John Bennett Herrington, Paul S. Lockhart, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Donald R. Pettit. The primary objective of STS-113, also designated as Station Assembly Flight 11A, was to transport the crew of Expedition 6―Bowersox, Budarin, and Pettit―to the ISS and return the crew of Expedition 5 to Earth. Another major objective was to install the Port 1 (P1) Truss segment on the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. The structure would eventually house the ISS’s solar arrays and would carry power, data, and temperature controls for the station’s electronics. In addition, STS113 would transport several experiments to the ISS, returning to Earth with several experiments that the crew of Expedition 5 had conducted.(NASA, “STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 29 October 2008); NASA, “STS-113 Shuttle Press Kit” press kit, 25 October 2002, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-113/SPK_sts-113.pdf (accessed 29 October 2008).)
The U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space began hearings on legislation to reauthorize NASA programs. Subcommittee chairman Ron Wyden (D–OR) expressed concern about the agency’s financial management, particularly cost overruns for the ISS. He also urged NASA to maintain the excellence of the Shuttle program while research continued on a next-generation space vehicle. Members of the subcommittee heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, who addressed them for the first time, and from William F. Readdy, Deputy Associate Administrator of the NASA Office of Space Flight. The members of the subcommittee questioned O’Keefe about his vision for NASA and his plans to reduce NASA’s budget by ending particular programs. In his prepared statement, O’Keefe discussed the status of the ISS and Space Shuttle programs.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, NASA Reauthorization, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 May 2002; Karen Masterson, “JSC Mission May Hit Detour,” Houston Chronicle, 9 May 2002.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:44 a.m. (CDT), marking the end of STS-112. During the mission, Atlantis’s crew had conducted joint operations with the ISS Expedition 5 crew, including the installation of the S1 Truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Astronauts Piers J. Sellers and David A. Wolf had performed three spacewalks to install the truss. In addition, the Shuttle’s crew members had transferred cargo to the ISS and had used the Shuttle’s thruster jets to raise the station’s orbit. The mission’s total duration was 10 days, 19 hours, and 58 minutes.
NASA’s KSC awarded the Boeing Company the checkout, assembly, and payload-processing services (CAPPS) contract for the Space Shuttle and the EELV. The CAPPS contract had a four- year base period of performance valued at US$332 million. In addition, the contract had two three-year extension options, which could increase the contract’s total value to US$810 million. Under the contract, Boeing would perform payload-processing tasks, such as ensuring that payloads were compatible with launch vehicles and loading payloads into launch vehicles. Boeing had also held KSC’s previous payload-processing agreement, called the payload ground- operations contract.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Wins Major Space Payload Processing Contract,” news release, 29 August 2002. 86)
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
The GAO submitted a report to the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics on NASA’s progress toward developing a reusable launch vehicle (RLV), under the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) program, to replace the Space Shuttle. According to GAO, NASA needed to complete ongoing reassessment of its overall space transportation plans and of the future of the ISS. NASA also needed to determine whether it would develop the SLI program in cooperation with the DOD. To address these concerns, GAO recommended that NASA reassess the schedule for defining the SLI’s requirements and reach a consensus with the DOD on the program’s priorities and objectives. The report also recommended that NASA finalize the SLI’s basic requirements before implementing management controls on the program’s costs and risks. In its response, NASA concurred with GAO’s recommendations and outlined plans to implement them.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Transportation: Challenges Facing NASA’s Space Launch Initiative” (report no. GAO-02-1020, Washington, DC, 17 September 2002), http://www.gao.gov/ new.items/d021020.pdf (accessed 10 October 2008).)
NASA officials announced the delay of the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113, scheduled for 21 July. Engineers had discovered fuel-line cracks, the same problem that had previously led NASA to ground some Space Shuttles. At the time of the announcement, NASA officials remained uncertain of the new date of Endeavour’s launch, suggesting that, although the Shuttle would be ready to fly by September 2002, NASA might delay the launch until at least the end of 2002.(Warren E. Leary, “Delay Likely for Shuttle Mission with Israeli,” New York Times, 20 July 2002.)
NASA announced that it would keep all four Space Shuttles grounded until at least September 2002 because of potentially dangerous fractures discovered in the fuel lines of all four Shuttles. NASA officials also reported that engineers now considered the cracks less of a safety concern than they had feared when NASA first discovered them in June 2002.(William Harwood, “NASA Grounds Space Shuttle Fleet over Fuel Line Cracks,” Washington Post, 13 July 2002.)
NASA awarded a US$1.14 billion contract to the Boeing Company’s Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power division for maintenance and support of the Space Shuttle’s main engine during the ensuing five years. Under the terms of the contract, Rocketdyne was to provide flight and test engineering; engine refurbishment; and manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of three additional Space Shuttle main engines. The contract also required Rocketdyne to provide engineering support for NASA’s main engine facilities at NASA’s KSC and SSC. From 1972 until the company signed the contract, Rocketdyne had assembled 106 main engines for NASA’s Shuttles.(NASA, “NASA Awards $1.14 Billion Space Shuttle Main Engine Contract to Boeing Rocketdyne,” news release c02-h, 3 May 2002.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 attached a 44-foot (13-meter) truss, containing computers, coolant lines, electrical cables, and other components to the ISS. The 27,000-pound (12,250-kilogram) beam, dubbed Starboard Zero or S0, was the first of nine truss segments that would form a 356-foot (110-meter) exterior spine, supporting new solar arrays, heat radiators, and laboratory modules. The installation, involving the first use of the 58-foot (18-meter), Canadian-built robotic arm designed for the station, required two separate spacewalks, performed by two different pairs of astronauts.(Warren E. Leary, “Major Component of Space Station Is Attached,” New York Times, 12 April 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASA’s SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the “One NASA” initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASA’s various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASA’s MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFC’s Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASA’s KSC.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director,” news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Two astronauts from Space Shuttle Endeavour undertook an extravehicular activity (EVA) to repair the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2. American astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz and French astronaut Philippe Perrin replaced one of seven joints on the US$600 million, Canadian- built robotic arm, which was critical to the continued construction of the ISS. To repair Canadarm2, the astronauts first removed its 450-pound (205-kilogram), hand-like, latching-end effector (LEE); loosened six bolts connecting the problematic “wrist roll” joint to the arm; and disconnected power, data, and video lines. They then installed the replacement joint, tightened the bolts to secure the new joint to the arm, restored the power and other lines, and reaffixed the LEE. Subsequent tests of the Canadarm2 confirmed the success of the repairs. The EVA, lasting 7 hours and 17 minutes, was the third for Mission STS-111.(William Harwood, “Spacewalkers Continue Space Station Repairs; Joint on Robotic Arm Is Replaced,” Washington Post, 14 June 2002; NASA JSC, “STS-111, Mission Control Center Status Report no. 18,” 13 June 2002, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts111/STS-111-18.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Scientists from NASA’s JPL announced the release of high-resolution topographic data of the continental United States acquired during the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) on Space Shuttle Endeavour in February 2000. Project scientists planned to process the digital- elevation-model (DEM) data, sampled at an interval of one measurement every 30 meters (98 feet), into the most detailed three-dimensional topographic maps ever made of Earth. The SRTM data would eventually include 1 trillion measurements, representing nearly 80 percent of Earth’s landmass between 60° north and 56° south of the equator, a mapped area in which nearly 95 percent of the world’s population resides. SRTM project scientists anticipated that the maps produced from the mission would provide the most valuable and universally beneficial data produced by any scientific mission. Scientists would be able to use the data in applications ranging from flood control to transportation and urban planning.(NASA, “Pictures from the Real Edge: NASA Posts U.S. Topography Data,” news release 02-15, 22 January 2002.)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearingNASA Workforce and Management Challengesto garner information about NASA’s efforts to address concerns regarding its human capital, competitive sourcing for the Space Shuttle program, and other matters. Committee members heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe; David M. Walker, Comptroller General of the United States; and Mark D. Roth, General Counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees. O’Keefe discussed NASA’s Strategic Human Capital Plan, a systemic method of managing human capital according to NASA’s vision and mission. In addition, O’Keefe announced the termination of the comprehensive Strategic Resources Review initiated during the Clinton administration to create a blueprint for NASA’s future facility, missions, and workforce requirements. Roth argued that, because NASA expected a high number of retirements in the near future, its existing and proposed personnel policies were inadequate to address the resulting loss in human capital. Walker discussed methods NASA could use to strengthen its human capital and to address its difficulties with contract management, as well as the increasing expense of the ISS program and of space exploration.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Workforce and Management Challenges, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 18 July 2002, http://science.house.gov/publications/hearings_markups_details.aspx?NewsID=1424 (accessed 21 August 2008 through Lexis-Nexis Congressional); Larry Wheeler, “O’Keefe Scraps Review of NASA,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 July 2002.)
The Space Shuttle Competitive Source Task Force released its final report on the potential for private-sector operation of the Shuttle program. NASA had commissioned the Task Force to analyze the roles of NASA and its contractors with regard to Space Shuttle operations. More specifically, the Task Force had assessed various scenarios in which NASA would focus primarily on spaceflight research and development, outsourcing to the private sector the operation of the planned replacements of the Shuttles for routine transit to low Earth orbit. The Task Force had concluded that, although NASA faced numerous challenges to competitive sourcing for the Shuttle program, it should pursue some form of this option. Moreover, the panel suggested that the most likely scenario for successful private-sector involvement in the Shuttle program would not involve private operation of the program, but rather a transfer of program assets to private entities at highly deflated prices. Another option would entail the restructuring of existing contracts, perhaps taking steps to expand the pool of program suppliers beyond the existing duopoly of Boeing and Lockheed Martin. In addition, as a first step to privatization, NASA could establish a space authority to operate the Shuttle, as well as future human transportation vehicles.(Space Shuttle Competitive Sourcing Task Force, “Alternative Trajectories: Options for Competitive Sourcing of the Space Shuttle Program” (Final Report, Science and Technology Policy Institute, Rand Corporation, Arlington, VA, December 2002), http://www.rand.org/scitech/stpi/NASA/index.html (accessed 30 December 2009).)
NASA announced that Donald R. Pettit, a backup member of the crew of the Expedition 6 Mission to the ISS, would replace Donald A. Thomas on the mission. NASA had reassigned Thomas, a veteran of four Space Shuttle flights, because of medical issues affecting his qualification for long-duration spaceflight. Pettit, a chemical engineer who had joined the astronaut corps in 1996, had previously served as a staff scientist at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico.(NASA, “Backup Crew Member Assigned to Expedition Six,” news release 02-139, 26 July 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that, after international partners had completed certain portions of the ISS, former schoolteacher Barbara R. Morgan would fly on a Space Shuttle mission to the station. NASA had selected Morgan as a mission specialist in the astronaut class of 1998. She had subsequently worked in ISS Mission Control, relaying instructions between ISS Mission Control and the crew of Expedition 4 aboard the ISS. Morgan had previously served as a backup candidate for the Teacher in Space Program, training with Christa McAuliffe and the STS-51L crew of Space Shuttle Challenger. At the time of O’Keefe’s announcement, Morgan was part of a new Educator Astronaut Program administered by NASA and the Department of Education, designed to attract students to engineering, math, and science.(NASA, “Press Briefing Scheduled with NASA Administrator and Astronaut Barbara Morgan,” news release N02-28, 15 April 2002; William Harwood, “McAuliffe’s Backup Will Go to Space in 2004,” Washington Post, 13 April 2002.)
Crew of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 finished installing several new instruments on the 12- year-old HST and sent the observatory back into orbit. During a series of five spacewalks conducted in as many days, Columbia’s crew had installed a new power-shunting unit, an improved solar panel, and a cooling unit that would restore the Near-Infrared Camera and Multi- Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) to operational status. In addition, Columbia’s crew had installed a new main camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), which NASA had designed to give the telescope unprecedented ability to observe distant galaxies and other objects.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Returning to Mission Able To Peer Deeper Into Space,” New York Times, 10 March 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:37 p.m. (CST), marking the end of Mission STS-113. During the mission, Endeavour’s crew had attached the Port 1 (P1) Truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, in an installation that included three spacewalks by crew members John Bennett Herrington and Michael Lopez- Alegria. Shuttle and Expedition crews had also transferred 4,340 pounds (1,969 kilograms) of cargo between the Shuttle and the ISS. In addition, Endeavour had transported the Expedition 6 crew to the station, returning the crew of Expedition 5 to Earth. The total duration of STS-113 was 13 days, 18 hours, and 47 minutes.
NASA announced that it would delay the selection of designs for the RLV that would replace the Space Shuttle under the US$4.8 billion SLI program. NASA had planned to select a pool of proposed designs in November 2002, eventually limiting the pool to two designs before 2006. However, a NASA official said that NASA had slowed the selection process while awaiting the results of studies on various unresolved issues with the SLI program. The results of those studies could affect the program’s objectives, as well as the design of the RLV that NASA planned.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Taps Brakes on Shuttle Replacement,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 October 2002.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft took its last pictures, images of Io, a planet-sized moon orbiting Jupiter. Galileo had launched in 1989 from Space Shuttle Atlantis and had entered Jupiter’s orbit six years later. The spacecraft had eventually made 33 orbits around Jupiter, capturing nearly 14,000 images of the planet and the objects around it.(NASA, “Farewell, Io; Galileo Paying Last Visit to a Restless Moon,” news release 02-10, 15 January 2002; NASA, “Solar System ExplorationGalileo: Overview,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo/ /index.cfm (accessed 31 July 2008); Andrew Bridges, “NASA Awaits Last Photographs from Jupiter Probe’s Long Trip,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2002.)
Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. became the eighth Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Acting Director Roy S. Estess, who resumed his position as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC). Before assuming the post, Howell had worked for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) administering its safety, reliability, and quality-assurance contract with NASA, to provide safety and mission assurance for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs.(NASA JSC, “Jefferson Davis Howell Jr. Named as Johnson Space Center Director,” news release J02-17, 12 February 2002.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:46 p.m. (CDT). The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Jeffrey S. Ashby, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and crew members Sandra H. Magnus, Piers J. Sellers, David A. Wolf, and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. STS-112’s major objective was to deliver and install the Starboard One (S1) Truss, the second segment of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Astronauts Sellers and Wolf planned to make three spacewalks during the installation missiondesignated ISS Assembly Mission 9Ato install and activate the truss. Other mission objectives included transferring experiments and payloads from Atlantis to the ISS, deploying the station’s second S-Band communications system, and installing external camera systems.(NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008); NASA, “STS-112 Overview,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/mm-sts-112.pdf (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:22 a.m. (EST). Weather, mechanical issues, and other concerns had prompted NASA to postpone Columbia’s launch several times, from its original launch date of 19 November 2001. Officially designated STS-109, the mission’s objective was to service the HST, the fourth such mission (designated Mission SM3B) for the HST. The payload consisted of various technology updates for the HST, including a new camera and solar arrays. In addition, Columbia carried seven crew members: Mission Commander Scott D. Altman and astronauts Duane G. Carey, Nancy J. Currie, John M. Grunsfeld, Richard M. Linnehan, Michael J. Massimino, and James H. Newman.(NASA, “STS-109,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-109/mission-sts-109.html (accessed 10 August 2008); William Harwood, “Cooling Glitch Mars Shuttle’s Hubble Trip,” Washington Post, 2 March 2002. 197 Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; ESA, “Envisat Overview,” http://www.esa.int/esaEO/SEMWYN2VQUD_index_0_m.html (accessed 10 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:27 a.m. (EST). While in orbit, the Shuttle’s crew had performed four spacewalks to connect the S0 Truss to the ISS and to prepare the MTa track-mounted platformfor use. The crew had used the robotic arms of both Atlantis and the ISS to install the truss. STS-110 was the first mission in which the crew had used the ISS’s robotic arm to maneuver crew members around the station as they performed spacewalks. In addition, it was the first mission in which the crew’s base for all of its spacewalks was the ISS’s Quest Airlock. The Shuttle’s crew had also engaged in joint operations with the ISS’s Expedition 4 crew. The total duration of STS-110 was 10 days, 19 hours, and 42 minutes.(NASA, “STS-110 Extravehicular Activities,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-110/eva/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); NASA, “STS-110: A Framework for Station Expansion,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-110/ (accessed 12 August 2002).)
Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 4:32 a.m. (EST). During the 11-day mission, the Shuttle crew had conducted five spacewalks and performed several significant modifications of the HST, including the installation of an ACS and an experimental cryocooler, which had restored the operation of the NICMOS. The mission’s total duration was 10 days, 22 hours, and 11 minutes.(NASA, “STS-109,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-109/mission-sts-109.html (accessed 11 August 2002); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA announced that it had grounded all four Space Shuttles because of newly discovered mechanical problems, postponing indefinitely the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia. Previously, NASA had scheduled Columbia’s launch for 19 July 2002. According to NASA officials, engineers had found small fissures in metal liners within the fuel pipes of the main engines of Shuttles Atlantis and Discovery. If left unrepaired, the cracks could cause pieces of the liners to break off, possibly damaging a Shuttle’s engine while in flight.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded To Fix Cracks,” New York Times, 26 June 2002.)
After several unsuccessful attempts to contact the Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) satellite, NASA and Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory concluded that CONTOUR was lost. The objectives of the CONTOUR mission had been to maneuver to a distance of 60 kilometers (100 miles) from at least two comets, capturing high-resolution images and performing various compositional analyses of the comets’ near-nucleus-environment compositional material. NASA had launched CONTOUR on 3 July 2002 but had lost contact with the satellite on 15 August 2002 after a maneuver intended to shift CONTOUR from Earth orbit to an orbit in which it would encounter the comet Encke.(NASA, “Discovery Mission: CONTOUR,” http://discovery.nasa.gov/contour.html (accessed 31 October 2008). 103)
NASA successfully launched the third replenishment spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleet. The TDRS-J satellite launched aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:42 p.m. (EST). TDRS satellites comprised a communication-signal relay system providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing-Built NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release, 4 December 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021204s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
NASA announced the extension of its existing contract with ATK Thiokol Propulsion for the production and refurbishment of reusable solid rocket motors (RSRM) for the Space Shuttle program. Shuttle launches required two RSRMs and three main engines to provide sufficient thrust for the Shuttle to attain orbit. Under the modified agreement, ATK Thiokol would produce and refurbish 70 RSRMs and three flight-support motors. The US$429 million modification extended to May 2007 the original US$2.4 billion contract, which NASA and ATK Thiokol had agreed on in October 1998. The original contract had been the sixth agreement between ATK Thiokol Propulsion and NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, “NASA Extends Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Contract with ATK Thiokol Through May 2007,” news release c02-q, 1 July 2002.)
NASA named 16 crew members for two Space Shuttle missions to the ISS, scheduled for 2003. Mission STS-115 would carry Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. and crew members Daniel C. Burbank, Christopher J. Ferguson, Steven G. MacLean, Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, and Joseph R. Tanner. Mission STS-116 would carry Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt and the crew―American astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and William A. Oefelein, and Swedish ESA astronaut Christer Fuglesang. NASA planned for STS-115 to deliver a second port truss segment to the ISS. Later, crew would attach the second port truss segment to a third port truss, which STS-116 would deliver. STS-116 would also involve rotation of the crew: the Shuttle would carry ISS Expedition 8 Commander C. Michael Foale, astronaut William S. McArthur, and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev to the ISS, for a long-term stay, and would return ISS Expedition 7 Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and crew members Edward T. Lu and Sergei I. Moschenko to Earth.(NASA, “Astronauts Named to Key Space Station Missions,” news release 02-35, 26 February 2002.)
NASA announced the extension of its existing six-year contract with Lockheed Martin Space Systems to build 35 super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle program. The modified agreement extended the contract to September 2008, adding US$341 million to the original contract of US$1.15 billion, which NASA had awarded to Lockheed Martin in October 2000. Under the contract, Lockheed Martin would construct, test, and deliver the tanks; maintain and operate NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans; and provide services at NASA’s KSC and its MSFC. Furthermore, under the terms of the extension, Lockheed Martin agreed to provide at least six tanks per year, instead of the eight tanks per year stipulated in the original agreement. (NASA, “NASA Extends Shuttle External Tank Contract with Lockheed Martin to September 2008,” news release c02-m, 12 June 2002.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 and the ISS installed the first Starboard truss segment, the S1 Truss, connecting it with the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Installation of the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long) S1 Truss was the mission’s main objective. Astronauts David A. Wolf and Piers J. Sellers accomplished the task during three spacewalks, with astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Sandra H. Magnus operating the ISS’s robotic arm to attach the S1 to the central truss segment, the S0 Truss. The astronauts also installed the Crew and Equipment Translation Aid, a cart that runs on rails along the top of the truss.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Install Girder on Space Station,” New York Times, 11 October 2002; NASA, “ISS Assembly Mission 9A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/structure/ iss_assembly_9a.html (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA announced the release of the first test images from the HST’s recently reactivated Near- Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS). The test images of galaxies in various stages of development included the NGC 4013 and the Cone Nebula galaxies. The NICMOS had remained inactive for three years, until the crew members of Space Shuttle Columbia STS-109 had installed a new cooling system for the instrument on 3 March 2002 as part of HST Servicing Mission 3B. The new NICMOS Cooling System (NCS) had been a joint project of NASA and the U.S. Air Force; NASA’s GSFC and the Creare Corporation had built the NCS.(NASA, “Hubble’s Infrared Camera Is Back in Business―New Images Released,” news release 02-104, 5 June 2002; NASA, “SM3B,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/missions/sm3b.php (accessed 17 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-111 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 5:22 p.m. (EDT). NASA had originally scheduled the mission to lift off on 30 May but had delayed the launch because of mechanical and weather concerns. The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell and astronauts Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, Valery G. Korzun, Paul S. Lockhart, Philippe Perrin, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson. Korzun, Treschev, and Whitson were also members of ISS Expedition 5, which was to remain at the ISS when Endeavour returned to Earth. STS-111 had several objectives. The Shuttle was transporting to the ISS the Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM), which contained racks for experiments, stowage, and resupply. The crew would also install a component called the Mobile Base System (MBS) to service the ISS’s robotic arm. Both the MPLM and the MBS were part of the payload of the mission, also designated ISS Utilization Flight 2. A further objective of the mission was to transport the crew of Expedition 5 to the ISS and to return the members of Expedition 4 to Earth.(NASA, “STS-111 (110),” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-111/mission-sts-111.html (accessed 17 August 2008); NASA, “STS-111: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-111/ (accessed 17 August 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs’ budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle,” news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post,” 16 May 2002.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the appointment of the team that would lead the new NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC), chartered in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance would assume oversight of the NESC. Based at NASA’s LaRC, the NESC would coordinate and conduct testing and safety assessments in support of critical NASA projects and programs. O’Keefe had charged Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. with assembling a team to get the Center up and running. O’Keefe remarked that Bridges had “assembled a dynamic group of recognized experts in the fields of engineering analysis and risk mitigation.” The group comprised new Director of the NESC Ralph R. Roe Jr., formerly Manager of the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office at NASA’s JSC; new Deputy Director Paul M. Munafo, formerly Manager of Materials, Processes and Manufacturing at NASA’s MSFC; and new Deputy Director of Safety J. Larry Crawford, formerly Director of Research Engineering at NASA’s DFRC. Roe’s appointment as Director of
Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASA’s plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, “Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, “Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives,” http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
In the CAIB’s second public hearing, expert witnesses discussed what they knew about the reentry of Space Shuttle Columbia on 1 February. William H. Ailor III, Director of the Center for Orbital and Reentry Debris Studies at the Aerospace Corporation, explained to the CAIB that part of the difficulty of deciphering the precise cause of the orbiter’s breakup was that space agencies had done little work over the past years in reconstructing spacecraft breakups. The lack of a systematic effort to retrieve debris from such incidents compounded the problem. R. Douglas White, Director for Operations Requirements, Orbiter Element Department for United Space Alliance, the prime contractor for NASA’s Space Shuttle Program, provided a “dramatic portrayal of Columbia’s troubled trajectory from orbit.” He drew attention to the behavior of Columbia’s aileron, the hinged control surface attached to the craft’s trailing edge, remarking that its behavior was a first indication that “something odd was happening to the space plane.” Paul Hill, Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Director at NASA’s JSC and leader of the team piecing together the still and video images of the Shuttle’s final minutes, told the CAIB about the work of the image analysts. Hill also expressed gratitude to the public for submitting amateur photographs and videos for analysis.(Leonard David, “Columbia Board Hearing: ‘Clues, Critical Events’ Destroyed on Reentry,” Space.com, 18 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030318.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
Senator John McCain (R-AZ), chair of the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, and U.S. Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY), chair of the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, cochaired a joint hearing of congressional leaders, focusing on the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. Recommendations resulting from the hearing prompted NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe to issue a second amendment to the charter of the Space Shuttle Accident Investigation Board, an independent panel led by retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr. and known as the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) or, informally, as the Gehman Board. The amendment removed any requirement, real or perceived, instructing Gehman to “coordinate or await approval from NASA for any dimension of the panel’s investigation.”(NASA, “Joint Congressional Hearing Results in Second Charter Amendment for Gehman Board Columbia Accident Briefing,” news release 03-069, 12 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03069.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched on STS-107 from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:39 a.m. (EST). NASA had postponed the launch, originally scheduled for July 2001, because of technical and scheduling problems. Flying an orbital mission, a rare event since the ISS partners had begun construction of the space station in 1998, STS-107 was a “pure research mission.” The crew would conduct scientific investigations in two 12-hour shifts each day in the laboratory module of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. The crew included Shuttle Commander Rick D. Husband; Pilot William C. McCool; Payload Commander Michael P. Anderson; Payload Specialist Ilan Ramon, Israel’s first astronaut and a fighter pilot with the rank of colonel in Israel’s Air Force; Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, an aerospace engineer originally from India; and Mission Specialists David M. Brown and Laurel B. Clark, both physicians. The launch occurred under exceptionally tight security with more than 300 dignitaries and guests from Israel in attendance.(Broward Liston for Reuters, “Space Shuttle Launches with First Israeli Astronaut,” 16 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “Columbia Takes Off Under Tight Security,” New York Times, 16 January 2003.)
NASA notified SPACEHAB Inc. that NASA had not renewed SPACEHAB’s contracts for building and maintaining the Space Vehicle Mockup Facility (SVMF), the facility with ISS mockups at NASA’s JSC, and for operating the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (NBL) facility, where astronauts simulate spacewalks in a swimming pool. Instead, NASA had awarded the multiyear contract, valued at up to US$78.97 million, to Raytheon Technical Services of Houston. SPACEHAB’s subsidiary Johnson Engineering had operated the NBL for approximately 10 years. In 1998 SPACEHAB had acquired Johnson Engineering and had continued to operate the NBL. SPACEHAB had depended on Johnson Engineering and the NBL/SVMF contract for about half of its US$100 million in annual revenues. The loss of the contract followed SPACEHAB’s loss of one of its major flight articles, the Research Double Module, a pressurized science facility that had made its debut during STS-107 on the ill-fated Space Shuttle Columbia. SPACEHAB had insured the module for only US$17.7 million of its US$62.7 million value. SPACEHAB expected to contract with NASA to fly additional modules, which would enable the company to recoup its investment in the hardware.(NASA, “NASA Buoyancy Laboratory, Space Vehicle Mockup Facility Contract Awarded,” news release, 7 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_c03004_bb_030207.html (accessed 16 July 2008); Brian Berger, “Double Whammy: Spacehab Loses NASA Contract,” Space News, 12 February 2003; Brian Berger, “$100 Million Commercial Science Lab Lost on Columbia Was Insured,” Space News, 2 February 2003.)
The CAIB held its final public hearing, moving its focus beyond the cause of the disaster to a probe of the overall state of NASA’s management. Witnesses identified several key weaknesses in NASA’s management of its personnel, which could have affected safety issues in the Space Shuttle Program. Allen Li of GAO, which had issued a report in 2001 about NASA workforce issues, noted that NASA had faced substantial challenges in attracting and retaining a highly skilled workforce. Therefore, key areas of NASA’s programs had an insufficient number of qualified workers, and the remainder of the staff showed signs of overwork and fatigue. In response to the 2001 report, NASA had developed new systems for monitoring such issues, and Li said that NASA had made noteworthy progress. However, NASA was still requesting congressional approval of personnel reforms that would help ameliorate the situation, reforms that would give NASA the authority to streamline the hiring process and the ability to offer larger recruitment and retention bonuses. Marcia S. Smith of the Congressional Research Service provided the CAIB with a history of NASA’s budget situation but remarked that the CAIB would have difficulty tying budgetary changes directly to safety issues and Shuttle operations. Russell D. Turner, the former CEO of the prime contractor for Shuttle operations, United Space Alliance, defended the work of the firms involved in the Space Shuttle Program.(Tom Shoop, “NASA Needs Management Overhaul, Shuttle Investigators Told,” Government Executive, 13 June 2003.)
NASA opened its inaugural annual Service Life Extension Program (SLEP) Summit at the NASA Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. SLEP was part of the new Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP) established to “ensure the viability of the Space Shuttle Program.” NASA intended the annual summit to provide a forum to aid the U.S. spaceflight community in shaping long-range strategy, setting priorities, and determining the selection and recommendation process to sustain the Shuttle system. In the wake of the Columbia tragedy, the summit also addressed return-to-flight issues in its first meeting. The summit brought together approximately 200 government and aerospace industry professionals who heard from seven SLEP panels: Safety, Sustainability, Infrastructure, Aerospace Industry, Performance, Operations, and Resources. Panels consolidated and submitted their recommendations to NASA’s Space Flight Leadership Council (SFLC), which then identified 60 candidate projects for further consideration and chartered a team to prepare an internal submission, which SLEP would vet over the summer, during NASA’s upcoming FY 2005 budget process. SLEP intended to refine its long-term strategy further at the following year’s summit.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Holds First Summit,” news release n03-030, 14 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_n03030.html (accessed 25 August 2008); NASA, “NASA Develops Long-Term Planning Process for Space Shuttle,” news release 03-119, 24 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03119.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named the commander, the pilot, and a mission specialist of the next Space Shuttle mission, even though NASA had not selected any dates for future Shuttle missions since the suspension of Shuttle flights following the Columbia disaster. O’Keefe said that NASA’s target to resume Shuttle flights was the end of the calendar year. O’Keefe said that the crew―Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of Japan’s NASDA―would be “challenged with the opportunity to be the first crew to return to flight.” O’Keefe said that the ISS partners would probably fill the other three slots with a three-member crew headed for the ISS.
NASA awarded its Kennedy Space Center Integrated Communications Services (KICS) contract, valued at approximately US$190.7 million, to InDyne Inc. of McLean, Virginia. Under the cost- plus-award fee/firm-fixed price, indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity contract, InDyne would provide communications services at NASA’s KSC in support of the Space Shuttle Program, ISS Program, Payload Carriers Program, and Launch Services Program Office payloads. The KICS contract was the first of five work packages in NASA’s space mission communications and data services solicitation, which succeeded the NASA consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) and incorporated the requirements of the visual information technical contract as well as the telephone service requirements of the outsourcing desktop initiative.(NASA, “First Contract in SMCDS Solicitation Awarded To InDyne, Inc.,” contract release c03-ff, 17 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_c03ff_indyne_contract.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
NASA’s Deputy Chief of Staff Scott Pace announced that NASA would not seek a waiver to the Iran Non-Proliferation Act of 2000 (Pub.L.No.106-178) The law prohibited NASA from purchasing space hardware from Russia unless Russia certified that Russian aerospace companies had not aided Iranian missile programs for at least a year. If the White House did not grant a waiver, NASA would be unable to buy Russian Progress and Soyuz vehicles―the United States’ only viable means of reaching the ISS after the suspension of Shuttle flights. Pace explained that NASA would not press the White House for a waiver, because NASA did not intend “to make foreign policy,” acknowledging that the White House or the U.S. Department of State was responsible for seeking changes in the Iran Non-Proliferation Act, if appropriate.(Brian Berger, “NASA Official: Agency Won’t Seek Waiver to Iran Act,” Space News, 20 February 2003.)
The CAIB questioned NASA flight managers and tank engineers about damage from launch debris―a key concern of the CAIB―during 4 hours of technical testimony at a public hearing. The CAIB sought to uncover why NASA officials had considered the recurrent problem of foam falling during launches a maintenance issue rather than a flight safety concern. NASA testimony included the description of the layers of checks, justifications, and paperwork required to certify a Shuttle for launch, as well as evidence of NASA engineers’ collective conviction that the shedding foam did not present a threat to flight safety and, therefore, was not a sufficient reason to cancel a launch. In October 2002, foam falling from the bipod area of its external tankthe area where two metal struts connect the fuel reservoir to the orbiterhad struck Space Shuttle Atlantis. The foam that had fallen from Space Shuttle Columbia striking its wing had come from the same area of Columbia’s external tank as the foam that had struck Atlantis. However, engineers and managers had examined Atlantis’s debris incident and had determined that falling foam did not present a safety-of-flight concern for Columbia. Nevertheless, because of the Atlantis incident, managers had requested that engineers responsible for the Shuttle’s external tank develop a plan to prevent debris from breaking away from the bipod area of the tank. Engineers had not completed the plan at the time of Columbia’s flight.(Todd Halvorson, “Engineers: Launch Debris Troublesome Since Start,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Foam Problem,” 8 April 2003.)
President George W. Bush signed into law an omnibus appropriations bill (Pub.L.No.108-7), setting aside US$50 million to help NASA fund its investigation of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster. Taking into account that NASA’s costs could exceed US$50 million to cover the investigation and to correct the problems with the Shuttle program, the law allowed NASA to seek additional funding if necessary. U.S. Senator Bill Nelson (D-FL) initiated discussion about the need for additional funding for the Columbia accident investigation, urging senior members of the Senate responsible for appropriations to include enough money to help NASA avoid further erosion of the already depleted Shuttle funds. The Challenger accident investigation had cost the United States US$75 million.(Frank Oliveri, “NASA Gets $50 Million for Shuttle Investigation,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 February 2003.)
NASA’s Galileo mission ended when the Galileo spacecraft disintegrated in Jupiter’s atmosphere. NASA had managed the course of the craft’s demise to prevent its becoming uncontrollable once it had depleted its propellant. Galileo had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1989, following multiyear delays―originally, NASA had planned for the craft to launch in 1982 aboard a Centaur rocket. The probe had made significant contributions to scientists’ knowledge of Jupiter and its moons, including collecting evidence of the possibility of life on Europa. Galileo had outlasted its prime mission by six years, despite enduring numerous technical problems and more than four times the amount of radiation that engineers had designed the spacecraft to withstand.(NASA JPL, “Galileo End of Mission Status,” news release, 21 September 2003, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=129 (accessed 2 February 2009); Usha Lee McFarling, “Stalwart Galileo Is Vaporized near Jupiter,” Los Angeles Times, 22 September 2003.)
The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post”; Stephen Clark, “Proton Lifts Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
After completing a 16-day orbital science mission that NASA judged a success, the crew of STS- 107 perished when Space Shuttle Columbia broke apart above Texas during reentry. NASA’s Mission Control lost communication with Columbia at 9:00 a.m. (EST) and immediately switched to the contingency plan to preserve all flight-activity information. NASA had scheduled the landing for 9:16 a.m. (EST). NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe issued a statement describing all the steps NASA had taken after the loss of the Shuttle. NASA officials had spoken with President George W. Bush and Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge; met with family members of the crew; assembled an internal mishap investigation team; and appointed a mishap investigation board. The board comprised an external group of people independent from NASA, charged with examining all the information that Mission Control had locked down when it lost communication with Columbia.(NASA, “NASA Statement on Loss of Communications with Columbia,” news release 03-030, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-030.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); NASA, “Statement by NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe,” news release 03-032, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-032.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); Washington Post, “The Columbia Catastrophe,” 2 February 2003.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
Four witnesses appeared before the CAIB at its first public hearing. Director of NASA’s JSC Jefferson D. Howell Jr. and Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore spoke about workforce issues, particularly, about NASA’s concern regarding the erosion of its skill base. Keith Chong, a senior scientist at the Boeing Company, discussed Boeing’s work on the foam insulation applied to large propellant tanks such as the Shuttle’s external tank and the Boeing Delta 4 booster. Henry McDonald, former Director of NASA’s ARC, discussed the Space Shuttle Independent Assessment Team (SIAT), which he had led before leaving NASA. The SIAT report had identified problems within the Shuttle program. McDonald expressed disappointment that NASA had not implemented some of the SIAT’s recommendations. He said that he believed some of the recommended improvements, such as modernized records, could have significantly influenced decisions that NASA had based on risk assessments.(Leonard David, “Columbia Accident Hearing Probes NASA Workforce Erosion, Shuttle Safety Issues,” Space.com, 6 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/caib_hearing_030306.html (accessed 29 August 2008); Matthew L. Wald, “NASA Records in Disarray, Study Leader Tells Board,” New York Times, 7 March 2003. 385 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593, 1 April 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx593.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Reuters, “Delta 4 Sends Up Its First U.S. Air Force Satellite,” 10 March 2003.)
NASA announced the resignation of Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore. A 26-year veteran of NASA, Dittemore had supervised the Space Shuttle Program for more than four years. Dittemore had joined NASA in 1977 as a propulsion-systems engineer, working on orbital maneuvering and reaction-control systems for the Space Shuttle before his selection as a Space Shuttle Flight Director in 1985. In 1993 NASA had appointed him Deputy Manager for the Space Shuttle Program Integration and Operations Office in the Space Shuttle Program Office. He had also served as Manager of Space Shuttle Program Integration and as Chairperson of the Space Shuttle Mission Management Team before his selection in 1996 to manage the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office. He had become Space Shuttle Program Manager in 1999, assuming responsibility for the overall management, integration, and operation of the program. In announcing his departure, Dittemore remarked that, before the Columbia tragedy, he had been struggling over whether to leave NASA and had decided to resign in the spring of 2003. However, after the Columbia accident, he had immediately postponed his departure. Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program Michael C. Kostelnik and NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe credited Dittemore with keeping communications open between NASA and the public in the wake of the tragedy. Dittemore planned to remain in his position until the CAIB had finished its work and established a return-to-flight program, to enable NASA to make a smooth management transition.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post,” news release 03-149, 23 April 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/apr/HP_news_03149.html (accessed 19 September 2008); Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Shuttle Director Dittemore To Leave NASA,” 23 April 2003.)
NASA announced the Level 1 requirements for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) system, the next- generation system of space vehicles designed to transport crews to and from the ISS and to provide rescue missions. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had proposed the concept in November 2002 “as a way to take some of the pressure off the aging space shuttle fleet.” NASA had envisioned a simple craft, easier to launch and with greater maneuverability in orbit. However, NASA had not intended the OSP system as a substitute for the Shuttle, the only U.S. spacecraft able to haul heavy cargo into space. The OSP concept was to include in its first design an escape pod for the ISS, ready for use by 2010. Its second version, intended for completion by 2012 would be a craft capable of transporting people.(NASA, “Initial Requirements Set for Orbital Space Plane System,” news release 03-073, 18 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03073.html (accessed 16 July 2008); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Views Space Plane as Helpmate to Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 February 2003.)
NASA released to the public recovered photographs and video that Columbia’s crew had taken during its mission in January. The CAIB had determined that the material was not relevant to their investigation into the Shuttle’s demise. The imagery included nearly 10 hours of recovered video and 92 photographs. The Shuttle had carried 337 videotapes, of which 28 had recoverable footage, and 137 rolls of film, of which only 21 contained recoverable photographs. Search-and- recovery crews had located more than 84,000 pieces of debris.(NASA, “New Space Shuttle Columbia Images Released,” news release 03-212, 24 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03212_columbia_images.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA awarded its Commercial Invention of the Year to the Video Image Stabilization and Registration System (VISAR) and its Government Invention of the Year to the Computer Implemented Empirical Mode Decomposition Method, also known as the Hilbert-Huang Transformation (HHT) Method. David H. Hathaway, a solar physicist, and Paul Meyer, an atmospheric scientist, both of NASA’s MSFC, had created the basis for the VISAR technology, which turns dark, jittery images into clearer stable images. NASA had developed VISAR in response to an FBI request for assistance. The FBI first used VISAR in 1996 to analyze video of the bombing at the Olympic Summer Games in Atlanta. At the time of the award, investigators were using VISAR to help isolate images collected during the launch of the ill-fated Space Shuttle Columbia, images that they were examining to locate possible damage to the orbiter. Norden E. Huang, Director of the Goddard Institute of Data Analysis at NASA’s GSFC, had invented the HHT Method, which had applications in a variety of fields. Researchers could use the HHT Method in the study of topics as diverse as climate cycles, earthquake engineering, geophysical exploration, submarine design, turbulence flow, basic nonlinear mathematics, satellite data analysis, structural damage detection, nonlinear wave evolution, variations in solar neutrinos, blood pressure variations, and heart arrhythmias. NOAA had used the HHT Method to analyze sea-surface temperature data collected by Earth-orbiting spacecraft, successfully linking environmental changes with weather changes.(NASA, “NASA Selects Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year,” news release 03-120, 26 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03120.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Brian Lawson, “ NASA Cites Two for Imaging Work: Invention Has Been Used To Help Law Enforcement Effort,” Huntsville Times (AL), 27 March 2003.)
NASA appointed two veteran astronauts―Apollo Commander Thomas P. Stafford and Space Shuttle Commander Richard O. Covey―to lead the task force assisting NASA’s return-to-flight team. The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), composed of distinguished experts and industry professionals representing a wide range of disciplines, would help the NASA team implement the CAIB’s findings following the release of its final report. Stafford, a retired Lieutenant General in the U.S. Air Force who had flown four missions during the Gemini and Apollo programs, had also chaired the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on ISS Operational Readiness. Covey, a retired U.S. Air Force Colonel, had piloted the 1988 Shuttle Mission STS-26, the first flight following the Challenger accident. He had also piloted Mission STS-51I in 1985 and had commanded STS-38 in 1990 and STS-61 in 1993.(NASA, “Former Apollo and Shuttle Commanders Lead Columbia Accident Report Task Force,” news release 03-196, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03196_covey_lead.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA launched a nationwide campaign to recruit elementary, middle, and high school classroom teachers for its astronaut corps, building on the legacy of its Teacher in Space Project of 1985. NASA had selected Christa McAuliffe and Barbara R. Morgan from among 12,000 applicants for the first project, which had ended tragically when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launching on 28 January 1986 with McAuliffe on board. McAuliffe’s backup Barbara R. Morgan had rejoined NASA in 1998 to train and qualify as a mission specialist. In December 2002, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had announced Morgan’s assignment to a November assembly mission to the ISS. NASA planned for the new recruitment campaign to extend the legacy of McAuliffe and the work of Morgan, making future educator- astronauts as much a part of the astronaut corps as test pilots, engineers, physicians, astronomers, geologists, and scientists from other disciplines. To accomplish this goal, NASA planned to train teachers with proven technical skills, making them eligible for missions ranging from 12-day Shuttle flights to months-long residencies aboard the ISS. Because of their ability to communicate with students in the classroom more effectively than traditional NASA astronauts, the educator-astronauts would be a critical part of an educational initiative to “make math and science as inspiring to youngsters as pop music and sports.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Seeking a Few Good Teachers,” Houston Chronicle, 22 January 2003.)
The NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT) presented to the CAIB the results of its ongoing analysis of the Columbia disaster. Ten members of the CAIB were either present or listening via telephone, and 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel participated in the private briefing. The CAIB indicated that the Space Shuttle Program required more work in four areas―aerothermal analysis, foam-impact testing, testing of flown RCC panels, and metallurgical analysis from debris. According to the CAIB, NAIT had “provided an overview of the latest data-recorder information, and the CAIB issued its guidance based on that data and board investigators’ continuing analysis of the latest orbiter debris.”(William Harwood, “NASA, CAIB Investigators Compare Notes on Disaster,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003. 424 Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Next Shuttle Crew Named as Columbia Probe Proceeds,” 25 April 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the members of the Space Shuttle Mishap Interagency Investigation Board, also known as the Gehman Board. To chair the Board, NASA had appointed retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr., who had cochaired the independent commission that investigated the attack on the USS Cole in Aden, Yemen, on 12 October 2000. Other members included Rear Admiral Stephen A. Turcotte of the U.S. Naval Safety Center; Major General John L. Barry of the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio; Major General Kenneth W. Hess of Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico; James N. Hallock of the U.S. Department of Transportation; Steven B. Wallace of the FAA; and Brigadier General Duane W. Deal of the 21st Space Wing at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado. Several senior- level NASA leaders were also named to the panel: G. Scott Hubbard, Director of NASA’s ARC; Bryan D. O’Connor, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance and a former astronaut; and Theron M. Bradley Jr., NASA’s Chief Engineer. NASA intended the Gehman Board to make a parallel investigation, complementing NASA’s own internal investigation. The Board would have access to the same scientific information and to the cooperation of the same agencies as NASA.(NASA, “NASA Announces Space Shuttle Columbia Accident Investigation Board (The Gehman Board),” news release 03-034, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-034.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); David Arnold, “Specialist Panel Convenes, Begins Search for Cause,” Boston Globe, 4 February 2003.)
Investigators of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident stated that the recently recovered Orbital Experiment Support System, which stored data about temperature, aerodynamic pressure, vibration, and other variables, appeared to contain information up to a fraction of a second before the orbiter broke apart over Texas. Technicians had located a time tag on the tape indicating that it had stored data until 9:00:18 a.m. (EST) on 1 February.
NASA announced that a two-year collaboration between researchers at Stanford University and NASA’s ARC had resulted in a successful test of an alternative paraffin-based rocket fuel intended to increase operational safety, reduce costs as compared to solid fuels, and, eventually, to provide the fuel in Space Shuttle booster rockets. The researchers had developed a nontoxic, easily handled fuel, producing as by-products carbon dioxide and water, rather than the aluminum oxide and acidic gases that conventional rocket fuel produces. Arif Karabeyoglu had led Stanford University’s contribution to the fuel research, developing the theory of a fast- burning, low-cost, paraffin-based fuel in his doctoral thesis, which Stanford and NASA had partially funded. The testing series had begun on 24 September 2001 at ARC’s Hybrid Combustion Facility, a heavy-duty test chamber capable of accommodating pressures of up to 60 atmospheres. The first phase of the testing program had consisted of approximately 40 runs.(NASA, “NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel,” news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
Progress M1-10 launched successfully from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying 2,400 kilograms (5,300 pounds) of fuel, canned food, water, oxygen, and equipment for scientific experiments to the ISS. Yuri P. Semyonov of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), the company leading Russia’s participation in the ISS, remarked that Progress M1-10 carried a supply of extra water because NASA had canceled all Shuttle flights in the wake of the Columbia disaster. The ISS Expedition 7 would have a staff of two, rather than three crew members―Russian Flight Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and U.S. Flight Engineer Edward T. Lu―to save fuel and water until Shuttle flights resumed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, “Russian Supply Vessel Docks with International Space Station,” 11 June 2003; Reuters, “Russian Rocket Sends Fuel, Food to Space Station,” 9 June 2003.)
The GAO presented testimony to the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space regarding the impact of the Shuttle fleet’s grounding on ISS construction and maintenance. Based on a GAO report published in September, a report that the full Senate committee had requested, GAO testified that the grounding of the Shuttle fleet would increase the cost of completing the ISS and could expose the station’s two-person crew to additional risk. NASA had originally estimated the cost of the ISS at US$10 billion, but since 1985, the U.S. Congress had appropriated US$32 billion to the project. The Bush administration had cancelled several planned ISS modules in 2001, to offset US$4 billion in cost overruns. Since the grounding of the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, several components of the station―completed and ready to launch―had reached their storage limit, necessitating their replacement or refurbishment. The inability to ferry heavy items to the ISS had hampered NASA’s ability to correct known safety concerns, such as the delivery of additional shielding to protect the ISS crew dormitory from orbital debris. Furthermore, NASA had estimated that the probability of space debris penetrating ISS living quarters increased by 1.6 percent for each year that the ISS partners postponed installing new shielding. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had requested the report from GAO. Members of Congress had repeatedly asked NASA to provide financial details about the effect of the Columbia accident on the ISS program. However, GAO’s September report stated that neither NASA nor GAO could accurately estimate the costs associated with the grounded Shuttle fleet. GAO testified that it would be able to make such an estimate once NASA had identified precisely when Shuttle flights would resume. NASA officials agreed with GAO’s findings.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Shuttle Fleet’s Safe Return to Flight is Key to Space Station Progress” (report no. GAO-04-201T, Washington, DC, 29 October 2003), 1–11, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04201t.pdf (accessed 8 May 2009); Marc Carreau, “Costs Up for Space Station, Report Says,” Houston Chronicle, 15 October 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Report: Shuttle’s Absence Hurts ISS, GAO Claims Station Is in ‘Survival Mode’,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 October 2003.)
NASA announced the selection of William W. Parsons Jr., Director of NASA’s SSC, to succeed Ronald D. Dittemore as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Dittemore had announced his resignation on 23 April. NASA appointed SSC Deputy Director Michael U. Rudolphi to serve as interim Director of SSC.(NASA, “NASA Selects New Space Shuttle Program Manager,” news release 03-164, 9 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HP_news_03164.html (accessed 2 December 2008); Michelle Krupa, “No 2 Man Takes Helm at Stennis Center: Ex-director Moves Up to Shuttle Position,” New Orleans Times- Picayune, 13 May 2003.)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
NASA released documents showing that the Columbia accident was not the first time that superheated gas had invaded an orbiter’s wing when it reentered Earth’s atmosphere. The documents showed that in 2000 Atlantis had entered orbit with a 0.25-inch (0.64-centimeter) breach in its wing’s leading edge, allowing plasma to enter the wing during the orbiter’s reentry. The incident had caused only minor damage. Improper insulation installation during Atlantis’s overhaul in 1997 had caused the gap to form. Instead of filling up the gap, the insulation had been “folded up and pushed away,” leaving an exposed cavity.(John Schwartz and Matthew L. Wald, “Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Gas Enter Wing on Return,” New York Times, 9 July 2003.)
department that advises senior managers about shuttle safety.” He explained that the links of engineering specialists with NASA’s Space Shuttle Program had apparently been too close to permit independent review of the condition of the orbiters. In addition, he said that NASA’s Safety Organization lacked sufficient personnel. Gehman testified that, although NASA’s Safety Organization appeared perfect on paper, the procedures lacked substance in reality. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, who appeared at Gehman’s side at the hearing, assured the Senate panel that NASA would hold its officials accountable, and that NASA would correct all faults in management that the CAIB identified. However, O’Keefe did not respond to Gehman’s criticism of NASA’s safety team.(Traci Watson, “Probe Slams NASA Safety,” USA Today, 15 May 2003; Nick Anderson, “NASA Is Chided for Faults in Safety Teams,” Los Angeles Times, 15 May 2003.)
Israeli scientists announced that, while traveling aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, astronaut Ilan Ramon had successfully captured images of smoke from a burning rain forest, a dust storm above the Mediterranean Ocean, and a small dust plume off the African coast over the Atlantic Ocean. Operating a twin-camera multispectral instrument in Columbia’s payload bay, Ramon had scanned dust and other aerosol particles, which storms had blown from deserts and high winds had carried across the globe. The instrument had also operated during the night, capturing images of the tops of thousands of thunderstorms. The team of scientists from Tel Aviv University’s Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) intended to use the images to develop a better understanding of climate change, one of the goals of Columbia’s research flight, which had encountered two years of delays. Joachim Joseph, a principal researcher on the project, remarked that the experiment had gathered “very good data, very unique data.” The purpose of the US$2 million experiment was to “provide a better understanding of how migrating dust plumes affect climate.” (NASA, “Shuttle’s Desert Dust Experiment Delivers,” news release N03-010, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/note2edt/2003/n03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2003); Associated Press, “Astronaut Photographs Dust Storm,” 31 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “ Space Shuttle Crew Completes Israeli Dust and Cloud Studies,” New York Times, 31 January 2003.)
NASA officials and a CAIB spokesperson stated that NASA had recovered intact, from a field in Texas, the Orbital Experiment Support System, an electronic box containing vital information from Space Shuttle Columbia’s descent. NASA had designed the system to activate at about 400,000 feet, when Earth’s atmosphere first affects the Shuttle. The box contained data that the Shuttle had not transmitted to NASA’s Mission Control via telemetry.(CNN, “Crucial Columbia Part Found,” 20 March 2003.)
CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. and NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe appeared before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation to discuss NASA’s return-to-flight goals in light of the CAIB’s findings. Committee members criticized the CAIB for its reluctance to assign individual blame within NASA for the Columbia disaster, but Gehman replied that the Board did not need to make judgments about individual accountability. O’Keefe added that NASA would have held individuals accountable only if someone had acted maliciously in the sequence of events that led to the loss of Columbia. O’Keefe also pointed out that all former members of the Shuttle team had either left their positions, or NASA had reassigned them. Gehman testified that the decisions and conditions that had led to the loss of the orbiter had begun years before, stating that Congress and the White House shared responsibility with NASA for creating the conditions responsible for the accident. Congress and the White House had reduced NASA’s budget by 40 percent over the previous decade, affecting the operation of NASA’s management system. When committee members asked whether NASA required additional funding for 2004, O’Keefe responded that the current budget did not cover some of the CAIB’s recommended activities, such as establishing an independent authority to oversee Space Shuttle technical requirements, recertifying the orbiters, and accelerating the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program. Committee members asked for O’Keefe’s assurance that NASA would change its culture, implementing processes that would prevent future Shuttle accidents.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Senators Rip NASA over Columbia Probe,” 4 September 2003; Brian Berger, “Lawmakers Press O’Keefe for Cost Figures,” Space News, 4 September 2003.)
NASA announced that it had settled negotiations with United Space Alliance, increasing the value of its two-year extension of the spaceflight operations contract (SFOC) by US$59.91 million. The finalized SFOC extension supporting the Space Shuttle Program brought the total value of the two-year contract to US$2.90 billion. The extended contract would run through 30 September 2004.(NASA, “NASA Finalizes Contract with United Space Alliance,” news release C03-001, 31 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/contract/2003/c03-001.txt (accessed 15 July 2008).)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced an agreement between NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which provided for NIMA to capture detailed satellite images of Space Shuttles in orbit. NASA had sought this agreement with NIMA because of critics’ “pointed questioning” of NASA’s decision not to capture satellite images that it could have used to check for damage to Columbia’s heat shields while the Shuttle was in orbit. The agreement would enable NASA to “employ NIMA assets during targets of opportunity” without requiring NASA to make a specific request for imaging. Before the disaster, NASA had turned down a NIMA offer to capture images of Columbia, and NASA officials had withdrawn an unofficial request for U.S. Air Force telescopes to capture images. O’Keefe stated that the agreement did not represent any NASA decision “about whether those images might have helped determine damage” to Columbia.(Associated Press, “Military To Capture Future Shuttle Flight Images,” 29 March 2003. 123)
Harold W. Gehman Jr. delivered the CAIB’s final report to NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, presenting its findings and recommendations. The CAIB found that a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam insulation, traveling at more than 500 miles (804.6 kilometers) per hour, had damaged Columbia’s wing during launch, ultimately leading to its disintegration during reentry. The report stated that management decisions during Columbia’s flight reflected missed opportunities, ineffective communication channels, flawed analysis, and ineffective leadership. When cameras tracking Columbia provided two grainy images showing the foam striking the wing, engineers had immediately begun to discuss obtaining further images of the Shuttle or initiating a spacewalk to check for damages. However, mission managers had “adjourned for a holiday weekend and did not discuss the foam strike.” Upon returning to work on 21 January, the managers had assessed the strike as a postlanding maintenance problem, because smaller foam strikes had left harmless dents in Shuttles during all previous missions. The CAIB’s Executive Director John L. Barry remarked that, among NASA’s competing goals of maintaining costs and meeting schedules, safety had lost out. The Board directly criticized Administrator Sean O’Keefe for increasing pressure to meet a February 2004 launch deadline, thereby creating a pattern similar to that which had led to the Challenger disaster in 1986. The CAIB recommended that NASA implement 15 actions before the next Shuttle flight, including creating an independent safety-and-engineering organization to help establish satisfactory safety margins. Upon receiving the Board’s final report, O’Keefe reiterated NASA’s intention to comply fully with the recommendations.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Accepts Columbia Accident Report,” news release 03-276, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03276_AOK_Acpt_CAIB.html (accessed 29 December 2008); Mark Carreau, “Columbia Accident Board Casts Wide Net of Blame,” Houston Chronicle, 27 August 2003; Kathy Sawyer and Eric Pianin, “Report Blames Flawed NASA Culture for Tragedy,” Washington Post, 27 August 2003. 504 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Justin Ray, “Resupply Ship Bound for the International Space Station,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2003.)
A panel of five retired NASA and contractor managers, whose expertise dated to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs, testified in a public hearing before the CAIB that engineers had never designed orbiters’ wings to sustain strikes from any form of debris. The panel members agreed that engineers had known in the 1970s that the RCC panels along the leading edge of the orbiters’ wings presented a technical challenge, and that NASA should have taken appropriate precautions against debris striking the RCC panels. Milton A. Silveira, who had helped design the orbiter, remarked that wings of airplanes were also incapable of sustaining such strikes. Robert F. Thompson, another designer of the orbiter, who had headed the Space Shuttle Program in the 1970s, added that providing an impenetrable wing edge was impossible. According to Thompson, if NASA had insisted on that standard, it would have had to abandon the Shuttle project. Diane Vaughn, a sociologist affiliated with Boston College, who in 1996 had published the book The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture and Deviance at NASA, spoke to the panel about NASA’s approach to risk-management and decision-making systems. Vaughn observed that NASA had failed to address institutional problems present at the time of the Challenger disaster, and that as a result, NASA decision-makers had remained unable to access the type of data they needed to assess risk accurately and to act on that knowledge.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Pioneers Testify on Shuttle Columbia Tragedy,” 24 April 2003; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Mistakes Will Repeat Without Changes, Board Told,” Washington Post, 24 April 2003.)
NASA released an 84-page report, “Implementation Plan for the International Space Station Continuing Flight,” detailing NASA’s plans to improve exterior inspections of the ISS and to shield the station from debris strikes, while continuing to maintain a crew aboard the ISS during the disruption of Space Shuttle flights. Before the Columbia accident, Space Shuttle crews visiting the ISS had routinely photographed the exterior of the station; NASA expressed concern that in the absence of Shuttle flights, external damage would go undetected. The report outlined plans to conduct thorough inspections of external surfaces of the ISS using external cameras and classified satellite images, as well as to inspect more closely the wiring and equipment inside the station.(Patty Reinert, “Armed with Lessons, NASA Outlines Safer Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 November 2003; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “NASA: Space Station Safety Can Be Better,” 7 November 2003.)
For the first time, NASA quantified the costs related to the loss of the Shuttle, stating that, in the six months since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, it had spent US$152.4 million to conduct the investigation and recover debris. The figure included US$111.9 million for NASA to support the CAIB’s inquiry with research and analysis, including the expensive high-speed, foam-impact tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, which had provided evidence that foam striking Columbia after lift off had caused the hole in the left wing. NASA had spent US$18.7 million to fund the 13-member investigative board, paying the salaries of the five civilian members, office rent, travel expenses, and the expense of holding public hearings and maintaining the CAIB’s Web site. NASA had also spent US$21.8 million recovering debris from the Columbia accident, compared to the US$30 million it had spent salvaging pieces of Challenger. Shortly after the tragedy, the U.S. Congress had approved US$50 million to cover expenses, and it was considering a supplemental appropriation of US$50 million. John Scofield, spokesperson for the House Committee on Appropriations, remarked that nobody had criticized NASA’s spending, because nobody wanted to do the necessary work “on the cheap.” Scofield added that the committee was conducting its own analysis to confirm that NASA had correctly estimated its expenditures, but that Congress would likely reimburse NASA for much of the cost. NASA had spent a total of US$62 million (adjusted for inflation) to investigate the 1986 explosion of Challenger.
In its first launch since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in February, NASA launched its Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) research satellite aboard a Pegasus XL rocket released from an L-1011 cargo plane that had flown out of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. GALEX carried a telescope measuring 19.7 inches (50 centimeters) in diameter, designed to provide a wide-angle view of the ultraviolet light that distant galaxies emit. NASA had planned the mission, which would survey the light emitted by a million galaxies over 28 months, to learn more about galaxies dominated by hot, short-lived stars that give off a great deal of energy as ultraviolet light. The mission cost US$103.7 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Associated Press, “NASA in 1st Launch Since Columbia Breakup,” 28 April 2003. 427 Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “BeppoSAX Satellite Falls Harmlessly into Ocean,” 30 April 2003.)
NASA issued new safety standards for future space vehicles, such as the proposed Orbital Space Plane (OSP) and next-generation launch systems, requiring crew-escape systems and methods of aborting launches. Earlier, NASA had rejected recommendations for the proposed systems as too impractical or expensive for the existing Space Shuttle fleet. The new standards represented NASA’s effort to provide “maximum reasonable assurance” that, in the future, mission failures would not automatically endanger the crew. The standards, known as the Human-Rating Requirements and Guidelines for Space Flight Systems, stipulated that NASA would design future spacecraft to allow the crew to escape quickly during prelaunch procedures and to abort the mission or to effect an emergency escape during ascent.(Eric Pianin, “New Standards Are Issued for Space Vehicle Safety,” Washington Post, 18 July 2003.)
The CAIB released its first two official recommendations, suggesting that before resuming Shuttle missions, NASA should 1) improve its inspections of the leading edge of the orbiters’ wings, and 2) ensure that U.S. spy satellites would capture detailed images of the orbiters during each mission. Although the Board had not yet begun developing its final report, the CAIB released preliminary recommendations so that NASA could begin to implement them expeditiously. The CAIB made the first recommendation because it had found that inspection techniques in place did not enable engineers to assess the structural integrity of the orbiter’s heat shield, considered a “criticality one” item. The failure of the heat shieldcomprising the reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC) panels that protect the front of the orbiter’s wings during reentry, the RCC panels’ supporting structure, and the attaching hardwarewould lead to the loss of the vehicle and crew. The CAIB made the second recommendation because it had discovered that NASA officials had cancelled an informal request that the U.S. military capture images of Columbia to check for possible damage caused by launch debris. NASA already had a new memorandum of agreement with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) to provide NASA with images of orbiting Shuttles. Previously, NIMA had only made images available upon request, but the CAIB recommended that NASA and NIMA make imaging each Shuttle flight a standard requirement.(Jim Banke, “Columbia Board Releases Two Recommendations to NASA,” Space.com, 17 April 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030417.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of James W. Kennedy as the new Director of NASA’s KSC, effective 10 August, succeeding Roy D. Bridges Jr. On 13 June, NASA had appointed Bridges to lead NASA’s LaRC. Kennedy had served as KSC’s Deputy Director since November 2002 and, before that, he had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Kennedy had also served as Project Manager for the X-34 and DC-XA initiatives and had led KSC’s OneNASA effort to coordinate teamwork across all field centers. He had managed MSFC’s Space Shuttle Projects Resident Office at KSC in 1996, returning to MSFC later that year to manage the Solid Rocket Booster Project. In 1998 he had become Deputy Director of Science and Engineering and, one year later, Director of Engineering. In those positions, he had established and maintained a nationally recognized research and development capability in space research and technology.(NASA, “James W. Kennedy Named Director, NASA KSC,” news release 03-217, 26 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03217_Kennedy_KSC.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Kelly Young, “Kennedy Takes Over KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 June 2003.)
NASA released its first preliminary return-to-flight plan, briefing reporters at JSC in Houston, Texas. The 158-page report, which Associate Administrator William F. Readdy called “an evolving document,” indicated that 11 March 2004 was the earliest possible date for a Space Shuttle to return to flight. However, Readdy emphasized that NASA would be safety-driven, not schedule-driven, in its efforts to launch the first Shuttle to fly since the Columbia disaster. NASA had tentatively scheduled Atlantis for a launch between 11 March and 6 April 2004. In the preliminary plan, NASA indicated that it had changed Atlantis’s original mission of ferrying supplies and a new crew to the ISS. Instead, the mission would be a developmental flight during which the crew would test the new procedures and safety equipment that the CAIB had recommended. Although the ISS would still be Atlantis’s destination, the mission would not carry ISS replacement crew. NASA’s Space Shuttle Program Manager William W. Parsons Jr. said that the greatest challenges for future Shuttle missions would be developing methods to minimize the shedding of foam from the orbiter’s external tank and to repair tile and protective heat panels while in space. In addition, NASA would have to install cameras and sensors on the Shuttles and on the ISS robotic arms, to detect vehicle damage.(John Schwartz and Warren E. Leary, “NASA Says It Won’t Rush Shuttle Back to Space,” New York Times, 9 September 2003.)
NASA’s ARC in Mountain View, California, closed three wind tunnels until the end of FY 2003 because of budget cuts, fewer defense contracts, and the increased use of computer simulations. NASA reported that, unless it received major contracts from the DOD or from the private sector within a year from October 2003, ARC would close the wind tunnels permanently. Two of the wind tunnels, the largest and second-largest wind tunnels in the world, had operated for nearly six decades, testing dozens of aircraft and spacecraft, including Korean War–era fighter planes, helicopters, and the Space Shuttle. The largest wind tunnel, known as “80 by 120” in reference to its height and width, was the only wind tunnel in the world that could accommodate full-size aircraft. With the closure of the three tunnels, ARC dismissed 23 contractors and reassigned 23 employees, changes that would save ARC US$12 million per year in operational costs.(Joshua L. Kwan, “NASA/Ames Center Shuts Wind Tunnels,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 19 May 2003.)
The Partnership for Public Service announced the results of the first survey measuring employee satisfaction in the federal government, conducted several months before the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. The survey results ranked NASA first, overall, among 28 major government agencies; NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, ranked first, and its JSC in Houston, Texas, ranked second, among 200 smaller divisions. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe attended a news conference to publicize the results of the survey, describing the findings as a “proud day” for NASA. O’Keefe remarked that, although NASA was in the midst of working through the tragedy of the Columbia accident, the survey results established that NASA had a “very good foundation upon which to work.”(Mark Carreau and Megh Duwati, “Federal Employees Rate NASA Tops,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2003; Jeffrey McMurray for the Associated Press, “Huntsville Space Center Named Best Federal Place To Work,” 12 November 2003; David Lerman, “Study: It’s Good To Be at NASA Langley,” Hampton Roads Daily Press (VA), 13 November 2003.)
NASA announced the names of three additional members of the crew of the Space Shuttle Program’s Return to Flight Mission STS-114. In 2001 NASA had named four astronauts to STS- 114―Mission Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of JAXA. The four were already training for the flight, scheduled to launch no earlier than September 2004. Astronauts Andrew S. W. Thomas, Wendy B. Lawrence, and Charles J. Camarda rounded out the mission’s crew of seven. NASA had originally planned for STS-114 to have a seven-member crew, but in the wake of the Columbia accident, NASA had changed the mission objective to focus on testing and evaluating new procedures for flight safety, rather than on ISS logistics and crew rotation. Thomas and Lawrence were veteran astronauts―Thomas was the second-highest-ranking member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, and Lawrence had flown on the Shuttle three times. Camarda was a rookie making his first orbital flight. NASA had assigned Robinson and Noguchi to conduct spacewalks on the flight.(NASA, “NASA Names Crew Members for Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” 7 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03360_STS_114_crew.html (accessed 5 February 2003); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Veterans, Rookie Fill Return-to-Flight Shuttle Crew,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 November 2003; Jim Banke, “NASA Names Additional Crew for Return to Flight Mission,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts114_ crew_)
Alex Roland, a history professor at Duke University and former NASA historian, and Brian E. Chase, Executive Director of the National Space Society and a former congressional aide, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space concerning problems in NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. Roland stated that the Shuttle was not sustainable as a safe, reliable, and economical launch vehicle and recommended its phaseout. Roland faulted NASA for ignoring the findings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission), which had paved the way for the Shuttle to return to flight after the Challenger disaster in 1986. The Rogers Commission had recommended that NASA begin developing a next-generation launch vehicle immediately. However, 16 years later, NASA continued to rely on the Space Shuttle and had no replacement in sight. Chase recommended the short-term maintenance of the remaining Shuttles and endorsed the George W. Bush administration’s plan to develop an Orbital Space Plane (OSP) ready to transport crews to the ISS by 2010. He also recommended that NASA use commercial heavy-lift launch vehicles for hauling cargo to the space station.(Jefferson Morris, “Former NASA Historian Urges Phaseout of Shuttle,” Aerospace Daily, 4 April 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Experts Disagree on Future of Shuttle,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 April 2003.)
Maxime A. Faget, who had contributed to the designs of every U.S. spacecraft built to transport humans from Mercury to the Space Shuttle, passed away at age 83 in Houston, Texas. Born on 26 August 1921 in British Honduras, Faget had graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering from Louisiana State University in 1943. He had begun his career with NASA in 1946 as a research scientist at the NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia. In 1958 he had joined the Space Task Group―later, NASA’s JSC―where he had helped to design the spacecraft for the Mercury project and had led a team studying the feasibility of a lunar mission. Faget had also worked on the original feasibility study for the Space Shuttle, later contributing to the development of the Shuttles. After retiring from NASA in 1981, Faget had helped found Space Industries Incorporated, a private space company that had developed a Shuttle project for processing material in a near-perfect vacuum.(NASA, “Legendary Spacecraft Designer Dr. Maxime A. Faget Dies at 83,” news release 04-350, 10 October 2004.)
Major media reported details of a NASA internal document, which stated that a proposed plan to use the ISS as a safe haven for Space Shuttle astronauts would likely have a high risk of failure. The NASA document was a response to a proposal that the ISS should temporarily house the Shuttle crew if a problem arose that prevented an orbiting Shuttle from returning its crew to Earth safely. In the internal document, NASA objected that the ISS had neither sufficient supplies nor support systems to keep both ISS and Shuttle crew members alive longer than a few months. NASA officials responded to the publication of the document, stating that the provisional contingency plan had been one of many ideas considered for improving Space Shuttle safety.(John Schwartz, “NASA Rescue Plan Is Reported To Have High Risk of Failure,” New York Times, 9 July 2004.)
Thomas Q. Donaldson replaced Michael U. Rudolphi as Director of NASA’s SSC. Donaldson had previously served as Commander of the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command headquartered at SSC. Rudolphi had served as interim Director of SSC since May 2003 but had left the Center in December 2003 to become Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office at NASA’s MSFC.(NASA, “Stennis Space CenterMichael U. Rudolphi,” http://www.nasa.gov/centers/stennis/about/ history/personalities/rudolphi.html (accessed 11 January 2009); NASA, “Stennis Space CenterRear Admiral)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and families of the Space Shuttle Columbia crew unveiled a commemorative monument for the Columbia crew at Arlington National Cemetery. The crew had died when Columbia broke apart during reentry into Earth’s atmosphere on 1 February 2003. The marble monument was 66 inches (1.7 meters) tall, 48 inches (1.2 meters) wide, and bore two bronze plaques portraying the crew and the shoulder patch they had worn on the mission.(NASA, “NASA Dedicates Space Shuttle Columbia Memorial,” news release 04-049, 2 February 2004.)
NASA released pieces of the debris from Space Shuttle Columbia to a nongovernmental agency for study and testing. The release of the materials was the first implementation of NASA’s new policy for the use of materials from a destroyed Space Shuttle. Henceforth, instead of burying Space Shuttle materials, as it had done after the Challenger accident, NASA would use materials from destroyed Space Shuttles for research. The company that received the partsthe Aerospace Corporation of El Segundo, Californiawas one of several organizations that had requested NASA’s permission to study Columbia’s debris. Under the terms of the release, the company would keep the Shuttle parts for one year, using them to analyze the effect of atmospheric reentry on materials.(NASA, “First Columbia Debris Loaned for Research,” news release 04-165, 20 May 2004; James R. Asker, “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 22 (31 May 2004): 19.)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the station’s management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASA’s other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISS’s hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the station’s operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the station’s exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program,” New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Safety Problems Noted,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
NASA’s Space Flight Leadership Council (SFLC), which was overseeing NASA’s efforts to resume Shuttle flights, announced that NASA would not launch another Space Shuttle before March 2005. NASA had delayed a Shuttle launch because of a new requirement that launches occur during daylight hours, to enable photographing the liftoff from multiple angles. Because of the limited number of days available in which a launch could take place in daylight, the next Shuttle launch could occur no earlier than March 2005. In addition, NASA announced that, when Shuttle launches recommenced, one Shuttle would function as a standby rescue vehicle in case the Shuttle carrying the crew sustained damage during flight. NASA announced that, although rescue vehicles would not necessarily be positioned on the launchpad, they would be ready for launch within 45 to 90 days, the maximum length of time that seven astronauts could survive on the ISS before their supplies ran out.(NASA, “NASA Updates Space Shuttle Return to Flight Plans,” news release n04-065, 19 February 2004; Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Won’t Fly Before March Next Year,” New York Times, 20 February 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
NASA awarded a US$814 million contract to Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International (HSSSI) to provide equipment and services supporting spacewalks performed by Space Shuttle and ISS crew members. Under the contract―formally called the Extravehicular Activity (EVA) Systems Contract―Hamilton Sundstrand would provide EVA hardware, training support, real- time mission support, and other products and services related to spacewalks. The contract had a five-year base period and five additional one-year options.
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe presented the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to the families of the crew members of Space Shuttle Challenger. O’Keefe presented the honor in the name of the U.S. Congress and on behalf of President George W. Bush. The seven astronauts on board Challenger had died when the Shuttle exploded soon after launching on 28 January 1986.(NASA, “Challenger Crew Honored with Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” news release S04-238, 23 July 2004.)
Former astronaut Robert D. Cabana became Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Brock R. Stone, who had retired after a 36-year career with NASA. Cabana had previously served on four Space Shuttle missions and in many management positions supporting the Astronaut Office and the ISS Program. Before becoming Deputy Director of JSC, Cabana had served as Director of Flight Crew Operations. NASA had appointed former astronaut Kenneth D. Bowersox to fill that position.(NASA JSC, “NASA Fills Key Space Flight Positions,” news release I-I04-080, 3 March 2004.)
The National Research Council (NRC) issued a report outlining recommendations for servicing the HST. The issue of servicing the HST had initiated a public discussion in January 2004, when NASA had decided to cancel a Shuttle mission to service the HST because of concern for astronaut safety. The debate had erupted again after April 2004, when NASA had announced that it would conduct an unpiloted servicing mission for the HST. In response to criticism for those decisions, NASA had requested that the NRC evaluate servicing options for the HST. The NRC recommended that NASA service the HST using a piloted Shuttle mission, because a robotic mission would be too complex for NASA to complete before 2007, when NASA anticipated that the HST’s machinery would wear out. According to the guidelines recommended by the CAIB, astronauts would be able to service the HST by 2007. The NRC also reported that, if NASA carefully planned and conducted the piloted Shuttle mission, the mission would be far more likely to extend the telescope’s operational life at a relatively lower cost.(Guy Gugliotta, “Astronauts Acceptable, Panel Says,” Washington Post, 9 December 2004; National Research Council, Assessment of Options for Extending the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope: Final Report (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2005).)
As part of its first efforts to meet the objectives of President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, NASA awarded contracts to 11 companies to provide research on human lunar exploration and the development of a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. The Vision for Space Exploration called for NASA to engage in human and robotic exploration of the solar system and regions beyond. NASA awarded three contracts of approximately US$1 million each to Raytheon, Science Applications International Corporation, and the SPACEHAB Corporation for preliminary studies of human lunar exploration. An additional eight companies―Andrews Space, The Boeing Company, Draper Labs, Lockheed Martin, Northrup Grumman, Orbital Sciences Corporation, Schafer, and Transformational Space Corporation―received contracts of approximately US$3 million to conduct preliminary research on human lunar exploration and on the development of a new crewed exploration vehicle.
NASA’s MSFC and KSC provided law enforcement agencies with analysis of video and imagery relevant to their investigation of the abduction of an 11-year-old girl in Sarasota, Florida. When law enforcement officials asked the two centers to examine security camera footage showing the girl’s abduction by an unknown individual, MSFC provided assistance using its Video Image Stabilization and Registration System (VISAR), an image-stabilization software program developed for space program research. KSC examined the security camera footage using its Image Analysis Facility, which NASA had developed for visual analysis of Space Shuttle launches. Although this was not the first time that the two centers had assisted law enforcement in this manner, the case garnered major press coverage throughout the United States.(NASA, “NASA Technology Helps Investigators in Florida Abduction Case,” news release 04-055, 5 February 2004; Fred Barbash, “Fla. Police Find Body of Abducted Girl,” Washington Post, 7 February 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, O’Keefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
The GAO released an analysis of NASA’s budgetary outlays for fiscal years 2002 through 2004. Under Pub. L. No. 106-391, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000, GAO was required to verify NASA’s accounting of its funds obligated against established budgetary limits for the ISS and for Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the Act, NASA’s obligations were limited to US$25 billion for the ISS and US$17.7 billion for Shuttle support. GAO’s report noted that NASA had not provided sufficient documentation for the amounts it had reported as obligated against budgetary limits. Thus, GAO could not verify the amounts that NASA had reported to Congress in its budget requests for fiscal years 2002 through 2004. Similarly, NASA had not reported any documentation of its FY 2004 budget obligations in its FY 2005 budget request to Congress. NASA officials acknowledged that NASA’s accounting system presented some difficulties for GAO’s auditors, but explained that those difficulties were the result of NASA’s having reported budgetary figures based on the amount it was authorized to spend rather than on the amount it was obligated to spend.(Patty Reinert, “GAO Says Lax Bookkeeping Thwarts Space Agency Audit,” Houston Chronicle, 7 April 2004; U.S. General Accounting Office, “International Space Station and Shuttle Support Cost Limits” (report no. GAO- 04-648R, Washington, DC, 2 April 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04648r.pdf (accessed 19 March 2009). 623 British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2” (report, ESA/UK Commission of Inquiry Swindon, UK, 5 April 2004), http://www.bnsc.gov.uk/assets/channels/resources/press/report.pdf (accessed 31 March 2009), 3–7; ESA, “Beagle 2: Lessons Learned and the Way Forward,” ESA news release 27-2004, 20 May 2004.)
Engineers at NASA’s SSC successfully completed the first test of the redesigned Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME). NASA planned to use the redesigned SSME in the first Shuttle mission after the Columbia tragedy―the mission that NASA often called the Return to Flight Mission. The test of the SSME lasted for 520 seconds, the amount of time a Space Shuttle requires to reach orbit. Each Space Shuttle has three SSMEs―reusable rocket engines capable of generating 400,000 pounds (181,000 kilograms) of thrust.(NASA, “Engineers Test the First Engine for NASA’s Return to Flight Mission,” news release 04-231, 19 July 2004.)
Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASA’s JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSC’s Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASA’s JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, “Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director,” Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, “NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy,” news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
NASA announced its findings concerning how and why a piece of insulation had separated from a fuel tank on Space Shuttle Columbia, an event that had later contributed to Columbia’s destruction upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. According to NASA official William F. Readdy, NASA had determined that extremely cold fuel had liquefied air or nitrogen, which subsequently had seeped into a portion of the foam or had collected on nuts and bolts below the foam, eventually expanding and explosively jettisoning a piece of the foam. The foam had shot from the fuel tank, hitting the orbiter and creating a large―and ultimately fatal―gash in its left wing. Before the Columbia tragedy, engineers had believed that when the fuel tanks shed foam, it fell away from the body of the orbiter. Readdy stated that NASA had redesigned the fuel tanks and improved techniques for applying the foam to remedy the problem that had caused the accident to Columbia.(Warren E. Leary, “Repairs and Need for Rescue Craft Pushed Back Shuttle Timetable, NASA Says,” New York Times, 21 February 2004.)
The GAO released its assessment of NASA’s efforts to upgrade the Space Shuttle fleet in the wake of the Columbia tragedy. NASA planned to implement the recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, as well as those of its own Space Shuttle Service Life Extension Program (SLEP). The GAO report stated that before NASA determined the upgrade requirements and priorities for the Shuttles, it should first determine the Shuttles’ operational life and the requirements for meeting the objectives of the Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP). Before the announcement of the new Vision for Space Exploration, the ISTP had encompassed the space policy of the United States. However, GAO noted that the establishment of President Bush’s new Vision for Space Exploration, which formally changed the duration of operations for both the Space Shuttles and the ISS, had largely invalidated the recommendations offered in GAO’s assessment.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Shuttle: Further Improvements Needed in NASA’s Modernization Efforts” (report no. GAO-04-203, Washington DC, 15 January 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04203.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
An independent panel of experts provided its interim assessment of NASA’s efforts to meet the CAIB’s requirements for resuming Space Shuttle flights. NASA had chartered the Stafford- Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) to assess independently its implementation of the CAIB’s preflight recommendations―mandatory for NASA’s resuming Space Shuttle flights. The 26-member Task Group, headed by former astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, stated that it had approved NASA’s compliance plans for eight of the CAIB’s 15 requirements. The task force did not see any major obstacles to NASA’s resuming Shuttle flights by May or June of 2005. The Task Group also noted, however, that NASA continued to have difficulty developing methods to repair the exterior heat tiles and thermal-resistant carbon-fiber material damaged during Shuttle flights.(Warren E. Leary, “Panel Sees Shuttle Flights Resuming Soon,” New York Times, 17 December 2004.)
An independent panel of experts released an interim assessment of NASA’s progress implementing recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB). The U.S. Congress had chartered the group―formally called the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG)―to provide independent evaluations of NASA’s progress in meeting the CAIB’s recommendations. The CAIB had enumerated safety and operational practices that NASA must implement before resuming Space Shuttle flights. In its interim assessment, the Task Group stated that NASA had successfully implemented two of the CAIB’s recommendations: to define foreign-object debris and to create computer-accessible digital images of Shuttle hardware, taken at various stages of development and launch preparation. The Task Group would assess NASA’s progress toward satisfying the other CAIB recommendations in future reports.(NASA, “Stafford-Covey Task Group Announces July 22 Public Meeting,” news release N04-108, 19 July 2004; NASA, “Statement of Sean O’Keefe, Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Before the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, United States Senate” (statement of testimony, Washington, DC, 8 September 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf64686main_aok_/ 64686main_aok_ testimony_090804.pdf (accessed 28 April 2009).)
NASA announced its approval of a new design of the particular part of the Space Shuttle that may have critically contributed to Space Shuttle Columbia’s accident. The part―called a bipod fitting―connects a Shuttle’s external fuel tanks to the orbiter during launch. The newly designed bipod fitting eliminated the use of foam covering in favor of four rod-shaped heaters, reducing the risk of falling debris during launch. Investigators believed that the Columbia disaster might have resulted from the impact of insulating foam, which had fallen from the bipod fitting, damaging the orbiter’s left wing. According to NASA, the approval of the redesigned bipod fitting was a significant step in its efforts to resume safe Shuttle flights. Engineers would begin using the new fitting on the external tanks for the next Space Shuttle mission.(NASA, “NASA Approves New Design for Shuttle External Tank Fitting,” news release 04-240, 26 July 2004.)
The National Research Council (NRC) issued a report calling for NASA to send a Space Shuttle mission to service the HST. The report challenged Administrator Sean O’Keefe’s earlier decision that NASA would not conduct a Shuttle servicing mission for the HST because of potential safety risks. According to the NRC report, if NASA did not service the orbiting telescope, it would eventually become dysfunctional and fall out of orbit. Although the report acknowledged that a Shuttle mission would pose some risks for astronauts, the NRC stated that the scientific value of continuing HST operations merited a mission, both to maintain the orbiting telescope and to upgrade its components. The report recommended that NASA should consider sending a robotic servicing mission for the HST instead of a Shuttle mission, but should not rule out sending a Shuttle servicing mission, if NASA determined that the robotic option was too costly or complex.(Guy Gugliotta, “Scientists Say Shuttle Can Service Telescope; Report Counters NASA Stance on Repairing Hubble,” Washington Post, 14 July 2004; Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board and Space Studies Board, “Assessment of Options for Extending the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope” (letter report, National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 13 July 2004), http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=11051#toc (accessed 28 April 2009).)
James D. Wetherbee, the only U.S. astronaut to command five Space Shuttle flights, announced his plans to retire from NASA. Wetherbee had participated in six Space Shuttle missions since becoming an astronaut in 1984, serving as pilot aboard Mission STS-32 in 1990 and commanding STS-52 in 1992, STS-63 in 1995, STS-86 in 1997, STS-102 in 2001, and STS-113 in 2002. His missions had included flights both to the Russian Mir space station, including the first Shuttle–Mir rendezvous, and to the ISS. Just before retiring, Wetherbee had worked as Space Shuttle Lead in the Independent Technical Authority at NASA’s JSC, a group responsible for identifying and analyzing possible hazards and determining launch readiness. Wetherbee had also served for two years as Director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC and for five years as Deputy Director of JSC.(NASA, “Veteran NASA Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” news release 05-017, 11 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/archives/2005-all-archives.html (accessed 13 August 2009); Associated Press, “Veteran Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” 12 January 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
NASA returned Discovery to the Vehicle Assembly Building from its launchpad, to attach a newer fuel tank and booster set to the Space Shuttle. While Discovery was sitting on the launchpad, NASA had determined that ice could break off the outside of its external fuel tank and could prove as lethal as the falling foam insulation that had led to the demise of Columbia. To minimize the risk of such debris striking the orbiter’s fragile heat shield, NASA had decided to install an additional heater on the fuel tank. Ice forms on the external tank when the fuel is extremely cold, and a heater would reduce the amount of ice build-up on the tank.(Irene Mona Klotz, “Shuttle Heads Back to Workshop,” BBC News, 27 May 2005; “Shuttle Rolls Back to Hangar,” Washington Post, 27 May 2005.)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns,” news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, “NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts, Stephen K. Robinson of NASA and Soichi Noguchi of JAXA, completed a spacewalk during which they tested new prototype methods to repair heat- resistant tiles on the orbiter’s exterior. Robinson applied an experimental compound inside cracks in damaged panels, and Noguchi applied a thick, dark-colored paint to thermal protection tiles, to replace cracked or missing black surface coatings. NASA had developed the repair techniques in response to recommendations from the Columbia Accident Investigation Board. During the spacewalk, the two astronauts also performed several tasks to upgrade the ISS, such as replacing a broken GPS antenna and installing a bracket designed to hold a toolbox and parts kit for use during future spacewalks.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Test Repair Methods on Heat Tiles,” New York Times, 31 July 2005; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Adds One Day to Shuttle’s Mission,” Washington Post, 31 July 2005.)
NASA announced that it would once again ground the Space Shuttle fleet, because mission personnel had discovered that Shuttle Discovery had experienced a problem similar to the one that had fatally damaged Columbia. Specifically, analysts had discovered that, during launch, Discovery’s external fuel tank had shed portions of foam insulation. At least one of the pieces of insulation had come from the same area of the tank as the foam that had ended the Columbia mission. Although the problem did not affect Discovery’s launch, the Shuttle’s crew had spent much of their first full day in orbit closely examining the orbiter’s exterior to determine the extent of the problem.
Both crew members of the ISS, NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the first assembly work since the 2003 accident of Space Shuttle Columbia, which had led to the suspension of construction on the station. The two removed broken and disused equipment and installed a new television camera, designed to aid in the assembly of additional truss segments for the ISS. McArthur and Tokarev were performing these tasks to prepare the ISS for the future installation of a new solar power module, planned for 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-051,” status report SS05-052, 8 November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/nov/HQ_SS05052_station_status-html (accessed 19 July 2009); Mark Carreau, “Camera Installed, Despite a Few Snags,” Houston Chronicle, 8 November 2005.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had been in his new position for only one month, appeared as the sole witness before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, and Science, to testify regarding NASA’s FY 2006 budget request. Key issues that the panel discussed with Griffin included several related to the Space Shuttle Program: the four-year gap between the planned decommissioning of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and the first scheduled flight of the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) in 2014; the United States’ obligation to complete the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle; and servicing the HST. In his responses, Griffin stated that, in mid-July, he would release a plan for the first flight of the new CEV. He suggested that, if the ISS partners postponed some scheduled on-board scientific research, they could complete the ISS before the Shuttle’s retirement, without cancelling any research programs. Regarding the HST, Griffin stated his opposition to a robotic servicing mission and said that he wished to assess the first two Shuttle flights before making a decision. The panel also discussed recommended cuts in Earth Science research. Griffin responded that NASA had listened to the concerns of the scientific community and was reexamining that area. Griffin clarified that NASA would not cut science programs to fund the spaceflight program.
NASA’s Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASA’s first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, “NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, “STS-114: Return to Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, “Return to Flight: Mission Overview,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, “NASA Grounds Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had reached an agreement to sell its Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power business to Pratt & Whitney, a United Technologies Corporation unit, for about US$700 million in cash. Rocketdyne, primarily a rocket engine developer and builder that provided booster engines for the Space Shuttle and the Delta series of expendable launch vehicles, had helped pioneer space exploration in the 1950s and1960s. The sale reflected Boeing’s struggle to make a profit in the space-launch business and marked the company’s latest move toward focusing on large-scale weapons and aerospace systems. United Technologies intended the acquisition to broaden the product line at Pratt & Whitney, which, in recent years, had lost market share in its core business of providing jet engines.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Sell Rocketdyne Propulsion Unit to Pratt & Whitney; news release, 22 February 2005, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2005/q1/nr_050222o.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Los Angeles Times, “Maker of Rocket Engines Is Sold,” 23 February 2005.)
Russian cosmonaut and ISS crew member Sergei K. Krikalev set a world record of 748 days for total time spent in space. Krikalev had begun his cosmonaut training in 1985 and had first served as a crew member of Russia’s Mir space station in 1988. Krikalev had served on the Mir crew again in 1991 and had later become a member of the first ISS crew comprising both Russian cosmonauts and U.S. astronauts. In addition, he had been the first Russian to travel on a NASA Space Shuttle, achieving that distinction on Shuttle Discovery in 1994. The ISS partners had scheduled Krikalev’s return to Earth for October 2005―by then he would have spent 814 days in space.(Mark Carreau, “Russian Cosmonaut Sets a World Record of 748 Days in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 17 August 2005.)
In the journal Geophysical Research Letters, researchers studying data from the Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) reported their determination that a strange flash over the Indian Ocean, which had occurred on 20 January 2003, was not related to lightning. The researchers named the mysterious reddish glow Transient Ionospheric Glow Emission in Red, or TIGER. Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon, a crew member of the ill-fated STS-107, had recorded the glow while aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, using an infrared video camera. During the Shuttle flight, Ramon had collected data about dust particles in the atmosphere for the MEIDEX Sprite campaign at the Open University in Ra’anana, Israel. Researchers for MEIDEX had analyzed Ramon’s video, including a single frame that showed a mysterious reddish glow 150 kilometers (93.2 miles) above the ocean near Madagascar. Like blue jets and elves, sprites are emissions―transient luminous events (TLEs)―that occur above thunderstorms. Airline pilots had first reported TLEs several decades ago. The TIGER phenomenon contrasted with typical TLEs because of its shape and its lack of any direct relationship to thunderstorm activity.(Maggie McKee, “Columbia Crew Saw New Atmospheric Phenomenon,” New Scientist, 20 January 2005; Michael Schirber, “High-Altitude Mystery Flash Recorded by Space Shuttle,” LiveScience.com, 19 January 2005, http://www.livescience.com/environment/050118_tiger_flash.html (accessed 18 August 2009).)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi of JAXA and Stephen K. Robinson of NASA performed the second of three scheduled spacewalks for STS-114. The two astronauts conducted tests on materials designed to service the orbiter’s heat-shielding tiles and replaced a 600-pound (272.2-kilogram) gyroscope on the exterior of the ISS. The device was one of four gyroscopes that help maintain the station’s orientation in space.(NASA, “STS-114 MCC Status Report #13,” 1 August 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/ news/STS-114- 13.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
Former NASA astronaut Michael L. Coats became Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Jefferson D. Howell Jr., who had left to become a visiting professor at the University of Texas in Austin. Coats had begun working at NASA in 1978 and had flown three Space Shuttle missions before retiring from NASA in 1991. Before becoming JSC Director, Coats had worked for Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names Former Astronaut New Johnson Center Director,” news release J05-055, 7 November 2005; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” 14 April 2009, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 21 July 2009).)
The Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at California’s Edwards Air Force Base at 5:11 a.m. (PDT). The mission―officially designated STS-114―was NASA’s first Shuttle mission since the February 2003 loss of Columbia. The Shuttle’s successful reentry was particularly important, because the Columbia accident had occurred during the reentry phase of its mission. The mission’s primary objectives were to test and evaluate new safety procedures for Shuttle missions and to continue construction and maintenance of the ISS. Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson had performed some of the ISS and Shuttle maintenance tasks during three spacewalks on 30 July, 1 August, and 3 August. The total duration of STS-114 was 13 days, 21 hours, and 32 minutes.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114.” 257)
NASA announced findings from its investigation into the causes of the foam loss on Discovery’s external tank during the Space Shuttle’s launch in July 2005, a problem similar to the one that had caused the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia in February 2003. A team of NASA investigators stated that they had uncovered several possible factors that may have caused a 3- foot (0.9-meter) portion of insulating foam to separate from Discovery during launch. They reported that the most likely cause was inadequate methods of applying and repairing the foam on Discovery’s external tank. The investigators stated that workers might have sprayed the foam in a manner that introduced fissures into it and might have crushed the foam while standing on it in the course of conducting the repairs on Discovery. Although the foam debris had not damaged Discovery, the incident had prompted NASA to suspend Shuttle launches until May 2006, so that engineers could identify the problem and correct it.(Guy Gugliotta, “Discovery Launch Is Still On for May,” Washington Post, 15 October 2005. 264)
France and the United States agreed to establish a Space Shuttle landing site in southern France. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and French Ambassador Jean-David Levitte signed the agreement, which covered NASA’s Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the agreement, France would permit Shuttles encountering problems during launch to land at Istres Air Base 125, near Marseilles, and allow the U.S. government to conduct additional support activities for Space Shuttles on French soil, such as weather monitoring and search-and-rescue operations.(NASA, “U.S. and France Agree To Establish NASA Shuttle Landing Site,” news release 05-143, 7 June 2005. 803 Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Safety Issues Unresolved,” Houston Chronicle, 9 June 2005; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Near to Meeting Safety Requirements for Launching in July,” New York Times, 9 June 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson completed a final spacewalk during which Robinson performed an unprecedented maneuver to complete a critical operation of the orbiter’s thermal protection system. The principle objective of the spacewalk was to remove two pieces of protruding heat shielding―called gap fillers―from the bottom of the orbiter. NASA was concerned that the fillers might add extra heat to the orbiter’s heat- shielding tiles upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere, thereby threatening the mission. Astronauts James M. Kelly and Wendy B. Lawrence used the robotic arms of the Shuttle and those of the ISS to lower Robinson to the underside of Discovery, while Noguchi monitored the operation. Despite concerns that Robinson might lose communication with the other astronauts, the operation was a success. The maneuver was the first time that an astronaut had worked on the underside of an orbiter while in space. During the spacewalk, Noguchi and Robinson also installed an external stowage platform and a new iteration of an experiment to test materials in the environment of space.(NASA, “NASA’s Spacewalking Astronaut Completes Unique Repair,” news release 05-212, 3 August 2005; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-114.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) released its final report on NASA’s efforts to meet the CAIB’s recommendations for resuming piloted Shuttle flights. Former NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had established the task group to provide an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations. In the final report, the CAIB concluded that NASA had met or exceeded 12 of the 15 recommendations and had made substantive progress on the remaining three. The task group explained that the final three recommendations were of a type that would be nearly impossible to complete. However, major media highlighted an appendix of the document in which seven of the 28-member task group provided a highly critical assessment of NASA’s management. These seven task force members claimed that some of the same organizational behaviors of NASA managers that had contributed to the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia had also jeopardized the July 2005 Space Shuttle Discovery mission. They stated further that NASA had failed to address the problem of Discovery’s loss of foam insulation from its fuel tank and had failed to take steps to protect the Space Shuttles from the damage caused by such debris.(Return to Flight Task Group, Final Report of the Return to Flight Task Group (Washington, DC, July 2005); John Schwartz, “Minority Report Faults NASA as Compromising Safety,” New York Times, 18 August 2005.)
NASA’s Space Shuttle Program reached another milestone: filling a 154-foot-high (47-meter- high) external tank with fuel and oxygen. The test, intended to assure engineers that all changes to the tank operated as expected, marked the first time since Columbia’s accident that NASA had prepared an external tank for flight. The foam was necessary to keep the liquid fuel cool and to reduce ice build-up on the tank, but NASA and Lockheed Martin had redesigned the tank to reduce the amount of foam debris during launch. Changes to the tank design included removing the foam from the bipod ramp and replacing the foam with heaters. The designers had also added a “drip-lip” to reduce ice accumulation on the joints that permit the adjustment of the tank’s fuel line. In a dress rehearsal for Discovery’s upcoming launch, engineers pumped more than 500,000 gallons of fuel into the tank, monitoring the tank and the Shuttle’s systems down to the T-minus 31-second mark in a mock countdown. N. Wayne Hale Jr., Deputy Manager of the Space Shuttle Program and Chair of NASA’s Mission Management Team, remarked on the outstanding performances of the newly modified external tank, the Shuttle, and the launchpad.(Philip Chien, “NASA Tests Tank on Space Shuttle,” Washington Times, 15 April 2005; William Harwood, “NASA Managers Elated with Shuttle Fueling Test,” Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2005; Kelly Young, “Shuttle’s External Fuel Tank Tested Successfully,” New Scientist, 15 April 2005, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn7270-shuttles-external-fuel-tank-tested-successfully.html (accessed 25 November 2009); Physorg.com, “NASA Puts Space Shuttle External Tank to the Test,” 15 April 2005, http://www.physorg.com/news3738.html (accessed 25 November 2009).)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASA’s workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administration’s 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASA’s efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttle’s retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASA’s failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASA’s ability to accomplish this, such as NASA’s near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the President’s Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement” (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 1–19, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) announced that it considered the Space Shuttle Discovery safe enough to fly again, even though NASA had not undertaken some steps recommended by the CAIB to ensure the Shuttle’s safe launch. NASA had planned to launch Discovery as the first Shuttle flight since the Columbia accident in 2003 and had established the Task Group to review NASA’s compliance with the CAIB’s critical recommendations. Task Group members stated that, although NASA had not complied with all of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations, the Space Shuttle was ready to resume flight, and NASA was responsible for making the final decision to launch the Shuttle. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin was unclear about how the Task Group’s findings would influence Shuttle launch plans.(Traci Watson, “Safety Panel: NASA Failed To Fix Critical Issues with Shuttle,” USA Today, 28 June 2009. 252)
William W. Parsons replaced Thomas Q. Donaldson as Director of NASA’s SSC. Parsons had served as Director of SSC from August 2002 to May 2003 before leaving SSC to serve as Space Shuttle Program Manager from May 2003 to September 2005. Donaldson had left SSC to serve on a Federal Emergency Management Agency special assignment concerning recovery efforts for areas affected by Hurricane Katrina in August 2005.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 9 July 2009); NASA, “NASA Names New Stennis Center Director,” news release 05-260, 13 September 2005.)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery had reached a major milestone, arriving at Launch Pad 39B at NASA’s KSC in preparation for its Return to Flight Mission, scheduled for 15 May. Over more than two years, Discovery had undergone 41 major modifications in response to the Columbia accident, including the addition of the new sensor system at the far end of the orbiter boom; cameras and laser systems to inspect its thermal protection system while in space; sensors in the leading edge of its wings to monitor for debris impacts; and a new digital camera for viewing the external tank during launch.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery at Launch Pad for Return to Flight,” news release 05-095, 7 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05095_Discovery_Roll_Out.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) provided an update on NASA’s efforts to comply with the Columbia Accident Investigation Board’s (the CAIB’s) recommended safety and operational practices for Shuttle launches. The Task Group stated that it had approved NASA’s efforts regarding five of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, bringing the total number of CAIB recommendations with which NASA had complied to 12. Among the five recommendations that NASA had implemented were the installation of cameras on the Shuttle to observe critical events and steps to ensure that budgetary issues and other outside pressures would not influence flight schedules in the future. The Task Group stated further that, although NASA had not yet complied with three of the CAIB recommendations, it saw no circumstances that might prevent NASA’s planned launch of Space Shuttle Discovery in July 2005. The three CAIB recommendations that NASA had not yet implemented were establishing in-orbit repair techniques for the orbiter, preventing catastrophic debris from falling off the orbiter’s fuel tank during launch, and fortifying the orbiter against debris impacts.
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space. Griffin outlined highlights of NASA’s FY 2007 budget request and discussed “the strategic direction for NASA in implementing the priorities of the President and Congress within the resources provided.” Griffin stated that NASA’s first priority must be to honor its March 2006 commitment to its international partners on the ISS. NASA had pledged to conduct an adequate number of Space Shuttle flights to complete the assembly of ISS by the end of the decade. Toward this end, NASA had reallocated funds budgeted for its scientific and exploration missions for fiscal years 2007−2011, transferring the projected funds to the budget for the Space Shuttle and the ISS. Griffin urged that NASA’s second priority should be constructing the new CEV, which would transport humans to the ISS after NASA retired the Space Shuttles in 2010. Griffin said that the CEV must be operational “not later than 2014 and possibly much sooner.” According to Griffin, NASA would have to delay several new scientific missions because fulfilling NASA’s commitment to the ISS and the CEV was a higher priority. Redirecting funds budgeted for Exploration Systems, in order to provide additional funds for aeronautics research or science
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC at 5:32 p.m. (EST), marking the end of the 13- day Mission STS-116, the 20th Shuttle flight to the ISS. The mission had been among the most challenging ever made to the space station. In addition to transporting 2.9 tons (2.6 tonnes or 2,631 kilograms) of equipment and supplies to the ISS, Discovery’s crew had rewired the ISS’s power system and installed an additional truss segment to the station’s Integrated Truss Structure. Rewiring the power system had proved particularly onerous because the crew had experienced difficulty retracting one set of solar arrays, to enable a different set of arrays to begin tracking the Sun’s motion. Crew members had conducted four spacewalks to work on the exterior of the ISS.(NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power.”)
NASA announced the crew for the Space Shuttle Discovery STS-120 mission, scheduled to launch an Italian-built U.S. module for the ISS in summer 2007. The Node 2 module would interconnect the research, habitation, control, and docking modules of the ISS. American astronaut Pamela A. Melroy, the second woman to command a Shuttle, would command the mission, and American astronaut George D. Zamka would serve as Pilot. Melroy had served as Pilot of Space Shuttle Discovery STS-92 in 2000 and as Pilot of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 in 2002. Other crew members would be American astronauts Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, and Michael J. Foreman, and Italian astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli of ESA. NASA and the Italian space agency, Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI), had arranged Nespoli’s mission within the framework of a MOU. According to the terms of the MOU, Italy would supply three pressurized Multi-Purpose Logistic Modules (MPLM) to the United States, which would assign to Italy flight opportunities and the use of the ISS.(ESA, “ESA Astronaut Paolo Nespoli Assigned To Crew for Shuttle Flight STS-120,” news release 19-2006, 19 June 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_19_2006_p_EN.html (accessed 8 June 2010); NASA, “NASA Assigns Crew for Shuttle Mission,” news release 06-242, 19 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_ 06242_crew_shuttle.html (accessed 8 June 2010).)
NASA announced the crew for International Space Station (ISS) Expedition 13, scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in March 2006. Russian cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov would command the mission, and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams would serve as Flight Engineer and NASA Science Officer. Expedition 13 would also include the first Brazilian astronaut to fly in space, Marcos Cesar Pontes, who would engage in scientific experiments aboard the ISS for approximately one week. Williams had flown aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-101 as Mission Specialist in May 2000, performing a spacewalk that lasted almost 7 hours. As Flight Engineer for the 1997 mission to the Russian Mir space station, Vinogradov had completed five spacewalks. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 13: American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Fyodor N. Yurchikhin.(NASA, “NASA Announces Next International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-002, 5 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06002_Expedition_13_crew.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 5 January 2006, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/060105_exp13_crew_announcement.html (accessed 28 June 2010).)
NASA launched the Space Shuttle Discovery (STS-121) from NASA’s KSC at 2:37 p.m. (EDT). The mission was NASA’s second Return to Flight mission since the 2003 Columbia tragedy. Discovery’s crew planned to continue testing safety equipment and procedures that NASA had introduced on the first Return to Flight Mission (STS-114), which Discovery had flown in 2005. Other objectives of the mission included delivery of equipment, experiments, and supplies to the ISS and the transport to the ISS of a third crew member, ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter. STS- 121 crew members included Commander Steven W. Lindsey, Pilot Mark E. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Michael E. Fossum, Lisa M. Nowak, Piers J. Sellers, and Stephanie D. Wilson.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launch Provides Spectacular Fireworks,” news release 45-06, 4 July 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/kennedy/news/releases/2006/release-20060704.html (accessed 15 March 2010); NASA, “STS-121,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-121.html (accessed 25 January 2010).)
NASA formed a five-member investigation board at NASA’s KSC in Florida, to review the 4 March 2006 incident during STS-121 in which Space Shuttle Discovery’s remote manipulator system (robotic Shuttle arm) sustained damage. The arm, a 50-foot-long, jointed extension, was used to grapple payloads and to remove them from the payload bay, and to move spacewalking astronauts to various work platforms. Hugo M. Delgado Jr., Deputy Director for the Office of the Chief Engineer at KSC, would chair the board, which would investigate the facts surrounding the incident, determine its probable cause, assess the possibility of a recurrence, and recommend corrective actions. The 4 March incident was one in a series of accidents that had occurred at KSC in 2006, prompting Director of KSC James W. Kennedy to order a brief shutdown of operations. At that time, Kennedy had warned KSC employees that a major accident could derail NASA’s plans to complete the ISS and to begin exploring the Moon and Mars.(NASA, “NASA Appoints Board To Investigate Shuttle Arm Incident,” news release 06-100, 17 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06100_Shuttle_arm_board.html (accessed 14 September 2009); New York Times, “Accident Involving Shuttles at Kennedy Space Center Prompt Safety Directive,” 18 March 2006.)
Eileen M. Collins, who had joined the astronaut corps in 1990, announced her retirement from NASA. In February 1995, Collins had served as NASA’s first female Shuttle pilot on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-63, the first Shuttle mission to rendezvous with the Russian Mir space station. In May 1997, she had served as pilot on Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-84 flight to Mir, and in July 1999, she had become NASA’s first female Shuttle commander on Space Shuttle Columbia STS-93, which had launched the Chandra X-Ray Observatory. In July–August 2005, she had served as commander of Space Shuttle Discovery STS-114, the first Shuttle flight since the 2003 loss of Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin described Collins as a “brave, superb pilot,” and NASA Flight Crew Operations Director Kenneth D. Bowersox called her a “gifted leader.”(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Eileen Collins Completes Career of Space Firsts,” news release 06-208, 1 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06208_Collins_retires.html (accessed 1 October 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s First Female Shuttle Commander Retires from Spaceflight,” Space.com, 1 May 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060501_collins_retirement.html (accessed 18 June 2010).)
Crew members of the ISS and Atlantis successfully unfolded two new solar arrays for the ISS’s power system, thereby increasing the station’s capacity for producing electricity. The 240-foot- long (73.2-meter-long) arrays were components of the station’s truss structure. Astronauts had installed an identical set of arrays at the ISS in 2000, and NASA planned to install two additional arrays during Shuttle flights in 2007 and 2008. Although the new arrays were already generating electricity, the generated power would not feed into the station’s power grid until the rewiring and activation of a related cooling system, which NASA had scheduled for completion in December 2006. NASA estimated that, once the crew had installed all of the arrays, the
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and A. Christer Fuglesang performed the first extravehicular activity (EVA), or spacewalk, of Mission STS-116. During the 6.5-hour EVA, the two astronauts installed the girder-like P5 truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Fellow astronauts Joan E. Higginbotham and Sunita L. Williams assisted them from inside the ISS, using the station’s robotic arm (Canadarm2). The P5 truss would support a set of solar arrays, which NASA expected to attach during a Shuttle mission planned for 2007. The astronauts’ other major task during the spacewalk was the retraction of the solar arrays on the station’s P6 truss, so that the newer solar arrays on the P4 truss could begin tracking the motion of the Sun. Although NASA had designed the P6’s arrays to fold up like an accordion, mechanical problems prevented crew members from fully retracting the device. Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis had installed the newer solar arrays during Mission STS-115 in August 2006.(NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power”; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-115,” http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-115.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Michael Cabbage, “Walk Add 2 Tons to Space Station; Truss Addition Paves Way for Solar Upgrade,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 13 December 2006. 150 NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power”; John Schwartz, “2 Spacewalkers Are Successful in Tricky Rewiring of the Space Station,” New York Times, 15 December 2006.)
The joint ESA-NASA Ulysses spacecraft commenced its third passage over the Sun’s south pole, an event that scientists expected would reveal new information about changes in the Sun and the effects of those changes on space. Carried into space in 1990 by the Space Shuttle Discovery, Ulysses was on a mission to explore the heliosphere—the region of space influenced by the Sun and its magnetic field. Data gathered during Ulysses’s orbit of the Sun, once every 6.2 years, was enabling scientists to study the Sun’s 11-year cycle of maximum and minimum solar activity. Moreover, Ulysses had accomplished 17 years of orbit, making it possible for scientists to study the Sun during its entire 22-year magnetic cycle. The spacecraft had first passed over the Sun’s south pole in 1994 and over its north pole in 1995, both passes occurring during a phase of minimum solar activity. Ulysses’s second set of polar passes, in 2000 and 2001, had occurred during a period of maximum solar activity. The spacecraft’s third passage over the Sun’s south pole was occurring during another period of minimum solar activity, but this pass would provide new data because the Sun’s magnetic field had reversed in polarity since the spacecraft’s first passage over the south pole. Ulysses is part of the Heliospheric Network, a spacecraft fleet that includes NASA’s Cassini, the joint ESA-NASA Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), and other spacecraft.(NASA, “NASA-European Spacecraft Swoops Under Sun’s Pole,” http://www.nasa.gov/vision/universe/ solarsystem/ulysses-20070207.html (accessed 14 September 2010); ESA, “Ulysses Embarks on Third Set of Solar Passes,” http://www.esa.int/esaSC/SEMWPIUXJUE_index_0.html (accessed 14 September 2010).)
NASA announced major personnel changes at three of its centers, Ames Research Center (ARC) in California, Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida, and Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. G. Scott Hubbard, Director of ARC, announced his resignation, stating that he had agreed to assume the Carl Sagan Chair for the Study of Life in the Universe at the SETI (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California. Hubbard had worked at Ames since 1987, serving as Director since 2002, and had previously served on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board and as the first Director of the NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA appointed William W. Parsons Jr., Director of Stennis since 2005, as Deputy Director of KSC. Parsons’s tenure at NASA had spanned 16 years. As Space Shuttle Program Manager after the Columbia accident, he had directed NASA’s return-to-flight efforts, which had culminated, in the summer of 2005, in the successful flight of Discovery in STS-114. Parsons had also led NASA’s recovery efforts after Hurricane Katrina. NASA appointed Richard J. Gilbrech, who had worked at Stennis since 1991, as Director of SSC. He had served as Deputy Director of LaRC in Virginia, as Deputy Director of NASA’s Engineering Safety Center, and had worked at various NASA flight centers.(NASA, “NASA Announces Senior Management Changes,” news release 06-031, 23 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06031_personnel_changes.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Picayune Item (MS), “NASA Announces Management Changes at Stennis Space Center,” 25 January 2006.)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 14, a six-month mission scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in September 2006. American astronaut Michael E. Lopez- Alegria would command the mission and serve as NASA’s station science officer, and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin would serve as Flight Engineer. American astronaut Sunita L. Williams, making her first spaceflight, would join Expedition 14 in progress, after traveling to the ISS on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-116, scheduled for December 2006. ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter would travel to the ISS aboard Space Shuttle Discovery STS-121, scheduled for summer 2006, serving as the third astronaut on Expedition 13 and later joining the Expedition 14 crew until Williams’s arrival. Lopez-Alegria had served on board Space Shuttle Columbia STS-73 in 1995, on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-92 in 2000, and on Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 in 2002, conducting five spacewalks during the assembly of the station complex. Tyurin had served as Flight Engineer of ISS Expedition 3 in 2001. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 14, American astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Clayton C. Anderson.(NASA, “NASA Announces 14th International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-209, 2 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06209_14th_ISS_crew.html (accessed 16 March 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 3 May 2006.)
NASA announced the appointment of two new Flight Directors, Ron Spencer and Heather Rarick, who would direct human spaceflights from Mission Control at NASA’s JSC. The appointments increased to 28 the number of active Space Shuttle and ISS flight directors, including those in training. From 1990 to 1994, Spencer had worked as a contractor at JSC, during which time he had developed the space station assembly sequence for the Space Station Program Office. In 1994 he had become a NASA civil servant, and, beginning in 1997, he had worked in Mission Control as a Shuttle flight dynamics officer. Rarick had also worked as a contractor for NASA in various capacities until 2001, including working as the operations lead and Russian interface officer in the International Liaison Office of Mission Control. She had become a NASA employee in 2001, continuing her previous assignment, as well as assuming the technical lead for the Russian interface officers. In 2003 NASA had named Rarick chairperson of the Russian Joint Operations Panel, which would address long-term resolution of U.S.-Russian operational issues. NASA Flight Director Office Chief Phil Engelauf praised Spencer and Rarick as “possessing the leadership skills necessary to ensure NASA accomplishes the near-term exploration goals of completing the space station, safely flying the shuttle through retirement and returning to the moon.”(NASA, Johnson Space Center, “Two New Flight Directors Chosen To Lead NASA’s Mission Control,” news release J06-069, 14 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/2006/J06-069.html (accessed 11 August 2010).)
06191_Crossfield_death.html (accessed 25 September 2009); David Stout, “Scott Crossfield, Fabled Test Pilot, Dies at 85,” New York Times, 21 April 2006. missions, would directly affect “NASA’s ability to effectively and efficiently transition the workforce and capabilities from the Space Shuttle to the new CEV system.”(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science and Space, NASA Issues and Challenges, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 25 April 2006, 2−4 (statement of NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin), http://commerce.senate.gov/pdf/griffin-042506.pdf (accessed 21 January 2010).)
President George W. Bush submitted his US$2.77 trillion budget for FY 2007, which included US$16.8 billion to fund NASA, a 3.2 percent increase over FY 2006. According to NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, the priorities established by this budget reflected NASA’s commitment to implement the Vision for Space Exploration, to complete the assembly of the ISS with the fewest possible spaceflights, and to deliver an operational Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) no later than 2014. The budget provided for a reduction in funding for the Shuttle program, from US$4.78 billion in FY 2006 to US$4.06 billion in FY 2007, and a 3 percent increase in funding for the ISS, to US$1.81 billion. NASA had requested funds of US$3.98 billion for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, a 30 percent increase from the previous fiscal year. The Directorate would develop the CEV, two new launchers, and the lunar landers needed to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA had estimated the cost of completing ISS assembly with the minimum number of Shuttle flights, while ensuring the safety of Shuttle flights, and had calculated a budget shortfall of US$3−5 billion. To make up this shortfall, the FY 2007 budget would cut funding for aeronautics research by 18 percent, to US$724.4 million. In addition, the budget would cap the increase for NASA’s science budget, which funded deep- space probes and Earth-observation satellites, at 1.5 percent in FY 2007, and at 1 percent annually for the following four years.(NASA, “NASA Administrator’s Statement About FY 2007 Budget,” news release 06-056, 6 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06056_Budget_Statement.html (accessed 10 September 2010); Warren E. Leary, “Unexpected Costs Force NASA Cuts,” New York Times, 7 February 2006; Brian Berger, “NASA Seeks 30-Percent Increase For Explorations Programs,” Space News, 6 February 2006.)
NASA launched Space Shuttle Atlantis (STS-115) from NASA’s KSC at 11:15 a.m. (EDT). The mission’s principal objective was to deliver and install a girder-like structure to the ISS. That structure, called the Port 3/Port 4 (P3/P4) truss, contained arrays—large, wing-shaped solar panels—designed to increase significantly the station’s power capability. The mission’s crew members included Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Christopher J. Ferguson, Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, Joseph R. Tanner, all U.S. astronauts, and CSA astronaut, Mission Specialist Steven G. MacLean.(NASA, “STS-115,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-115.html (accessed 11 March 2010).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis returned to Earth, landing at NASA’s KSC at 6:21 a.m. (EDT) to complete its 12-day mission (STS-115). During that mission, the crew had resumed construction of the ISS after a four-year hiatus. The mission highlights included three spacewalks to install the P3/P4 truss on the ISS and to prepare new solar panels on that truss for future production of electricity at the orbiting space station.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-115.”)
NASA announced the completion of the first systems requirements review (SRR) for its Constellation Program, a human spaceflight program aimed at sending astronauts to the Moon and possibly to Mars. NASA was conducting SRRs of human spacecraft systems to establish a foundation for the design, development, construction, and operation of those systems. NASA had completed its last review in August 1973 for the Space Shuttle program. The Constellation Program SRR examined the systems intended to replace the Shuttle systems, including the Orion spacecraft and the Ares I and Ares V launch rockets. The review confirmed numerous parameters of those systems, including Orion’s launch weight for lunar missions (61,000 pounds, or nearly 27,700 kilograms) and the Ares rockets’ capacity to provide sufficient thrust to launch Orion into orbit. NASA also announced that it was preparing detailed project-level reviews of the Constellation Program’s systems, scheduled for completion in early 2007. After completing those reviews, NASA would conduct another full review to reconcile information gained in the project-level reviews with the data from the first SRR.(NASA, “NASA Completes Milestone Review of Next Human Spacecraft System,” news release 06-354. 16 November 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/nov/HQ_06354_Constellation.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched at 8:47 p.m. (EST) from NASA’s KSC on Mission STS-116. NASA anticipated that STS-116 would be one of the most complex missions ever made to the ISS. The crew of ISS and Discovery planned to reconfigure the station’s electrical and cooling systems, making the solar arrays that the previous mission (STS-115) had delivered fully operational. In this unprecedented operation, the ISS’s ground control would shut down and reroute the ISS’s power in an iterative process. In addition, crew members would install the P(NASA, “NASA Honors Distinguished Astronomer with Medal,” news release 06-005, 10 January 2006, http://nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06005_Bahcall_AAS_Award.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine NASA’s development of the Orion CEV, NASA’s planned replacement for the Space Shuttle. Hearing witness Allen Li of GAO testified that NASA had contracted with Lockheed Martin to develop Orion before it had established clear cost estimates and design requirements for the project. GAO had previously raised the same concerns in a July 2006 report. Li reported that, in response to the GAO report’s criticism, NASA had made efforts to control the project’s costs. However, he acknowledged that NASA needed to do more to control costs and to clarify the project’s design requirements. The other hearing witness, NASA’s Scott J. Horowitz, Associate Administrator of the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, reported that Orion’s design relied on proven technologies, whereas earlier projects had relied on anticipated technological breakthroughs. He argued that NASA would therefore be able to control the costs of building Orion more easily than it had controlled the costs of previous projects. Furthermore, Horwitz pointed out that NASA was developing Orion for multiple applications over several decades. Committee members concluded that they would continue to monitor development of the CEV and other elements of NASA’s exploration initiative to ensure the completion of those projects in a fiscally responsible manner that did not interfere with other NASA programs.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, “Democrats Call for Increased Oversight of NASA’s Exploration Program,” press release, 29 September 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx? NewsID=1200 (accessed 15 April 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Implementing the Vision for Space Exploration: Development of the Crew Exploration Vehicle, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 28 September 2006, 48–53, http://science.house.gov/commdocs/hearings/full06/Sept%2028/Horowitz.pdf (accessed 15 April 2010); U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA: Sound Management and Oversight Key To Addressing Crew Exploration Vehicle Project Risks” (testimony of Allen Li before U.S. House Committee on Science; report no GAO-06-1127T, Washington, DC, 28 September 2006), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d061127t.pdf (accessed 15 April 2010).)
Heads of the national space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at NASA’s KSC in Florida to review plans for completing assembly of the ISS by the end of 2010. Since the grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet in 2003, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, the ISS had operated with two-member crews. However, the ISS partners planned to increase the crew to three members with the next Space Shuttle Discovery flight, scheduled for May 2006, and to increase the crew of the station to six members in 2009. Furthermore, NASA announced its plan to launch 16 Shuttle flights to allow completion of the ISS before the planned retirement of the Shuttles in 2010. To advance the assembly schedule, the Shuttles would transport ESA’s Columbus laboratory module and JAXA’s experiment module Kibo to the ISS during four missions in 2007 and 2008. The ISS partners issued a joint statement that “affirmed their plans to use a combination of transportation systems provided by Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States in order to complete ISS assembly in a timeframe that meets the needs of the partners and ensures full utilization of the unique capabilities of the ISS throughout its lifetime.”(NASA, “Joint Statement by International Space Station Heads of Agency,” news release 06-084, 2 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06084_HOA_statement.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Warren E. Leary, “Schedule To Complete Space Station Is Advanced,” New York Times, 3 March 2006; Irene Klotz for Reuters, “NASA Has New Plan To Complete Space Station,” 2 March 2006.)
NASA announced its selection of Lockheed Martin as the primary contractor to design, develop, test, and evaluate NASA’s new CEV, Orion, which would replace the Space Shuttle as the crew transportation vehicle. Orion would be able to carry four crew members to the Moon, to
NASA astronauts Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Sunita L. Williams undertook their third spacewalk outside the ISS in nine days. Over 6.5 hours, the astronauts accomplished their primary task—jettisoning two large thermal covers, folding them with smaller shrouds that had covered an electronics box, and tossing them away from the ISS, so that they would eventually burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. The astronauts also connected cables to a new system that would allow the ISS to share power with a docked orbiter; added a platform intended to hold a storage container; and photographed the docking port. Lopez-Alegria set a new U.S. spacewalking record of 61 hours and 22 minutes. The all-time record of more than 82 hours belonged to Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyov. Sunita L. Williams extended the spacewalking record she had set on 4 February to 29 hours and 17 minutes. The series of spacewalks that had begun on 31 January marked the first time that ISS crew had conducted three spacewalks within such a short time, without a Space Shuttle docked at the ISS.(Mike Schneider, “Astronaut Sets U.S. Spacewalking Record,” Associated Press, 9 February 2007. 8)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to discuss the status and future of the ISS in the context of NASA’s FY 2008 budget request. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern about the significant cutbacks in NASA’s ISS research program, warning that these cuts had “potentially serious implications for the productivity of the station as a research facility once it is assembled.” Christina T. Chaplain of GAO testified that NASA had planned 15 more Space Shuttle launches—an average of one every 2.7 months—through 2010, when NASA intended to end the Space Shuttle program. Compared to the existing launch schedule of once every 10.8 months, the new Shuttle schedule would provide little allowance for delays related to mechanical failure or weather. Thomas W. Holloway, Chair of the IISTF, expressed doubt that commercial space vehicles under development would be ready to ferry supplies to the ISS when the Space Shuttle retired. Associate Administrator of NASA’s Space Operations Mission Directorate William H. Gerstenmaier testified that, after the first test flights of the commercial cargo vehicles, scheduled for 2008, NASA would be better able to judge their readiness. Subcommittee Ranking Minority Member Thomas Charles “Tom” Feeney III (R-FL) expressed concern about the loss of skilled KSC workers when NASA ended its Shuttle Program and shifted its focus to the Moon and Mars programs, warning, “We can’t repeat past mistakes—like the Apollo-to-Shuttle transition— where America frittered away hard-earned space-faring skills, which are almost impossible to replace.”
NASA announced the conclusion of the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) mission. FUSE had become inoperable in July 2007 when it became incapable of pointing steadily. NASA had launched FUSE in 1999 to study how chemicals disperse throughout galaxies, as well as the composition of interstellar gas clouds. FUSE’s mission was to help answer important questions about the conditions in the universe immediately following the Big Bang. However, FUSE’s reaction wheels, designed to turn and aim the telescope, holding it on target, had malfunctioned. To operate correctly, FUSE required three reaction wheels, but in November and December 2001, two of the four wheels had stopped operating. FUSE flew too high for the Space Shuttle to carry astronauts to repair it. Therefore, NASA scientist Jeffrey W. Kruk had devised a way to use FUSE’s magnetic torquer bars, designed to act as a weak break against Earth’s magnetic field, as a third wheel to help FUSE’s remaining wheel and backup wheel turn and aim the telescope. This solution had worked until December 2004, when the third reaction wheel had broken down, leaving FUSE with only one working wheel and the torquer bars. The FUSE project team had required 11 months to devise a new pointing system for the telescope. Once the team had completed the repair, FUSE had explored the universe with few interruptions from November 2005 until July 2007. FUSE Project Scientist George Sonneborn, of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, remarked that the telescope had collected scientific data of high quality for eight years, longer than its five-year goal.(NASA, “NASA Concludes Successful FUSE Mission,” news release 07-227, 17 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07227_FUSE.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Frank D. Roylance, “8-Year Space Vigil Goes Dark,” Baltimore Sun, 19 October 2007.)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with ATK for the design, development, testing, and evaluation of the first stage of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 launch vehicles. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, which would replace the current Space Shuttle fleet. NASA intended to use Ares 5, a heavy-lift launch vehicle, to launch a variety of payloads for science and exploration activities. ATK planned to develop the Ares-1 first stage as a five-segment SRB, basing it on the four-segment design that the company had used for the Space Shuttle. The company planned to draw on current hardware, facilities, and manufacturing equipment qualified for human-rated SRBs. The contract, valued at US$1.8 billion, continued work that had begun in April 2006 under a temporary agreement, extending the performance period through December 2014. It included the delivery of five ground-static-test motors, two ground-vibration-test articles, and four flight-test stages.(NASA, “NASA Awards First Stage Contract for Ares Rockets,” contract release C07-36, 10 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_C07036_Ares_first_stage.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Edmond Lococo, “Alliant Techsystems Wins $1.8 Billion NASA Contract,” Bloomberg, 11 August 2007.)
Florida police released on bail Lisa M. Nowak, a NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy captain. The police had arrested Nowak the day before, after she threatened Colleen M. Shipman, a captain in the U.S. Air Force. Nowak had perceived Shipman as a romantic rival. NASA placed Nowak on 30-day leave and removed her from her mission duties. Nowak had flown her only mission as a crew member on STS-121 in July 2006, aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. NASA spokesperson Nicole Cloutier-Lemasters explained that, according to its past policy, NASA had screened crew members assigned to the ISS, before, during, and after missions, but had not screened Shuttle crews flying for two-week stints. Although Cloutier-Lemasters said that NASA did not plan to conduct an investigation of Nowak, NASA’s Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that NASA had begun a review of its screening policy. NASA hoped to determine whether it had overlooked indications for concern in Nowak’s case. Dale explained that NASA intended the review process to reveal whether or not astronauts were receiving adequate psychological and medical care and attention.(Mike Schneider and Erin McClam, “Astronaut Charged with Attempted Murder,” Associated Press, 7 February 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronaut’s Arrest Spurs Review of NASA Testing,” New York Times, 8 February 2007.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC on an 11-day mission, designated STS-117, to continue construction of the ISS. The crew consisted of Commander Frederick W. Sturckow; Pilot Lee J. Archambault; Mission Specialists James F. Reilly II, Patrick G. Forrester, Steven R. Swanson, and John D. Olivas; and Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson, who would replace Sunita L. Williams on board the ISS as a member of ISS Expeditions 15 and 16. The launch was nearly flawless. Only one potential problem occurred several minutes into the flight, when on- board cameras captured an image that appeared to show foam flaking off the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, just after the solid rocket boosters (SRBs) had separated from the orbiter. According to Shuttle Program Manager N. Wayne Hale Jr., NASA’s preliminary analysis of the incident indicated that the foam had not struck the craft. NASA planned further analysis.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-136, 8 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07136_Atlantis_launch.html (accessed 13 April 2010); NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight),” NASAfacts, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/177714main_STS-117.pdf (accessed 21 May 2010), John Johnson Jr., “Flawless Launch, At Last, For Atlantis,” Los Angeles Times, 9 June 2007.)
NASA announced that it had developed a new wireless tile scanner and was using it to inspect Space Shuttles before launch, looking for cracks and other imperfections. NASA intended for the new method to replace manual inspection of Space Shuttles. Wireless scanner inspections had begun on Endeavour, scheduled to launch to the ISS on 8 August. Technicians were using six new scanners, designed and built at NASA’s ARC in California, to check for problems in some of the 24,000 tiles covering Endeavour. Instead of using small hand-held scales to measure dents and cracks and to estimate the volume of flaws to a worst-case value, the technicians were able to use the new devices to scan flaws and to archive the data. The scanner’s software measured the archived data to determine accurately the depth and volume of flaws and their locations, allowing engineers to examine three-dimensional images of the flaws. NASA had developed the same technology further, to create a larger, desktop version of the scanner. NASA was using the larger version to study samples of material for the heat shield that was under development for Orion.(NASA, “NASA Develops Wireless Tile Scanner for Space Shuttle Inspection,” news release 07-171, 7 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07171_Shuttle_Tile_Scanner.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
107U. S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA’s Space Shuttle and International Space Station Programs: Status and Issues, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 24 July 2007, 14, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE% 2FCommittee+on+Science+and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg36737&packageId=CHRG- 110hhrg36737&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Subcommittee Examines Challenges Facing Space Shuttle and International Space Station Programs,” press release, 24 July 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle. aspx?NewsID=1928 (accessed 29 October 2010); Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Future in Doubt,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 26 July 2007.
The House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing on NASA’s fiscal year (FY) 2008 budget request, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. On 5 February, President George W. Bush had presented to Congress NASA’s proposed US$17.3 billion budget for FY 2008, as a component of the federal budget, including US$4 billion for five Space Shuttle flights and US$2.24 billion for ISS activities. Administrator Griffin urged Congress to fund NASA’s FY 2008 Exploration Systems request fully, enabling NASA to develop the Orion and the Ares-1 crew vehicles. He cautioned that NASA was unlikely to succeed in bringing new exploration capabilities online by 2014 because of several factors, including the cost of retiring the Space Shuttle and making the transition to the new vehicle, the cost of supporting the ISS, and the impact of the overall reduction in funding for NASA mandated by the FY 2007 Continuing Resolution. However, Griffin stated that NASA would continue to “transition the workforce, infrastructure, and equipment from the Space Shuttle to new Exploration systems.” Committee Chair Bart Gordon (D-TN) criticized the Bush administration’s failure to recommend the funding levels necessary to support the exploration initiative, the ISS, the termination of the Space Shuttle program, and the upgrade of the aging Deep Space Network.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s Fiscal Year 2008 Budget Request,” 110th Cong., 1st Sess., 15 March, 2007, 28, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg33803/ pdf/CHRG-110hrg33803.pdf (accessed 20 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s ‘Lean’ Budgetary Outlook Will Have Wide-Ranging Impact on Agency Programs,” press release, 15 March 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1724 (accessed 28 September 2010).)
“Alvin” Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffe’s backup during NASA’s teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavour’s payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavour’s 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavour’s time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavour’s heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, “STS-118: Endeavour,” NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, “Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter,” NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, “Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off,” New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko undertook a spacewalk to prepare the space station for the relocation of the Harmony module, a pressurized compartment designed to serve as a docking port for European and Japanese laboratories. NASA had scheduled the Discovery astronauts to conduct this spacewalk as the fifth and final EVA of their mission to the ISS. However, the discovery and repair of tears in a critical solar-power module had taken precedence. During this EVA, Whitson and Malenchenko cleared cables from Harmony’s destined location and disconnected electrical and fluid connections. Mission STS- 120 had delivered the module to the ISS in October, and the crew had installed Harmony at a temporary location. Completion of Harmony’s transfer would require three spacewalks and extensive robotic work. Astronauts living aboard the ISS would need to reposition the module before NASA launched its next Shuttle mission, scheduled for early December 2010. That mission would carry Europe’s laboratory Columbus to the ISS.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk at Station,” 9 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Tackles Next Phase of Remodeling,” Houston Chronicle, 10 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California after weather concerns prevented the crew from landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. Sunita L. Williams returned home with the STS-117 crew, having surpassed Shannon W. Lucid’s 1996 record of 188 days and 4 hours. Williams had set a new 195-day record for the longest spaceflight by a woman. U.S. astronaut Clayton C. Anderson remained at the ISS, scheduled to return home aboard Discovery in October. The STS-117 mission had successfully increased the power capability of the ISS, preparing the station for the future delivery of European and Japanese laboratories. Although Atlantis had sustained some damage soon after launch on 8 June, several inspections in orbit had revealed no critical damage, and Mission Control had declared the Shuttle’s thermal protection system safe for reentry on flight day 13. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to last 11 days, but had added extra days to allow time in case of the necessity of repairs to the thermal protection system. Olivas had stapled a thermal blanket back into place during the unscheduled fourth spacewalk on 17 June.(NASA, “Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-142, 22 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07142_Atlantis_landing.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Lands in California,” 25 June 2007.)
NASA announced the successful activation and operation of its new oxygen-generation system, which it had tested aboard the ISS between 11 and 14 July. Space Shuttle Discovery had delivered the 1,800-pound (816.5-kilogram) component during Mission STS-121 in July 2006, and the crew had installed it in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory. Since the new system’s installation, the crew had added several pieces of hardware and software to the ISS to support its operation. The crew had installed the last required part, a hydrogen-vent valve, during a spacewalk on Space Shuttle Atlantis’s Mission STS-117 in June 2007. Software updates to U.S. computers earlier in July had completed preparations for the system’s activation and operation. The new system, which would augment the Russian Elektron oxygen generator, would allow the increase of the ISS crew in 2009. NASA had designed the system to generate approximately 12 pounds (5.4 kilograms) of oxygen per day, enough for six people, but it was capable of providing as much as 20 pounds (9 kilograms), enough for 11 people. During the test, the system had generated approximately 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) of oxygen.(NASA, “New NASA System Will Help Space Station Crews Breathe Easier,” news release 07-159, 17 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07157_station_oxygen.html (accessed 11 June 2010).)
NASA named Macro-Fiber Composite (MFC), a device that acts like muscle and nerves to expand and contract surfaces, as the 2006 NASA Government Invention of the Year. A team of researchers at NASA’s LaRC had created the flexible material using ceramic fibers. Voltage applied to the MFC made the ceramic fibers change shape and expand or contract, causing material to bend or twist. The device had industrial and research applications, primarily for vibration monitoring and dampening. The MFC had improved research on helicopter rotor blades and assisted in detecting pipeline cracks. NASA had used the MFC to monitor the vibrations of support structures near the Space Shuttle launchpads during launches.(NASA, “NASA Names New Composite Government Invention of the Year,” news release 07-287, 21 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07287_Invention_of_the_Year.html (accessed 20 October 2010).)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted a spacewalk outside the ISS, lasting 7 hours and 55 minutes, which exceeded the planned time of 6 hours and 30 minutes. The two astronauts moved half of the ISS’s coolant lines to a permanent cooling station on the station’s Port 6 (P6) Truss. Several flakes, either of toxic ammonia or of paint, floated away from a cooling-line cap as the astronauts disconnected two of the fluid lines connected to an ammonia reservoir, preparing to stow them away. Time constraints prevented the astronauts from stowing both of the fluid lines. Moreover, the astronauts failed to accomplish tasks that would enable them to “get ahead,” such as photographing a solar array that the ISS partners planned to retract during the next Shuttle mission in March. Because of the suspected leak during stowage of the fluid line, Mission Control required Lopez-Alegria and Williams to remain in their spacesuits for an additional 25 minutes once inside the ISS’s airlock, as a precaution against contaminating the station with ammonia.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06,” 4 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0706_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Spacewalkers st Start Switch of Station’s Cooling System,” New York Times, 1 February 2007; Mike Schneider, “Astronauts Take 1 of 3 Spacewalks,” Associated Press, 1 February 2007.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from NASA’s KSC on STS-118 for an ISS assembly mission. STS-118 crew included Commander Scott J. Kelly; Pilot Charles O. Hobaugh; Mission Specialists Tracy E. Caldwell, Richard A. Mastracchio, Barbara R. Morgan, Benjamin A.
The ISS crew detached the 34,500-pound (15,649-kilogram) Harmony module from its temporary location and moved it to its permanent location at the front of the laboratory complex. ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson worked from a computer inside the Destiny module, sending commands to release 16 motorized bolts and to detach Harmony from its mounting point. Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani then operated the robotic arm slowly, to move Harmony and to position the module at the front of Destiny. The operation, the most significant relocation of a module ever conducted in the absence of a Space Shuttle, took a little over an hour to complete. The relocation of Harmony prepared the ISS to receive the European Columbus module, scheduled to arrive in December 2010, and the Japanese laboratory, scheduled to arrive in 2011.
SPACEHAB announced that, at the end of October, the company had completed a formal systems requirements review for its Advanced Research and Conventional Technology Utilization Spacecraft (ARCTUS). The company was developing ARCTUS for NASA’s COTS program under an unfunded Space Act Agreement. SPACEHAB had designed ARCTUS to deliver and return pressurized cargo to and from low-Earth orbit, in support of NASA’s requirement to fill the ISS cargo-transport gap following the retirement of the Space Shuttle. NASA had scheduled the Space Shuttle program to end in 2010.(Bettina Haymann Chavanne, “Spacehab Finishes COTS Vehicle Review,” Aviation Week, 21 November 2007. 173 Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Astronauts Take Spacewalk,” 21 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Much Accomplished During Spacewalk: Astronauts Get the Space Station Ready To Receive European Module,” Houston Chronicle, 21 November 2007.)
NASA announced that it had signed a US$1.2 billion contract with Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne of Canoga Park, California, to design, develop, test, and evaluate the J-2X engine that would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 launch vehicles. The Ares 1 and Ares 5 would launch the spacecraft that replaced the Space Shuttle. The contract allowed the continuation of the work that had begun in June 2006 under a preliminary letter contract with Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne, extending the performance period through December 2012. The J-2X was an evolved version of two historic predecessors—the J-2 engine, which had propelled the Apolloera Saturn -1B and Saturn-5 rockets, and the J-2S, a simplified version of the J-2 engine that NASA had tested in the 1970s. Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne had designed and developed both of those engines. According to Jeffrey M. Hanley, Manager of NASA’s Constellation Program, NASA had selected Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne without competitive bidding because the company was the only manufacturer that could meet the Ares design requirements and schedule goals.(NASA, “NASA Awards Upper Stage Engine Contract for Ares Rockets,” news release C07-030, 16 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_C07030_J2X_Contract.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Mark Carreau, “NASA Seals Deal on New Engine for Moon Rocket,” Houston Chronicle, 17 July 2007.)
left side of the truss.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-231, 23 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07231_STS-120_launch.html (accessed 8 September 2010). 156 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648; Audra Ang for Associated Press, “China Successfully Launches Lunar Probe,” 24 October 2007.)
Associate Administrator for NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missions—STS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASA’s efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitz’s resignation, praising the former astronaut’s tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASA’s decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttle’s reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, “Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA,” news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, “Scott J. ‘Doc’ Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former),” http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family,” Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
NASA announced the official appointment of William W. Parsons Jr. as Director of NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Parsons became KSC’s ninth director, succeeding James W. Kennedy, who was retiring from NASA. Parsons had served as KSC’s Deputy Director since February 2006. After the Columbia tragedy in 2003, Parsons had led NASA’s Return to Flight effort as Space Shuttle Program Manager at KSC and had contributed to the success of STS-114 in 2005. Parsons had also served as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi and as Deputy Director of NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin remarked that Parson’s experience as a program manager and center director, in addition to his knowledge of NASA’s human spaceflight community, made him the “right person to take Kennedy Space Center through the end of the Shuttle era and into the era of lunar exploration.”(NASA, “Parsons Assumes Role as NASA’s Kennedy Space Center Director,” news release 07-01, 4 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_0701_Parsons_KSC.html#at (accessed 14 October 2009); Aero- News Network, “Upgraded: Parsons Tapped as Kennedy Space Center Director,” 8 January 2007.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely at NASA’s KSC after the 13-day STS-118 assembly mission to the ISS. Although the Shuttle had sustained damage during launch, including a small gouge in the protective tile on the orbiter’s underside, inspections during orbit had revealed no critical damage to the craft, and NASA managers had declared Endeavour’s thermal protection system safe for reentry. Endeavour had landed a day early because of NASA’s concern about Hurricane Dean. The hurricane had ultimately followed a track that did not threaten Houston, the home of NASA’s Mission Control. During the mission, Canadian astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams had undertaken three of the four spacewalks of STS-118, setting a new spacewalking record for Canada. Williams had surpassed the record held by Canadian Chris A. Hadfield, who had performed two EVAs during a single mission in 2001.(NASA, “Shuttle Endeavour Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-177, 21 August 2007; Andy Blatchford, “Canadian’s Record Spacewalk,” Toronto Star, 19 August 2007; Traci Watson, “Shuttle Coming Home Early as Dean Nears,” USA Today, 20 August 2007.)
SPACEHAB announced that it had filed for a formal dismissal, with prejudice, of all litigation against NASA relating to losses incurred because of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident in 2003. SPACEHAB stated that the potential benefits of continuing litigation no longer outweighed the benefits of the case’s dismissal. At the time of the Columbia accident, NASA had been SPACEHAB’s largest customer. SPACEHAB had initiated a contract claim against NASA in January 2004, seeking US$87.7 million in damages for the loss of its Research Double Module (RDM). Claiming that its liability was limited under the contract, NASA had paid SPACEHAB US$8.2 million, including interest, in October 2004. SPACEHAB had filed an appeal with the Armed Services Board of Contract Appeals, and the two parties had proceeded with preparations for a hearing, which the court had scheduled for July 2008. SPACEHAB had also filed a tort claim in November 2004, seeking US$79.7 million in additional damages, but the court had granted a motion in June 2006 to stay the case until resolution of the contract claim appeal. Dismissal of the claim required SPACEHAB to pay US$500,000 to Lloyd’s of London, the RDM insurer.(SPACEHAB, “SPACEHAB Dismisses RDM Claim with NASA,” news release, 21 February 2007, http://www. spacehab.com/news-and-events/news/spacehab-dismisses-rdm-claim-with-nasa (accessed 13 January 2010); Houston Business Journal, “Spacehab Drops Suit Against NASA,” 21 February 2007.)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted their second spacewalk in four days, to finish connecting cooling lines to a permanent system of the ISS. Working for just over 7 hours, the astronauts rerouted a series of two electrical cables and four quick-disconnect fluid lines to the Destiny laboratory’s permanent cooling system; retracted the aft heat-rejecting radiator on the P6 Truss; and finished disconnecting and stowing the second of two fluid lines for the Early Ammonia Servicer. Lopez- Alegria photographed the starboard solar array and the blanket box into which it folds, so that engineers could analyze the photos and finalize plans for its retraction during the Shuttle Mission STS-117, scheduled for March 2007. He also removed a sunshade that the crew no longer needed from a data-relay box, folding the sunshade to bring it inside the ISS, so that the crew could dispose of it later. At the conclusion of the spacewalk, Williams and Lopez-Alegria again followed precautionary decontamination procedures in the ISS’s airlock, as they had on 31 January, because they had seen ammonia flakes early in the spacewalk. Williams set a record for spacewalking time accrued by a woman—22 hours and 37 minutes—surpassing the record that NASA astronaut Kathryn C. Thornton had set in 1993.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06”; Marc Carreau, “Spacewalkers Finish Job; Astronauts Sets Record,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2007.)
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASA’s SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSC’s A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, “NASA’s Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration,” news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at NASA’s KSC after completing a 15-day mission to the ISS. Highlights of STS-120 included the successful delivery of the Node 2 module called Harmony, which would provide attachment points for future European and Japanese laboratories; the relocation of a solar array and truss to its permanent position, a move that required two spacewalks; and an unprecedented spacewalk to repair damage to the newly relocated solar array, which had failed to deploy properly.(NASA, “Shuttle Discovery Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-249, 7 November 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/nov/HQ_07249_STS-120_Discovery_landing.html (accessed 20 October 2010); John Schwartz, “Eventful 15-Day Mission for Shuttle Discovery Ends,” New York Times, 8 November 2007.)
Shuttle Commander Frederick W. Sturckow guided Space Shuttle Atlantis through an end-over- end rotational pitch maneuver (RPM), to allow ISS crew to photograph the Shuttle’s fragile heat shield. Atlantis’s Mission STS-117 ended in a trouble-free rendezvous and a flawless docking with the ISS. Since the Columbia tragedy, the RPM had become a routine element of flights to the ISS. ISS Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov shot close- up digital photographs of the craft from inside the ISS, images that NASA engineers would examine to determine the need for additional inspections.(William Harwood, “Atlantis Arrives at the Station After Smooth Rendezvous,” Spaceflight Now, 10 June 2007. 81 NASA, “Rededication of NASA’s Space Power Facility in Sandusky,” news release 07-017, 6 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/news/pressrel/2007/07-017_SPF_Rededication.html (accessed 21 May 2010); Maggie Reid, “Plum Brook To Put New NASA Vehicle to the Test,” Toledo Blade (OH), 12 June 2007.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from KSC in Florida at 11:38 a.m. (EDT) on STS-120, a 14- day mission to continue ISS construction. The STS-120 crew consisted of Commander Pamela A. Melroy; Pilot George D. Zamka; and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, Stephanie D. Wilson, Daniel M. Tani, and ESA astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli. Mission Specialist Tani would join Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Yuri I. Malenchenko, replacing Clayton C. Anderson, who had lived aboard the ISS for five months. Mission goals included installing the Harmony connecting module (Node 2) and moving the P6 segment of the ISS truss, with its solar arrays, to a permanent position at the end of the
The X Prize Foundation and Google announced the names of the first 10 teams to qualify to compete in the Google Lunar X Prize competition, which would award US$20 million to the first team to send a rover to the Moon. The winning team must build a rover that would land on the Moon, transmit a data signal back to Earth, travel at least 500 meters (1,640 feet), and then transmit another data signal. The X Prize Foundation would also give US$5 million to the second team to accomplish this goal, as well as offering additional prizes for other lunar achievements, such as the detection of lunar ice. The teams qualifying for the competition were Aeronautics and Cosmonautics Romanian Association (ARCA) of Romania; Astrobotic Technology of the United States; Chandah of the United States; FREDNET, a multinational team; LunaTrex of the Unites States; Micro-Space of the United States; Odyssey Moon of the Isle of Man; Quantum3 of the 22 United States; Southern California Selene Group of the United States; and Team Italia of Italy. The U.S. Navy cruiser Lake Erie fired a missile interceptor that struck down a disabled American spy satellite over the Pacific Ocean. The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) managed the 5,000-pound (2,268-kilgram) satellite, which was orbiting 130 miles (209 kilometers) above Earth’s surface, at over 17,000 miles per hour (27,359 kilometers per hour), when it was hit at 22:30 (EST). The satellite had been inoperative since shortly after its launch in December 2006. Officials had been concerned that its fuel tank, filled with 1,000 pounds (454 kilograms) of toxic hydrazine, could pose a risk to humans if the satellite fell in a populated area. A heat-seeking missile interceptor, retooled to track the frozen satellite, had accomplished the strike. Military officials had timed the strike to occur after Space Shuttle Atlantis’s 20 February 2008 return to Earth, but before 1 March 2008, when the satellite’s fall into the upper atmosphere would disrupt its orbit, making it more difficult to hit. Officials stated that they believed that the impact had been strong enough to incinerate the fuel tank, although they would not know for 24 hours whether that had actually occurred.(Thom Shanker, “Missile Strikes a Spy Satellite Falling From Its Orbit,” New York Times, 21 February 2008. 24 NASA, “NASA Selects New Deputy Associate Administrator of Strategic Partnerships and Space Program Manager,” news release 08-065, 22 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/ HQ_08065_ New_Shuttle_Manage.html (accessed 28 December 2010).)
Atlantis landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at 14:08 (UT) after a 13-day journey to the ISS, successfully completing the Shuttle mission STS-122, to deliver and install ESA’s microgravity science laboratory Columbus. The seven-member crew included American astronauts Stephen N. Frick, Alan G. Poindexter, Leland D. Melvin, Rex J. Walheim, and Stanley G. Love, and ESA astronauts Hans W. Schlegel and Léopold Eyharts. The mission had begun with a 19:45 (UT) launch on 7 February 2008 from KSC and had included three spacewalks. Crew members had docked the Columbus laboratory to the Harmony module of the ISS; installed power, data, and cooling cables to the laboratory; replaced a spent nitrogen tank; placed two science experiments on the laboratory’s exterior; retrieved a broken gyroscope; installed a solar monitor; and positioned the European Technology Exposure Facility. STS-122 had also exchanged Eyharts for American astronaut Daniel M. Tani, who had been aboard the ISS for almost four months.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 652; NASA, “Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 08-061, 20 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08061_Atlantis_Lands.html (accessed 28 December 2010).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC at 11:15 (EDT), completing Mission STS-124 to the ISS. The crew included NASA astronauts, Commander Mark E. Kelly, Kenneth T. Ham, Michael E. Fossum, Karen L. Nyberg, Ronald J. Garan Jr., and Garrett E. Reisman, and Akihiko Hoshide of JAXA. Reisman was returning to Earth after almost three months aboard the ISS. Gregory E. Chamitoff had taken his place aboard the ISS. The astronauts had transported the second room of JAXA’s Kibo laboratory, the JPM, to the ISS. During the course of the 14-day mission, the crew had conducted three spacewalks. They had installed the JPM, which was approximately the size of a bus, along with its robotic arm. In addition, they had installed in its permanent position the laboratory’s logistics module, which had been in a temporary location since March 2008.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 08-150, 14 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08150_discovery_lands.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
GAO released a report assessing NASA’s challenges in defining the scope and costs of Space Shuttle transition and retirement. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008 (Pub. L. No. 110161), had directed GAO to evaluate NASA’s plans and progress in transitioning and retiring the SSP’s equipment and facilities. From February 2008 to August 2008, GAO had examined the challenges NASA had faced in defining the scope and costs of retiring the SSP. GAO had noted whether NASA had reflected these costs in its budget requests. The report noted some specific challenges in ascertaining costs, including NASA’s need to determine which SSP equipment would be retained for the Constellation Program; the cost of making artifacts from the SSP safe for public display, and how to offset many costs through the exchange or sale of property. The report determined that NASA’s 2010 budget request had not accurately reflected the costs of SSP retirement, partly because NASA had not yet assessed those costs, and partly because NASA had not reflected some of the SSP’s indirect costs in the SSP budget line. The report directed NASA to include in its budget requests for FY 2010, and for future years, its best estimates of total direct and indirect costs of transition and retirement of the SSP. NASA concurred with GAO’s recommendation.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA: Agency Faces Challenges Defining Scope and Costs of Space Shuttle Transition and Retirement” (report no. GAO-08-1096, Washington, DC, September 2008), http://www.gao. gov/new.items/d081096.pdf (accessed 3 August 2011).)
Warner K. Dahm, the last of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team to retire from NASA, died at age 90 in Huntsville, Alabama. A German aerodynamics expert, Dahm had joined von Braun’s program during World War II and had later come to the United States with his colleagues to assist in developing American rocketry. He had worked at NASA first as a member of the team for Operation Paperclip in Texas and later at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Over the years, Dahm had lent his expertise to the design of the V-2 and Wasserfall anti-aircraft rockets, the Redstone rocket, the Jupiter ballistic missile, Saturn 1, Saturn 1B, the Saturn-5 rocket that flew America’s first astronauts to the Moon, Skylab, and the Space Shuttle Transportation System. In 2006, at the age of 89, he had retired from his position as Chief 5 Aerodynamicist at Marshall. Dahm had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 2003.
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched at 00:55 (UT) from NASA’s KSC with a crew of seven astronauts and a cargo of 32,000 pounds (14,514.96 kilograms) of supplies. The crew reported seeing debris falling during the seconds after liftoff; however, they saw no evidence of damage to the Space Shuttle. The main goal of Mission STS-126 was to make improvements to the ISS that would expand its housing capacity from a crew of three to a crew of six. The astronauts planned to install additional sleeping quarters, equipment for generating oxygen, a resistance exercise device, an additional toilet, and a system for purifying fluids—including urine—into drinking water. Additionally, officials had scheduled four spacewalks, primarily to clean and lubricate the two Solar Alpha Rotary Joints, which allow the ISS’s solar arrays to track the Sun. The STS-126 crew, commanded by Christopher J. Ferguson, included Pilot Eric A. Boe, and Mission Specialists Stephen G. Bowen, Robert S. Kimbrough, Sandra H. Magnus, Donald R. Pettit, and Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 661, 1 December 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx661.html (accessed 22 August 2011); NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Launches on Home Improvement Mission,” news release 08- 294, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-294_STS126_launch.html (accessed 22 August 2011); John Schwartz, “Shuttle Departs with Gear for Space Station,” New York Times, 15 November 2008.)
George David Low, a former NASA astronaut who had flown on three Space Shuttle missions, died at the age of 52 from colon cancer. Low, who was the son of former NASA Director George M. Low, had worked at NASA’s JPL from 1980 to 1984 before NASA selected him to train as an astronaut. During his 12 years as an astronaut, Low had spent more than 714 hours in space and had circled Earth more than 540 times. After retiring as an astronaut, Low had continued to serve NASA on the Russian Integration Team and in the Legislative Affairs Office. In 1996 he had joined Orbital Sciences Corporation, and in 2006 he had become the Senior Vice President and Program Manager for Orbital’s Commercial Orbital Transportation Service program.(Joe Holley, “G. David Low, 52; Cerebral Astronaut Flew on 3 Shuttles,” Washington Post, 20 March 2008.)
NASA announced that it had signed a Space Act Agreement with Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, for a contract to develop a commercial launch system that would be capable of ferrying cargo and crew to the ISS. NASA had funded the contract, worth US$170 million, under the Commercial Orbital Transportation Services Project (COTS), an initiative designed to encourage private enterprise to create space transport systems that would be available for use after the retirement of the Space Shuttle. NASA had collaborated with seven other corporations through COTS, including SpaceX of El Segundo, California, the only other company to receive NASA funding.(NASA, “NASA Partners with Orbital Sciences for Space Transport Services,” news release 08-058, 19 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08058_COTS_Selection.html (accessed 28 December 2010); Brian Berger, “Orbital Wins $171 Million Space Station Re-Supply Demo Deal,” Space.com, 19 February 2008, http://www.space.com/4995-orbital-wins-171-million-space-station-supply-demo-deal.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
NASA announced that it had awarded an Integrated Mission Operations Contract to United Space Alliance of Houston, Texas, for mission and flight support of the ISS and for human space exploration activities after the retirement of the Space Shuttle. The contractor would provide development and execution of capabilities for ground-based human-spaceflight operations, including training crew and flight controllers, preparing and supporting mission planning, and executing real-time missions. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, valued at US$206.5 million, covered the period of 1 November 2008 through 30 September 2011. An optional one-year extension, if exercised, would continue through 30 September 2012 and would bring the total value of the contract to US$371 million.
The House Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics received testimony on the status of the ISS, including the progress of its construction and the manner in which the ISS partners should use, operate, and manage it. NASA’s FY 2009 budget would provide US$2.06 billion to the ISS program, an increase of US$247 million over NASA’s 2008 funding of the program. William H. Gerstenmaier, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Operations, praised the ISS for its role in promoting U.S. leadership in space operations, as well as for the many training and research opportunities that it would provide. However, Cristina T. Chaplain, Director of GAO’s Acquisition and Sourcing Management, testified that GAO continued to question NASA’s ability to complete assembly of the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and NASA’s capacity to provide logistics and maintenance to the ISS after 2010. Chaplain had previously stated GAO’s concerns in her July 2007 testimony before the Subcommittee. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) called for farsighted budgeting measures that would adequately fund ISS resupply missions after the Shuttle’s retirement.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, “Construction of ISS Progressing, Subcommittee Explores Research Capabilities,” press release, 24 April 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/PressRoom/Item.aspx?ID=97 (accessed 19 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “NASA’s International Space Station Program: Status and Issues,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 24 April 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41799/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41799.pdf (accessed 18 March 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, “Subcommittee Examines the Status of the International Space Station,” press release, 24 April 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/ PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=2167 (accessed 15 March 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 21:02 (UT), commencing Mission STS- 124 to the ISS. During liftoff, observers noticed pieces of insulating foam falling from Discovery’s external fuel tank; however, NASA officials stated that they were not worried about the foam, since it had fallen after the time when it could have damaged the spacecraft. Seven crew members were aboard the Space Shuttle, including American astronauts, Commander Mark E. Kelly, Pilot Kenneth T. Ham, Gregory E. Chamitoff, Michael E. Fossum, Ronald J. Garan Jr., and Karen L. Nyberg, and Japanese astronaut Akihiko Hoshide. During the mission, the astronauts planned to repair a broken toilet on the ISS and to install on the Japanese Kibo laboratory a new, 16-tonne (16,000-kilogram or 35,273-pound) room, known as the Japanese Pressurized Module (JPM). The astronauts planned three spacewalks. In addition to installing the JPM, they intended to clean a damaged power-supply rotary joint and to perform routine maintenance. NASA planned for the mission to last for 14 days. Garrett E. Reisman, who had been aboard the ISS since March 2008, would return to Earth with the STS-124 crew, and Chamitoff would remain aboard the ISS in his place.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 655; NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches with Japanese Laboratory,” news release 08-136, 31 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08136_STS-124_launch_release. html (accessed 16 March 2011); John Schwartz, “Shuttle Discovery Heads Toward the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 June 2008.)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held its first hearing to review NASA’s proposed fiscal year (FY) 2009 budget request and FY 2008 Operating Plan. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony in support of NASA’s US$17.6 billion request, which would allocate US$5.78 billion for Space Shuttle and ISS programs, US$4.44 billion for science, US$3.5 billion for development of new crewed spacecraft, and US$447 million for aeronautics research. Griffin devoted much of his oral testimony to NASA’s request for an extension of a statutory waiver, which permits funding for payments to Russia for crew transport to the ISS. The current waiver had been a provision of the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Non Proliferation Act (Pub. L. No. 106-178, as amended). Griffin stated that NASA needed legislative authorization for the funding in 2008, because Russia required 36 months to fabricate new transport vehicles; therefore, NASA needed to finalize contractual agreements by late 2008, so that Russia could complete the vehicles by 2012.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Committee Examines FY09 NASA Budget,” press release, 13 February 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/ PRArticle.aspx?NewsID= 2088 (accessed 4 January 2010); United Press International, “NASA Proposes $17.6 Billion Budget,” 4 February 2008; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s Fiscal Year 2009 Budget Request,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 13 February 2008, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG- 110hhrg40598/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg40598.pdf (accessed 4 January 2011).)
NASA announced astronaut James F. Reilly’s resignation from NASA to pursue a career in the private sector. Reilly had been an astronaut since 1994. During his first mission, in January 1998, he had flown aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-89 to Mir. In 2001 he had participated in the STS-104 flight of Atlantis to the ISS. On that mission, he had made three spacewalks to install a joint airlock on the ISS. On his final flight, Mission STS-117 in 2007, he had again flown aboard Atlantis to the ISS, making two additional spacewalks to perform construction and maintenance on the ISS. During his career as an astronaut, Reilly had logged more than 853 hours in space and more than 31 hours of spacewalking.
NASA announced the appointment of Arthur E. Goldman as Director of NASA’s SSC. Goldman replaced Robert D. Cabana, who had accepted a position as Director of NASA’s KSC in October 2008. Goldman had begun his service with NASA in 1990 as a Project Engineer for the Space Shuttle Systems Integration Office at NASA’s MSFC, becoming Supervisor of that program in 1992. In 1994 he had transferred to the Space Shuttle Main Engine Project, working first as Manufacturing Engineer, then as Technical Assistant, and finally as Business Manager. Goldman had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s SSC since 2006. He had received many professional awards, including NASA’s Exceptional Achievement Medal and the Commendation of the Director of MSFC.(NASA, “Goldman Names Director at Stennis Space Center,” news release 08-303, 20 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-303_Goldman_SSC.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
President George W. Bush signed Pub. L. No 110-422, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2008, which authorized an appropriation of US$20.2 billion to NASA for FY 2009 for science, aeronautics, exploration, education, and space operations. The law required that NASA fly nine Space Shuttle missions to the ISS, two more flights than the previous manifest had required. Additionally, the law required that NASA make reasonable efforts to launch the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, an observatory that the crew would attach to the outside of the ISS. The law also required that NASA take all necessary steps to ensure that the ISS remained viable through at least 2020. The law authorized US$1 billion for the Constellation Program, to advance progress on the Orion and Ares vehicles. To allow flexibility in scheduling future Space Shuttle missions, the law prohibited NASA from taking any actions that would prevent the Space Shuttle’s use past its expected 2010 retirement.(Eun Kyung Kim, “NASA Bill Boosts Budget $2.6B, Adds Flight,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 2008; Mark Matthews, “Bush Signs NASA Authorization Act,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 October 2008; Mark Carreau, “Bush Signs Act Allowing NASA More Shuttle Time, Money,” Houston Chronicle, 17 October 2008.)
NASA announced that William W. Parsons would be resigning as Director of NASA’s KSC to pursue opportunities in the private sector. Parsons had begun his career with NASA in 1990. He had served in numerous positions, including Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC), Launch Site Support Manager, Manager of the Space Station Hardware Integration Office, Chief of Operations of the Propulsion Test Directorate, SSP Manager, and Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC. NASA had selected former astronaut Robert D. Cabana as the new Director of NASA’S KSC. Cabana, who had completed his astronaut training in 1986, had flown on four Space Shuttle missions: STS-41 in October 1990, STS-53 in December 1992, STS-65 in July 1994, and STS-88 in December 1988. Additionally, he had served as Director of NASA’s SSC, Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC, Chief of NASA’s Astronaut Office, Manager of International Operations of the ISS Program, Director of NASA’s Human Spaceflight Program in Russia, Deputy Director of the ISS Program, and Director of Flight Crew Operations.(NASA, “Cabana To Succeed Parsons as Kennedy Space Center Director,” news release 08-249, 30 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08-249_Parsons_leaves.html (accessed 25 July 2011). 123 Brian Berger, “Bush Signs NASA Budget, Soyuz Waiver into Law,” Space.com, 5 October 2008, http://www. space.com/5929-bush-signs-nasa-budget-soyuz-waiver-law.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Wayne Hale Jr. as NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Strategic Partnerships. Hale had begun his three-decade career with NASA in 1978 in Flight Operations at NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC). Hale had headed the Propulsion Systems Section of Mission Control from 1985 to 1988 and had overseen flight- control teams in Mission Control during all aspects of 40 Space Shuttle missions. He had served as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program (SSP) since 2005. In his new position, Hale would work in the Space Operations Mission Directorate to build alliances across the public and private sectors. John P. Shannon, who had served as Hale’s deputy since 2005, would succeed him as SSP Manager. Shannon had begun his career with NASA in 1988. When NASA appointed him Space Shuttle Flight Director in 1993, Shannon had become the youngest person in NASA’s history to hold that post. After Shannon served as Deputy Director of the Columbia Task Force in 2003, NASA had selected him to create the SSP’s Flight Operations and Integration Office.
A Russian Soyuz spacecraft landed in Kazakhstan at 10:37 p.m. (CDT), returning space tourist Richard A. Garriott and cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko from the ISS. Garriott, who had been the sixth tourist to visit the ISS, had lifted off for the ISS with two American astronauts on 12 October 2008. Commander Volkov and Flight Engineer Kononenko had served 197 days aboard the ISS on the Expedition 17 mission, performing two spacewalks. During their mission, NASA’s Space Shuttle had visited the ISS to deliver a Japanese laboratory. The Expedition 18 crew, American Commander E. Michael Fincke and Russian Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, had replaced Volkov and Kononenko on the ISS.(Tariq Malik, “New Space Station Crew Takes Charge,” Space.com, 22 October 2008, http://www.space.com/ 6011-space-station-crew-takes-charge.html (accessed 11 August 2011); NASA, “Expedition 17 Crew Returns from International Space Station,” news release 08-269, 23 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/ HQ_08-269_Expedition_17_landing.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 1:25 p.m. (PST), returning seven astronauts from a 16-day mission to the ISS. While aboard the ISS, crew members had unloaded over 7 tons (6.35 tonnes or 6,350.29 kilograms) of cargo from Endeavour; set up a refrigerator, exercise machine, two sleep stations, and a rack for science experiments; and activated a recycling system to turn astronauts’ urine and perspiration into potable water. The crew of Endeavour brought back samples so that NASA scientists could test the water before NASA approved the system for use. Astronauts Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn- Piper, Stephen G. Bowen, and Robert S. Kimbrough had conducted four spacewalks to repair the
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 110-329, the Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance and Continuing Appropriations Act for 2009, which included language renewing through July 2016 NASA’s waiver from the Iran-North Korea-Syria Nonproliferation Act (INKSNA). The terms of INKSNA, as enacted in 2000, barred U.S. government agencies from making “extraordinary payments” to Russia, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. Under these terms, NASA would be unable to purchase transport on Soyuz spacecraft. In 2005 Congress had enacted legislation granting NASA a waiver from INKSNA through January 2012, allowing NASA to negotiate a US$700 million contract for occasional flights to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. However, that contract would expire in 2011, and Congress needed to renew the waiver before NASA could begin negotiating a new contract. NASA would need to purchase Soyuz vehicles to transport American, Canadian, European and Japanese astronauts to the ISS during the period between the retirement of the Space Shuttle Program (SSP), scheduled for 2010, and the first flights of the Constellation Program, scheduled for 2015.
NASA announced that astronaut Carl E. Walz would leave his position to take a job in the private sector. NASA had selected Walz as an astronaut in January 1990. He had flown on four Space Shuttle missions, spending a cumulative 231 days in space. Walz had flown on STS-51 in September 1993. During that mission, he had undertaken a 7-hour spacewalk. On July 1994, he had flown on STS-65; and, in September 1996, on STS-79. In December 2001, he had flown to the ISS on Expedition 4. During that expedition, he had taken two spacewalks. Walz had also served in a variety of technical and managerial positions in the NASA Astronaut Office. At the time of his resignation, he had been serving as Director for the Advanced Capabilities Division in the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate at NASA Headquarters.(NASA, “Veteran Astronaut Carl Walz Leaves NASA,” news release 08-318, 4 December 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-318_Walz_Leaves.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) released a report assessing the implications of possible delays in the retirement of the Space Shuttle and the commencement of Constellation Program flights. The report determined that NASA had a 20 to 60 percent probability of being able to fly the 10 scheduled Space Shuttle missions in the next two years. CBO had studied the gap in NASA’s ability to launch human spaceflight after the retirement of the Space Shuttle and had determined that a one-year delay in the retirement of the SSP would result in a corresponding one-year delay in initial flights of the Constellation Program. Furthermore, CBO had found that that the gap could grow longer if NASA proved unable to meet the technological challenges of developing the Ares and Orion vehicles. Based on an analysis of 72 past NASA programs, CBO estimated that the cost growth of the Constellation Program would be approximately 50 percent and that the program would require as much as US$7 billion more than NASA had budgeted. Therefore, if NASA did not have real growth in its budgetary allocation, the additional costs could delay the initial operating capability for Ares I and Orion by as much as 18 months. CBO projected that funding of the Constellation Program would increase after 2013; however, CBO also reported that NASA had determined that additional funding would not change the date that the Ares and Orion vehicles would reach initial operation capability.(Becky Iannotta, “Report: Space Shuttle Retirement Date in Jeopardy,” Space.com, 4 November 2008, http://www.space.com/6062-report-space-shuttle-retirement-date-jeopardy.html (accessed 25 August 2011); U.S. Congressional Budget Office, “An Analysis of NASA’s Plans for Continuing Human Spaceflight After Retiring the Space Shuttle (report, Washington, DC, November 2008), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/98xx/doc9886/11-03-NASA_ Letter.pdf (accessed 25 August 2011).)
The Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Space, Aeronautics, and Related Sciences held a field hearing in Florida to assess the impact on NASA’s KSC workforce of the transition from the Space Shuttle Program (SSP) to the Constellation Program. Early in 2008, NASA had estimated that ending the SSP would force the elimination of 6,400 workers. However, at the hearing, NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified that new hiring for the Constellation Program would offset some of those job losses. Altogether, he estimated that NASA’s KSC would only lose 3,000−4,000 workers. As it shifted its workforce duties from other space centers to NASA’s KSC, NASA would also create some new jobs. For instance, although the sustaining engineering for the SSP had mostly taken place at NASA’s JSC and NASA’s MSFC, the sustaining engineering work for the Constellation Program would occur in Florida. Additionally, NASA intended to perform final assembly and integration of the Altair landers, Ares-5 rockets, and Orion capsules at NASA’s KSC. At the time of the hearing, NASA’s KSC had a workforce of 14,500 people.(Todd Halvorson, “KSC Tries To Salvage Some Jobs,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 June 2008.)
SpaceX announced the successful demonstration of a laser-imaging detection and ranging (LIDAR) sensor called DragonEye, a proximity sensor that had launched aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle Endeavor on 15 July 2009 in Mission STS-127. With the help of NASA’s Commercial Crew and Cargo Program Office, SpaceX had tested DragonEye in proximity with the ISS, in preparation for future visits of SpaceX’s Dragon spacecraft to the ISS. DragonEye would guide the Dragon craft as it approached the space station, providing three-dimensional images based on the amount of time needed for a single laser pulse from the sensor to reach a target and to bounce back. DragonEye had used flight data gathered on board Endeavour to detect the ISS successfully and to track it through various approach and departure maneuvers. Following Endeavour’s return to Earth, DragonEye had returned to SpaceX for evaluation. SpaceX’s Falcon-9 launch vehicle and Dragon were both under contract to NASA to provide cargo resupply to the ISS, following the Space Shuttle’s retirement. The contract included 12 flights between 2010 and 2015, with SpaceX representing the only COTS contender with the ability to return cargo to Earth.(Space Exploration Technologies, “SpaceX’s DragonEye Navigation Sensor Successfully Demonstrated on Space Shuttle,” SpaceX news release 25, September 2009, http://www.spacex.com/press.php?page=20090925 (accessed 19 September 2011); Laser Focus World, “SpaceX Successfully Tests DragonEye LIDAR on Space Shuttle,” 30 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of seven astronauts landed safely at 10:48 a.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC, concluding a 16-day mission to the ISS. The mission had delivered to the ISS the final piece of JAXA’s Kibo laboratory, as well as the new ISS crew member Timothy L. Kopra. Koichi Wakata was returning to Earth with the Endeavour crew after living at the ISS for more than four months. When the seven-member Shuttle crew joined the six-member Expedition 20 in residence at the ISS, the mission featured the largest number of people aboard the ISS to date— and the largest human gathering ever to take place in space. Over the course of five spacewalks, STS-127 crew had transported and assembled the final two sections of the US$1 billion Japanese Kibo laboratory, resupplied the station, and upgraded its power supply.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-179, 31 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_179_Shuttle_landing_success.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Eric Berger, “Endeavour Ends Historic Mission,” Houston Chronicle, 1 August 2009; Scott Powers, “Shuttle Landing: Space Shuttle Endeavour Lands at KSC,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 August 2009.)
Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiment’s purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASA’s LaRC.(Diane Tennant, “NASA Opens Suitcase from Space,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, “MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening,” LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC at 2:28 p.m. (EST) on STS-129, carrying nearly 30,000 pounds of replacement parts for use at the ISS. NASA had packed the spare parts inside two Express Logistics Carriers (ELCs). Astronauts would install the ELCs outside the space station on the central truss during one of the three scheduled spacewalks. Most of the spare parts, which included two steering gyroscopes, a group of tanks, pumps for the ISS cooling system, and a hand for a robotic arm, would remain packed indefinitely until a need for them arose. The STS-129 crew was composed of Commander Charles O. Hobaugh; Pilot Barry E. Wilmore; and Mission Specialists Leland D. Melvin, Michael J. Foreman, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Randolph J. Bresnik.(NASA Space Shuttle Mission Archives, “Mission STS-129: Delivering the Goods,” 4 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/sts129/launch/129_overview.html (accessed 21 November 2011); James Dean, “A ‘Picture-Perfect’ Start: Atlantis Hauls Spare Parts to International Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 November 2009.)
After receiving clearance to return home, astronauts aboard the orbiting Space Shuttle Endeavour successfully deployed two sets of small satellites. Endeavour had undocked from the ISS on 28 July in preparation for the return flight of STS-127. Endeavour’s crew first deployed a pair of small satellites from the Shuttle’s payload bay—the student-built DRAGONSAT (Dual RF Astrodynamic GPS Orbital Navigator Satellite), part of a study to demonstrate autonomous rendezvous and docking technologies, as well as GPS systems. The crew later jettisoned the two 19-inch (48-centimeter) spheres that comprised the Naval Research Laboratory’s ANDE-2 (Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment-2) mission. Although identical in size, each sphere had a different mass. Researchers planned to observe differences in the spheres’ orbits, as part of a study of the density of Earth’s atmosphere.(Tariq Malik, “Shuttle Astronauts Deploy Satellites Ahead of Landing,” Space.com, 30 July 2009, http://www. space.com/7078-shuttle-astronauts-deploy-satellites-landing.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis arrived at the ISS on mission STS-129. With the assistance of a robotic arm, NASA astronauts immediately unloaded one of two ELCs: a 16-foot-by-14-foot (5-meter- by-4-meter) platform, containing pumps, storage tanks, and other equipment weighing hundreds of pounds apiece. All of the equipment was too large to launch aboard any vehicle other than the Shuttle. With only five launches to go before the scheduled 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle program, NASA planned for the Shuttles to carry to the ISS as many spare parts as possible in the time remaining. In addition to spare parts sent to the ISS for storage, Atlantis had also carried thousands of microscopic specimens. NASA intended to use the specimens in experiments studying the effect of gravity on human muscle development and physiology. Upon the docking of Atlantis with the ISS, NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had been on board the ISS for approximately three months, became a member of the Shuttle crew. Stott would return home on board Atlantis at the conclusion of STS-129.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station, Unloads Parts,” 19 November 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Shuttle Atlantis Docks with Space Station,” 19 November 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 5:53 p.m. (PDT), ending a successful 14-day mission to the ISS. Weather prevented the crew from landing at KSC in Florida. STS-128 had delivered to the ISS NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had begun a three-month mission as a resident, replacing Timothy L. Kopra. Kopra had returned home with Discovery’s crew. Discovery had also delivered to the ISS 9 tons (8.16 tonnes, or 8,165 kilograms) of supplies, to sustain the six-person crew and to equip the station for more science experiments. The delivery had included two refrigerator-sized science racks for the station—one for conducting experiments on materials such as metals, glass, and ceramics, and the other for studying how fluids react in microgravity. In addition, Discovery had delivered a freezer for samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air-purification system, and a treadmill named for the comedian Stephen Colbert. The crew had undertaken three spacewalks, to replace experiments outside ESA’s Columbus laboratory and to empty an ammonia-storage tank.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery Returns to Earth After Successful Mission,” news release 09-212, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-212_Discovery_Lands.html (accessed 15 September 2011); James Dean, “Storms Prevent KSC Landing, Divert Discovery to California,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 September 2009; William Harwood, “Shuttle Glides to a California Landing,” New York Times, 12 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at NASA’s KSC at 9:44 a.m. (EST), successfully ending an 11-day mission to the ISS. Atlantis crew delivered and equipped the ISS with nearly 30,000 pounds (13,608 kilograms, or 13.6 tonnes) of critical spare parts. Atlantis crew also conducted three spacewalks in which astronauts completed extra tasks. The Shuttle crew also worked with five U.S., Russian, and European astronauts on board the ISS, to establish power, cooling, and airway connections ahead of the scheduled February arrival of the Tranquility module. The Shuttle and ISS crews also installed new external communications systems to facilitate future maintenance of the space station. Atlantis returned with ISS resident Nicole P. Stott, who had spent 91 days in space. NASA expected that Stott’s return would be the Shuttle’s last rotation of a station crew member.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Crew Returns Home After 11-Day Mission,” news release 09-279, 27 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-279_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Mark Carreau for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Lands Back on Earth,” 30 November 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 11:59 p.m. (EDT) on STS-128, to deliver supplies, equipment, and a new crew member to the ISS. The STS-128 crew comprised Commander Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow; Pilot Kevin A. Ford; and Mission Specialists Patrick G. Forrester, Jose M. Hernandez, John D. “Danny” Olivas, and ESA astronaut A. Christer Fuglesang. Also aboard was Nicole P. Stott, who would begin a three-month mission in residence at the ISS, replacing NASA’s Timothy L. Kopra. Discovery carried in its cargo bay the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module, a pressurized “moving van” that the crew would temporarily install at the ISS. Leonardo would deliver storage racks, materials and fluids science racks, a freezer to store research samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air purification system, and a treadmill named after comedian Stephen Colbert. Colbert had received the most entries in NASA’s online poll to name the station’s Node 3, but NASA had named Node 3 “Tranquility.” As a consolation prize for Colbert, NASA had decided to name the treadmill COLBERT (Combined Operational Load Bearing External Resistance Treadmill).(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Enhance Space Station Science,” news release 09-196, 29 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-196_STS-128_Launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched on STS-127 at 6:03 p.m. (EDT) from NASA’s KSC in Florida, on a 16-day mission to the ISS. The mission would include five spacewalks, deliver the final segment to the JAXA Kibo laboratory, and deliver a new crew member for the ISS. The launch was STS-127’s sixth attempt—NASA had aborted two earlier attempted launches of the mission in June, after poor weather and the discovery of potentially hazardous fuel leaks had caused three scrubs since 11 July. The crew was composed of Commander Mark L. Polansky; Pilot Douglas G. Hurley; and Mission Specialists Christopher J. Cassidy, Thomas H. Marshburn, David A. Wolf, Timothy L. Kopra, and CSA astronaut Julie Payette. Kopra would replace ISS crew member Koichi Wakata, who had been aboard the ISS for more than three months. Kopra would return to Earth with STS-128, which NASA had scheduled to launch in August 2009.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Launches To Complete Japanese Module,” news release 09-160, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-160_STS-127_Launches.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Blasts Off from Cape Canaveral,” 16 July 2009.)
NASA announced the successful completion of a test firing of the igniter designed to start the Ares-I rocket’s first-stage motor. The firing took place at ATK Launch Systems test facilities near Promontory, Utah. The successful test of the igniter, which was an enhanced version of the flight-proven igniter used in Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters, marked a milestone in the continuing development of the Ares-I first stage and paved the way for the first ground test, scheduled to occur later in 2009. Engineers had designed the Ares-I igniter to take advantage of upgraded liner and insulation materials with improved thermal properties. The materials would protect the igniter’s case from the burning solid propellant. The new igniter, approximately 18 inches (45.7 centimeters) in diameter and 36 inches (91.4 centimeters) long, was a small, high- burn-rate solid rocket motor designed to be secured in the forward segment of the five-segment booster. An ignition command would send a flame down the core of the 142-foot (43.3-meter) solid rocket motor, generating more than 3.5 million pounds (1.59 million kilograms) of thrust to trigger liftoff of the rocket.(NASA, “NASA’s Ares I Rocket First Stage Igniter Successfully Tested,” news release 09-055, 10 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09055_ARES_igniter_test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 7:43 p.m. (EDT). STS-119 carried the fourth and final set of solar-array wings, which would complete the ISS’s truss when installed. The schedule for the 13-day mission included three spacewalks to install the S6-truss segment on the starboard side of the ISS and to deploy the solar arrays. The seven-member crew was composed of Commander Lee J. Archambault, Pilot Dominic A. “Tony” Antonelli, and Mission Specialists Joseph M. Acaba, Steven R. Swanson, Richard R. Arnold II, John L. Phillips, and JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata. Wakata would remain at the ISS, replacing Expedition 18 crew member Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the station for more than four months. Acaba and Arnold, former teachers who had become fully trained NASA astronauts, were on their first mission, scheduled to undertake critical spacewalking tasks. STS-119 was one month behind schedule; NASA had delayed the launch four times because of fragile valves inside the Shuttle’s propulsion system. On 11 March, NASA had postponed Discovery’s launch because, during fueling, engineers had detected a leak associated with the gaseous hydrogen venting system. Because of the delays, NASA had shortened the STS-119 mission by one day and had dropped one of the four spacewalks originally scheduled.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Fully Power Space Station,” news release 09-060, 15 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-060_Discovery_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, “Discovery Heads to International Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 March 2009.)
NASA marked the 10-year anniversary of the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory with the release of the first of three new versions of classic Chandra images. NASA planned to release the other two versions over the following three months. The newly released image showed the remnants of the supernova E0102, located 190,000 light-years away from Earth, in the Small Magellanic Cloud. Chandra had made its first observation of E0102 shortly after its 1999 launch. The observatory had created the new image from recent x-ray data showing the supernova’s outer blast wave and its inner ring of cooler material. This x-ray data had provided astronomers with new information about the geometry of the remnant and the nature of the explosion. Chandra had launched in 1999 from aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, deploying on a five-year mission that had ushered in an unprecedented decade of discovery. Among its achievements, Chandra had provided the strongest evidence to date for the existence of dark matter. Chandra had independently confirmed the existence of dark energy, producing spectacular images of the titanic explosions created when matter swirled toward supermassive black holes.(NASA, “NASA Celebrates Chandra X-Ray Observatory’s 10th Anniversary,” news release 09-171, 23 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-171_Chandra_anniversary.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Space.com, “On 10th Birthday, Chandra Spies Stellar Explosion,” 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7039-10th- birthday-chandra-spies-stellar-explosion.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
Astronomer Arthur D. Code died in Madison, Wisconsin, at the age of 85. A designer of space observatories, Code had worked with a team of scientists from NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory in 1968, to send into orbit a bat-shaped satellite—the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO 2). Although the original OAO craft had failed in its 1966 mission, OAO 2 had succeeded, yielding information about the composition of stars, comets, and galactic gases. Intended to last a year, the OAO-2 mission had remained operational until 1973. OAO 2 had sent back data indicating that young stars in the constellations Scorpius and Orion are far hotter than previously thought and, therefore, are likely aging more quickly than astronomers had previously believed. OAO-2 successor craft included OAO 3 and NASA’s HST. Following the OAO-2 mission, Code had taught at the University of Wisconsin, where he had refined his designs and had analyzed data retrieved from subsequent satellites. In 1990 he and a team of students had sent an ultraviolet-detecting telescope to orbit aboard Space Shuttle Columbia; the team had used the device to study polarized ultraviolet light. Code had served as president of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and had been a member of the NAS. NASA had awarded him its Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.(Jeremy Pearce, “Arthur Code, Astronomer and Professor, Dies at 85,” New York Times, 23 March 2009.)
2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Mission’s 3rd and Final Spacewalk,” 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission,” 5 September 2009.)
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASA’s MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttle’s main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicle’s Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSC’s propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFC’s Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, “Lightfoot Named Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
The U.S. Senate confirmed retired U.S. Marine Corps general and former astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. as NASA’s twelfth Administrator, marking the first appointment of an African American as NASA’s Administrator. During his 34-year career with the Marine Corps, Bolden had spent 14 years as a member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, which he had joined in 1980. As an astronaut, he had traveled to orbit four times aboard the Space Shuttle, between 1986 and 1994. On two of those trips he had served as Commander of the Shuttle. His missions had included the deployment of the HST and the first joint U.S.-Russian Shuttle mission. While he was an astronaut, Bolden had fulfilled many technical assignments, serving as Astronaut Office Safety Officer; Technical Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations; Special Assistant to the Director of JSC; Lead Astronaut for vehicle test and checkout at KSC; Chief of the Safety Division at JSC, where he oversaw safety efforts for the return to flight after the 1986 Challenger accident; and Assistant Deputy Administrator at NASA Headquarters. In May 2006, NASA had inducted Bolden into the Astronaut Hall of Fame. The Senate also confirmed Lori B. Garver as NASA’s new Deputy Administrator. Like Bolden, Garver was returning to NASA for a second period of service. Between 1996 and 2001, she had served as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and Senior Policy Analyst for the Office of Policy and Plans, before becoming Associate Administrator of that office.(NASA, “Bolden and Garver Confirmed by U.S. Senate,” news release 09-165, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-165_Bolden_and_Garver.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Bolden Confirmed as NASA Administrator,” 16 July 2009.)
Commander Gennady I. Padalka and Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt, of ISS Expedition 20, landed safely on the steppes of Kazakhstan in the Soyuz TMA-14 spacecraft, following a six- month residency at the space station. During their mission, Padalka and Barratt had presided over the inauguration of the station’s six-person crew, as well as two Space Shuttle assembly and resupply missions. The two missions had included the delivery of new science facilities for expanded research and the arrival of the first Japanese HTV. Also aboard Soyuz TMA-14 was Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté, who had launched on 30 September with the Expedition 21 crew to spend nine days aboard the ISS. Laliberté had hosted a global Web cast from aboard the space station, to promote his One Drop Foundation. The mission of the One Drop Foundation was to preserve the world’s water resources and to provide global access to clean water. With Padalka’s departure, ISS Expedition 21 Commander Frank DeWinne became the first European to take command of the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz Landing Caps Historic Space Station Increment,” news release 09-237, 11 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09_237_Soyuz_Lands.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Douglas Birch for Associated Press, “Russian Spacecraft with Circus Tycoon Lands Safely,” 13 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, “European Takes Command of Space Station, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 October 2009.)
NASA announced the retirement of David A. King, Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. King was retiring from NASA to accept a position in the private sector, effective immediately. NASA appointed Robert M. Lightfoot, MSFC Deputy Director, to serve as Acting Director until the appointment of a successor. King’s departure ended a NASA career that had begun in 1983 at KSC, where he had served as Director of Space Shuttle Processing and Shuttle Launch Director. King had served as Director of MSFC since June 2003.
SpaceX announced that it had conducted its first Dragon spacecraft operations training in October 2009 at its headquarters in Hawthorne, California, for a group of NASA astronauts and personnel. The training had focused on how the crew would interface with the spacecraft as it approached and docked at the ISS. NASA had assigned astronauts Tracy Caldwell Dyson, Shannon Walker, and Douglas H. Wheelock to be on board the ISS when the Dragon made its inaugural visit under the COTS program, scheduled for February 2010. The training had been the first time the NASA astronauts scheduled to interact with the Dragon were actually inside the flight vehicle. This first training session marked a key step toward SpaceX’s provision of the alternative craft that NASA would use to transport cargo to and from the ISS after the Space Shuttle program ended. In the session, SpaceX had briefed the NASA astronauts on all aspects of the Dragon related to cargo transport—how to open the spacecraft’s hatch, how to enter the craft, and how to send commands as the craft approached the station.(Space Exploration Technologies, “SpaceX Hosts Preliminary Training for NASA ISS Astronauts in Preparation for Dragon Spacecraft Rendezvous and Station Berthing,” SpaceX news release, 3 December 2009, http://www. spacex.com/press.php?page=20091203 (accessed 19 December 2011); Robert Block, “SpaceX Trains Its First Batch of NASA Astronauts,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at 8:39 a.m. (PDT) at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending a successful 13-day mission to HST. Weather conditions had prevented Atlantis from landing at KSC. Astronauts had performed five spacewalks to repair, replace, and upgrade the instruments and computers on HST. These repairs and upgrades had not only restored the telescope, but had also expanded its capabilities. NASA considered the unprecedented mission historic, because of the complexity of the repairs and because the mission had been the last time human beings would go to space to repair an orbiting scientific instrument. NASA had placed HST in low Earth orbit at 600 kilometers (373 miles) to facilitate repair missions, but the location was suboptimal for space telescopes. NASA had planned to place HST’s successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) away from Earth, at L2, and, therefore, had designed JWST to function without repairs or upgrades. In addition to making HST repairs, astronauts had performed a commercial drug experiment aimed at finding a vaccine against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and other microbes.(NASA, “NASA’s Space Shuttle Returns to Earth After Hubble Mission,” news release 09-120, 24 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-120_STS-125_Landing_Edwards.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Houston Chronicle, “This Is Why We Fly: Hubble Repair Mission Showcases the Value of the Manned Space Program,” 26 May 2009; Daniel Holz, “The Last Fix,” Discover Magazine, 26 May 2009, http://blogs. discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2009/05/25/the-last-fix/ (accessed 21 July 2011); Frank Morring Jr., “Drug Experiment Performed on Atlantis,” Aviation Week, 20 May 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. Barratt and Kevin A. Ford used a robotic arm to remove the 13.5- ton (12.3-tonne, or 12,247-kilogram) Leonardo cargo module from Space Shuttle Discovery’s cargo bay. An hour later, the astronauts had successfully attached the module to the Harmony module’s Earth-facing port and had begun the process of checking for leaks and pressurizing a vestibule between Harmony and the cargo module.(William Harwood, “Cargo Module Mounted to Space Station for Unloading,” Spaceflight Now, 1 September 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of STS-127 at the ISS, focusing on odd jobs and unfinished tasks, which they completed in 4 hours and 54 minutes. The duo rewired power cables for the ISS’s American- built attitude-control system; secured loose insulation on a Canadian-built maintenance robot; and added to JEF a pair of television cameras, which would provide good views of Japan’s new unpiloted cargo ship, the H-2 Transfer Vehicle, scheduled to make its maiden flight in September 2009. The only task that the astronauts left unfinished was the installation of a cargo attachment system, a task that Mission Control had decided would require too much time. Instead, Mission Control instructed Cassidy and Marshburn to tend to some “get-ahead” tasks—attaching wire ties to external cables and installing new handrails and work-site attachments on the Kibo laboratory. The five spacewalks tied the record for the most EVAs (extravehicular activities) performed on the ISS while a Space Shuttle was docked at the station.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Wrap Up Space Station Service Call,” Space.com, 27 July 2009, http://www.space. com/7059-spacewalkers-wrap-space-station-service-call.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched at 2:10 p.m. (EDT) from NASA’s KSC. The seven-member crew was on the final servicing mission for the HST. STS-125, also known as Servicing Mission 4, comprised Commander Scott D. Altman, Pilot Gregory C. Johnson, and Mission Specialists K. Megan McArthur, John M. Grunsfeld, Michael J. Massimino, Andrew J. Feustel, and Michael T. Good. The mission plan called for the crew to make five spacewalks, to replace gyroscopes and batteries, as well as the Wide Field Camera 2, which had captured most of the images of deep space that had made HST famous. The crew would also attempt repairs of the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) and of a spectroscope that breaks down the light of stars. Because NASA had not designed those instruments with the intention of repairing them, NASA was uncertain that the repairs would succeed. NASA had developed 116 tools specifically for Servicing Mission 4. HST was located in an orbit 375 miles (603.5 kilometers) above Earth, in a region containing large amounts of space junk. NASA had placed Space Shuttle Endeavour on the launchpad in preparation for a rescue mission, in the event Atlantis sustained damage.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis Launches on a Final Mission to Hubble,” news release 09-104, 11 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-104_Atlantis_launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); John Johnson Jr., “Atlantis Blasts Off for Final Hubble Mission,” Los Angeles Times, 12 May 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of Dina E. Contella, Scott Stover, and Edward Van Cise as new flight directors to manage and carry out Shuttle flights and ISS expeditions. John A. McCullough, Chief of the Flight Director Office at JSC, remarked that all three new flight directors were senior flight controllers with lead management experience and an average of 10 years of flight-control experience. McCullough added that this group would help NASA transfer the knowledge and experience from the existing human spaceflight programs into the development and execution of the next-generation exploration program with the new Orion spacecraft. Contella had worked for NASA since 1990, when she had begun working in NASA’s cooperative education program while she completed her bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering. She had served as Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Controller and Astronaut Instructor since 1995, responsible for planning, training for, and executing spacewalks. Since 2008, Stover had supported six Space Shuttle flights for ISS assembly and had led the team that managed the ISS electrical power system. Van Cise had worked with NASA since 2000 in a variety of roles. He had been a member of the Operations Support Officer (OSO) team that coordinated ISS repair, maintenance, and assembly operations; served as Special Assistant to the Director of Mission Operations; led the Mechanisms and Maintenance Training Group, training astronauts and flight controllers in skills and techniques related to the repair, maintenance, and assembly of the space station; served on staff in the Flight Director Program Integration Office; and worked as an ISS Flight Controller for the OSO and for the Telemetry, Information, Transfer, and Attitude Navigation (Titan) groups.(NASA, “NASA Chooses Three New Flight Directors To Lead Mission Control,” news release 09-133, 12 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-133_New_Flight_Directors.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Doug Messier, “NASA Chooses 3 New Flight Directors,” Parabolic Arc, 15 June 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at 3:14 p.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC in Florida, completing its 13-day mission to the ISS. The crew of STS-119 had delivered, installed, and deployed the space station’s final set of solar-array wings, thus completing the station’s truss and supplying full power; replaced a failed unit for a system that converts urine to potable water; and performed important tasks in preparation for future upgrades and additions. STS-119 spacewalkers had failed to deploy fully an external cargo carrier on the Port-3 truss segment but had secured it in place. Mission Control had cancelled the installation of a similar payload attachment system on the starboard side, tasking NASA engineers with evaluating the problem. NASA planned to complete the installation during future spacewalks. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata had remained aboard the ISS, replacing Flight Engineer Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the space station for more than four months.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-072, 28 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09072_STS-119_Landing.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
