The U.S. Space Walk of Fame, based in Titusville, Florida, recognized with a two-day celebration the 20,000 men and women who worked on the Gemini space program. NASA had launched 10 Gemini missions between 1965 and 1966, each spacecraft carrying two astronauts. Many staff members and astronauts involved in the Gemini program went on to work on the Apollo Moon program. Gemini astronauts included Neil A. Armstrong, Jim Lovell, and Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. The event organizers celebrated the achievements of the Gemini missions, in addition to raising funds to establish a permanent monument to the Gemini program.(Marilyn Meyer, “History-Making Gemini Team To Reunite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 June 1996.)
New audio recordings, gathered from the excursion of NASA’s Galileo spacecrafts to Jupiter’s large moon Ganymede, contained a “soaring whistle and hissing static,” suggesting that the moon possesses a planet-like magnetosphere. According to Donald A. Gurnett, who had conducted the experiments using Galileo’s plasma wave instrument, the data “is kind of like looking at a musical score.” The sound patterns mimic those found on Earth, Saturn, and Jupiter. Gurnett suggested that the new findings would have broad significance for the scientific community, possibly allowing scientists to draw further conclusions about the interplay between magnetic forces and matter throughout the universe.(D. A. Gurnett et al., “Evidence for Magnetosphere at Ganymede from Plasmawave Observations by the Galileo Spacecraft,” Nature 384, no. 6609 (12 December 1996): 535; NASA, “Big Icy Moon of Jupiter Found To Have a ‘Voice’ After All; Europa Flyby Next for Galileo,” news release 96-255, 12 December 1996.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft completed a flyby of Jupiter’s largest moon, Ganymede, passing only 519 miles (835 kilometers) above the moon’s surface. NASA had equipped Galileo with 10 scientific instruments to gather data from the expedition. The instruments began making measurements on 23 June, as the probe approached Ganymede. Images revealed an icy surface, with bright, clean ice covering part of the moon and darker, dirty ice covering the rest. This was the first data gathered during a collection mission planned for 1996 and 1997, in which Galileo would pass Ganymede before completing 11 orbits of Jupiter and surveying the planet’s other moons. NASA monitored Galileo’s progress through its Deep Space Network, using control stations in California, Spain, and Australia. Scientists and engineers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had built the Galileo spacecraft.(NASA, “Galileo Readies for Close Flyby of Jupiter’s Biggest Moon,” news release 96-122, June 1996.)
Scientists announced the discovery of frozen water on the Moon, calling into question the long- held belief that the Moon lacked any form of hydration. The Clementine spacecraft had found the ice while using radar signals to examine the depths of the Moon’s craters. The discovery was the by-product of a US$75 million mission, co-sponsored by NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense, to test the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization’s “Star Wars” sensors developed to detect and track missiles. The possible ice deposit, composed of the suspected ice crystals mixed with dirt and spread over a vast landscape, was termed a dirty lake. The scientists discovered the ice in a massive, extremely deep crater. One scientist described the crater as twice the size of Puerto Rico and deeper than the height of Mount Everest. Scientists discussing the significance of the discovery postulated that the presence of water on the Moon might be a boon to future space exploration, perhaps enabling the construction of a “filling station” on the Moon. Other scientists offered a more sober opinion of the findings, referring to reports that the presence of water on the Moon might someday allow for colonization as “hyperbole.”(John Noble Wilford, “The Moon May Have Water, and Many New Possibilities,” New York Times, 4 December 1996; Associated Press, “Deep Within Lunar Crater, Small Frozen Lake Is Found,” 3 December 1996; Joyce Price, “Prospect of Ice on Moon Fires Hopes of Scientists,” Washington Times, 4 December 1996; Curt Suplee, “The Moon’s ‘Dirty Lake’ Makes Waves,” Washington Post, 4 December 1996.)
NASA announced the retirement of Jay F. Honeycutt, Director of KSC. A search for Honeycutt’s successor began immediately following the announcement. Honeycutt had joined NASA in 1966 after working as an engineer for Redstone Arsenal. He had begun as an engineer in flight operations and had worked at JSC, later training Apollo astronauts for the lunar landings, and had moved to NASA Headquarters in 1981. Honeycutt had transferred to KSC in 1989 as Director of Shuttle Management and Operations and had become Director of KSC in 1995. Honeycutt had won two Exceptional Service Medals, the Special Achievement Award, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, NASA’s Equal Employment Opportunity Award, and the Meritorious Executive Presidential Rank Award.(NASA, “KSC Director Jay Honeycutt To Retire,” news release 96-215, 22 October 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
In a study released in the journal Science, Charles P. Sonett detailed the results of his research measuring changes in the motion of Earth. Sonett reported that tidal forces from the gravitational force of the Moon had caused the Earth’s rotation to slow gradually over a period of millions of years. About 900 million years ago, according to Sonett, the length of the Earth’s day was only about 18 hours. The gravitational pull of the Moon, Sonett explained, “acts like a brake on the Earth.”(C. P. Sonett et al., “Late Proterozoic and Paleozoic Tides, Retreat of the Moon, and Rotation of the Earth,” Science 273, no. 5271 (5 July 1996): 100−104; Associated Press, “Astrodynamics: A Brake on the Earth’s Spin,” 8 July 1996.)
NASA released new images of Io, one of Jupiter’s moons, obtained by the Galileo spacecraft. Michael J. S. Belton of the National Optical Astronomical Observatories pointed out that radical changes had occurred on the moon during the 17 years between Galileo and the first observation of Io, via the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. According to Belton, active volcanoes had altered the color of the moon’s surface, forming deposits of sulfur and sulfur dioxide that painted the surface white.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Big Changes on Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon Io,” news release 96-143, 18 July 1996.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had purchased most of the aerospace and defense holdings of its competitor Rockwell International Corporation. The US$3 billion deal restructured the two companies in drastically different ways, permitting Boeing to increase significantly its potential to win government aerospace contracts, while Rockwell International turned its attention to the lucrative commercial market in automation. Whereas Boeing solidified its established dominance in the commercial jetliner construction business, Rockwell left behind its signature industry⎯the company had been nearly synonymous with NASA’s piloted space program. However, in the face of dwindling government contracts, Rockwell had been concentrating for years on developing its commercial product lines. Although the merger was not a surprise, the sale of the company responsible for engineering the Apollo spacecraft and the B-(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
NASA released images from its Galileo spacecraft, indicating that water might have existed on Jupiter’s moon Europa in the past, or might still exist there. According to scientists studying the images, Europa may have “warm ice” on its surface. Finding such ice would help scientists determine whether Europa’s climate could support life. “What we are really looking for is niches that could support life,” Ronald Greeley, a Galileo team scientist clarified, at a press briefing releasing the images. At first glance, the pictures, shot from a distance of about 95,700 miles (154,000 kilometers), seemed to depict a series of white stripes stretched across Europa’s landscape. However, the stripes were actually ice glaciers, long of interest to scientists. Researchers had long suspected that Europa might be one of the places in the universe possessing water and, therefore, an environment that could support life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed “skeptical optimism” at the Europa findings and urged the scientific community to examine the pictures further, in a tempered reaction similar to his stance regarding the discovery, one week earlier, of microbiological evidence of life on Mars.(NASA, “Statement by Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Release of New Galileo Spacecraft Images of Europa,” news release 96-166, 13 August 1996; Reuters, “Galileo Hints at Water on Europa,” 14 August 1996; NASA, “Jupiter’s Europa Harbors Possible ‘Warm Ice’ or Liquid Water,” news release 96-164, 13 August 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “Jupiter Moon May Contain Ice Floes, Sea,” Washington Post, 14 August 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers’ funds on NASA’s research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies “are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy.” The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, “NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame,” news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft discovered a giant iron core taking up half of the diameter of Jupiter’s moon Io, as well as a large hole in Jupiter’s magnetic field. Galileo Project Scientist Torrence V. Johnson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) identified Io as the most “geographically active body in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Galileo scientists also measured the intense heat Jupiter generates, noting that the planet has a massive gravity field. Galileo managed to come within 559 miles (900 kilometers) of Jupiter during its 1995 flyby, allowing scientists to locate the iron core and the hole in the magnetic field. Although they were still grappling with the significance of the “completely unexpected finds,” scientists reported their early analysis of the data in Science magazine.(J. D. Anderson, W. L. Sjogren, and G. Schubert, “Galileo Gravity Results and the Internal Structure of Lo,” Science 272, no. 5262 (3 May 1996): 709−712; NASA, “Galileo Finds Giant Iron Core in Jupiter’s Moon Io,” news release 96-89, 3 May 1996.)
George W. S. Abbey became the seventh Director of JSC in Houston, Texas. Abbey had been Acting Director since Carolyn Hunter had stepped down from the post on 4 August 1995. According to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, Abbey’s distinguished NASA career made him the right man for the job. Administrator Goldin announced, “George Abbey is uniquely qualified to lead the Johnson team into the future. Over the course of his eminent career with NASA, he has distinguished himself as an innovator and pioneer at all levels of Agency management.” Abbey had begun working at NASA in 1967 after serving as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force. He had worked on the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming Director of Flight Operations. NASA had recognized Abbey’s superior service by awarding him its Exceptional Service Medal and two Distinguished Service Medals.(NASA, “Abbey Named Director of Johnson Space Center,” news release 96-11, 23 January 1996. 3)
