NASA’s JPL named Thomas C. Duxbury Project Manager for JPL’s Stardust Mission, launched in February 1999 to collect a sample from Comet Wild-2 and return it to Earth. Duxbury, who had served as the Mission’s Acting Project Manager for the past year, replaced Kenneth Atkins, who had been heading a program to develop leadership for JPL’s projects. Duxbury had joined the Stardust project in 1996 as Mission Manager, responsible for navigation, mission design, the ground-data system, science-data management, and mission operations. Before working on the Stardust project, Duxbury had served on planetary mission teams, including several Mariner missions, the Mars Viking mission, Pioneer 10 and 11 to Jupiter and Saturn, Voyager 1 and 2 to the outer planets, the Soviet Phobos Mission to Mars, the Mars Observer Mission, and the Clementine Mission to study the Moon. Concurrent with his position as Stardust Project Manager, Duxbury planned to continue to serve as a member of the science teams for Mars Global Surveyor’s laser altimeter and for the ESA’s Mars Express orbiter and lander, as well as continuing as lead scientist for geodesy and cartography in the Mars Exploration Office.
The Carrier Test Pilot Hall of Honor, aboard the USS Yorktown, inducted U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr., honoring him for his distinguished aviation career before becoming an astronaut. Before Glenn became the first man to orbit Earth, he had already achieved a long record of flight exploits. Glenn’s fellow test pilot Neil A. Armstrong, the first astronaut to walk on the Moon, attended the induction. Upon receiving the award, Glenn expressed his gratitude at joining the distinguished ranks of the Hall of Honor and spoke of his lifetime of flight experiences.
Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiter’s solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileo’s magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelson’s team had measured the moon’s magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings “best explained by a thick layer of water⎯about as salty as Earth’s oceans⎯hidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath” the moon’s surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared “to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface.” Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiter’s intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Solar System’s Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean,” news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, “Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiter’s Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life,” Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
Chester M. Lee, who had served as Mission Director for six Apollo Missions to the Moon, including Apollo 13, died from complications of open-heart surgery. Lee had begun his 23-year career with NASA in 1965 after retiring from the U.S. Navy, specializing primarily on the Apollo Missions. He had also served as Program Director for the 1973–1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the first joint venture between the United States and the former Soviet Union.(Associated Press, “Chet Lee, Former NASA Worker, Dies at 80,” 7 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Obituaries Chester Lee; Navy Captain, Apollo Mission Director,” 9 March 2000.)
Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundation⎯now a part of Illinois Institute of Technology⎯had directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: “There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being ‘military high ground’.” The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, “Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project,” Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 13−14; Associated Press, “Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon,” 18 May 2000.)
As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
NASA announced the creation of a new office dedicated to improving heath and safety for its workforce. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian as Chief Health and Medical Officer, giving him the responsibility for developing programs to research and implement the best medical procedures for astronauts and other NASA personnel. “On the ground and in space, rapid advances in medical knowledge and tools need to be adapted and incorporated into our planning and practices,” Goldin said when announcing the new position. Nicogossian faced the task of establishing NASA’s Health Council, in keeping with NASA’s commitment to making heath and safety its number-one priority.(NASA, “NASA Creates New Office To Foster Heath and Safety,” news release 00-69, 1 May 2000. 915 Associated Press, “Glenn Honored for Test Pilot’s Role as Armstrong Watches,” 3 May 2000.)
Robert R. Gilruth, “an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo,” died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics’s Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, “his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.”(NASA, “Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies,” news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
The National Aviation Hall of Fame inducted four new members at a black-tie dinner and formal enshrinement ceremony at the Dayton Convention Center in Dayton, Ohio. Apollo astronaut Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. joined fellow Apollo 11 astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in the Hall of Fame. Aviators previously inducted to the Hall of Fame included Eugene A. Cernan, the last Apollo astronaut to walk on the Moon; Laurence C. “Bill” Craigie, the first U.S. military aviator to fly a jet aircraft; and Thomas B. McGuire Jr., the second-leading fighter ace in U.S. Air Force history. The National Aviation Hall of Fame’s Class of 2000 joined 166 award-winning aviators already chosen for the honor.(Dayton Daily News (OH), “Astronaut Meets a Fan; Aviation Hall of Fame Enshrines 4 More,” 16 July 2000.)
NASA released recently obtained images that further supported the possibility that Jupiter’s moon Europa might be home to a liquid ocean. The Galileo spacecraft had captured the images when passing Europa’s north pole. Using a magnetometer instrument, Galileo had recorded changing currents in the moon’s magnetic field⎯a finding consistent with the presence of a conducting material such as a watery liquid.(NASA, “Galileo Findings Boost Idea of Other-Worldly Ocean,” news release 00-7, 10 January 2000.)
Margaret G. Kivelson and four coauthors from the University of California at Los Angeles published in the journal Science the strongest evidence to date that Jupiter’s moon Europa contains a salty, liquid ocean beneath its surface. The team had used data from the Galileo probe’s magnetometer to study Europa’s magnetic compass, finding that “the presence of a layer of electrically conducting liquid, such as saltwater” best explained the behavior of the moon’s magnetic compass. Kivelson explained that the team had inferred that the conductor must be a liquid ocean, since ice is not a good conductor of electricity. However, Torrence V. Johnson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that the magnetometer data by itself was insufficient to conclude the presence of a liquid ocean. Johnson explained that scientists needed several further steps of inference, such as precise measurements of gravity and altitude, indicating the effects of tides.(NASA, “Galileo Evidence Points to Possible Water World Under Europa’s Icy Crust,” news release 00-131, 25 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-131.txt (accessed 6 May 2008); Margaret Kivelson et al., “Galileo Magnetometer Measurements: A Stronger Case for a Subsurface Ocean at Europa,” Science 289, no. 5483 (25 August 2000): 1340–1343.)
European Space Agency (ESA) engineers announced the discovery of a flaw in the European receiver on NASA’s Cassini spacecraft, prompting an inquiry into why engineers had not identified the problem before NASA had launched the craft, and how the issue could be resolved before the craft reached its destination. Cassini’s probe data relay subsystem (PDRS) lacked sufficient bandwidth to navigate the Doppler shift with the Huygens probe as the probe parachuted toward the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan. Therefore, the system would be unable to recover all of the data that Huygens’s six instruments would generate. Cassini and Huygens launched on 15 October 1997, with Huygens scheduled to separate from Cassini on 6 November 2004, break through Titan’s atmosphere on 27 November 2004, and descend to the moon’s surface using a parachute system. The mission plan called for Huygens to measure the composition and winds of Titan’s atmosphere and to collect images. The probe would send the data via the S-band PDRS to Cassini, which would then transmit the data to Earth. However, the ESA stated that the inadequate bandwidth of the PDRS meant that link margins would degrade, because the Doppler shift on the data subcarrier would be outside the bandwidth of the receiver- phase lock loop, leading to a potential loss in the link of 10dB over what engineers had assumed for the mission.(Frank Morring Jr., “ESA Sets Inquiry After Tests Reveal Flaw in Titan Probe Link,” Aerospace Daily, 6 October 2000.)
Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASA’s second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatch’s failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissom’s claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Grissom’s Capsule Back at Space Center,” 14 June 2000.)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum for “its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built.” NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists’ knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners,” news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
