NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced creation of a new Office of Programs to be headed by D. D. Wyatt, and the renaming of the Office of Administration under Albert F. Siepert.
NASA-DOD Large Launch Vehicle Planning Group in session since August 1 to study the policy, management structures, and requirements of launch vehicles beyond the size of Saturn. Meeting in NASA headquarters, the group was headed by Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin, technical assistant to the Associate Administrator of NASA.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy stated that “we are spending as much money and devoting as large a percentage of scientific personnel, engineering, and all the rest, as we possibly can to the space program. We are constantly concerned with speeding it up. We are making what I consider to be a maximum effort.”
USAF Dyna-Soar System Project Office personnel visited NASA headquarters for review of technical and management programs.
NASA postponed its projected manned orbital flight from December 1961 until early in 1962 because of minor problems with the cooling system and positioning devices in the Mercury capsule, Dr. Hugh Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, said in a Baltimore interview. “You like to have a man go with everything just as near perfect as possible. This business is risky. You can’t avoid this, but you can take all the precautions you know about.”
NASA planned to spend $6 million on expansion of its Langley facilities in this fiscal year, according to Representative Thomas N. Downing after a conversation with NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Representative Downing said he was satisfied that the lower peninsula area of Virginia would not suffer financially when the Space Task Group moved to Houston, Tex.
In speech on “Scientists and Engineers in the Space Program,” Albert F. Siepert, NASA Director of Administration, outlined NASA’s basic policies on personnel. He pointed out that of NASA’s some 20,000 employees, only 4,000 had come to NASA through individual appointments, the remainder on transfer of organizations intact to NASA. NASA’s personnel utilization practices, Siepert said, were as follows: (1) Don’t use a scientist or engineer when another skill will do as well; (2) classify a man’s skills by what he actually does, rather than how he was formally trained; (3) provide professional entrance into the Federal civil service through an examination which is work centered rather than academically oriented; (4) take on-the-job training and education seriously; (5) encourage professional recognition outside the agency; and (6) recognize that job satisfaction depends upon the man’s continued interest in his work as well as his take-home pay.”
NASA began negotiations with French Commission for Spatial and Scientific Research for conducting a cooperative Franco-American space program.
At Cape Canaveral with the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, Secretary of Labor Goldberg made public President Kennedy’s message praising the voluntary, no-strike, no-lockout pledges covering labor-management relations at missile and space sites. The President’s message stated that “the Nation cannot afford the luxury of avoidable delay in our missile and space program. Neither can we tolerate wasteful and expensive practices which add to the great financial burden our defense effort already places on us.”
In response to questioning by the House Science and Astronautics Committee, Associate NASA Administrator Seamans repeated the general estimate of $20 to $40 billion as the cost for the total effort required to achieve a lunar landing, that an all-out program might cost more, and that 1967 could be considered only as a possible planning date at this stage of such a complex task.
Reactor-in-flight-test system (Rift) study, a part of the NASA-AEC program on nuclear rockets, was briefed by contractors at NASA headquarters.
In address at George Washington University, NASA Administrator Webb stated that the exploration of space was an important part of man’s “driving, restless, insatiable search for new knowledge.”
NASA Administrator Webb, appearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, requested $60 million additional for fiscal year 1962 for the acquisition of 80,000 acres adjoining Cape Canaveral for launching facilities for the expanded space program.
President-elect Kennedy received report of special nine-man committee on the national space program. Chairman of the committee was Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner of MIT.
Reported that the DOD-NASA Golovin Committee was near agreement on hybrid solid-and-liquid fuel rockets for Dyna-Soar. Golovin Committee had been meeting for 3 months to work out families of large rockets for overall national space program.
Executive order of the President suspended the 8-hour limitation on construction workers in NASA. It stated that “a clearly leading role in aeronautical and space achievement has become a vital national objective,” and that it was essential to conduct the space program “with a major national commitment of manpower, material, and facilities,” and “with all possible speed and efficiency.”
NASA Deputy Administrator Dryden and Soviet Academy of Sciences official Dr. Leonid I. Sedov both appealed for greater international cooperation and exchange of information in the peaceful exploration of space in their speeches at the opening of the 12th World Congress of the International Astronautical Federation.
The national space program portends a major technological advance for mankind, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the New Orleans Chamber of Commerce. Comparing its potential to that of the invention of the steam engine, Dr. Seamans noted: “Two aspects of such major advances are characteristic. First, the practical results are largely unforeseeable, primarily because they develop on broad fronts and, frequently, in unsuspected directions. Second, the concentration of effort required does not diminish effort expended on other frontiers of knowledge, but rather spurs such activities. For example, despite fears that space technology would monopolize the scientific effort of this country, such fields of activity as oceanography, geophysics, and the physics of high-energy particles have greatly increased since the national space effort has become a serious one.”
James E. Webb was sworn in as NASA Administrator.
