In testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, nasa Administrator James E. Webb indicated that decision on the number of orbits, three or six, planned for the next Mercury flight had not been decided and that the selected pilot-astronaut would also be announced soon. On the relationship between civilian and military space activities: “President’s [space] policy has been, in accordance with the law, to develop the space program as a civilian peaceful effort to the fullest extent possible, but always pressing with the kind of technology that would permit us to move rapidly in the military field if we were required to do so. It is a little bit like ‘keep your powder dry’ with respect to the military side ...” Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric stated to the Committee that dod “was interested in developing the technology” but we [dod] have as yet no approved program for the development of a manned orbital system.” Gilpatric said that dod was “very conscious of the need to take out technological insurance” so that the U.S. could be “prepared and not surprised” in the event that the U.S.S.R. attempted to make “hostile use of space.”
Problem of communications blackout during spacecraft re-entry ionization has been surmounted, according to Boeing Co.’s X-20 Project Manager A. M. Johnston and engineers at Radio Corp. of America. RCA-developed equipment using higher radio frequencies would penetrate the blackout sheath 99 per cent of the time during which it engulfed a spacecraft.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. technical representatives held the first of a series of talks on the possibility of joint cooperation in space research and exploration. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, represented the U.S.; Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, represented the U.S.S.R.	.	.
Howard Simons reported that many U.S. space experts feel that the U.S.S.R. has reshaped its space program from a few, spreadout “spectaculars” to a more orderly scientific program. While spectaculars have not been abandoned, it was thought the bulk of the program would be conducted with smaller, cheaper rockets for more useful scientific objectives and with more international cooperation. This was considered to be a victory for Soviet scientists over military and political planners who had favored the spectaculars.
nasa would begin an education program in the fall of 1962 to provide financial support for 10 doctoral candidates in science and engineering at each of 10 U.S. universities, nasa Administrator dames E. Webb announced to the Institute of Environmental Sciences in Chicago. Students would receive a stipend of $2,400 per year, expenses up to $1,000 per year, and the university would be reimbursed for tuition, fees, and other expenses. Grants would be for one year, renewable to a maximum of three years. Mr. Webb said nasa expected the program “will increase considerably in years to come.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced first nationwide conference of scientists and educators would be held in Chicago November 1-3 to study the relationship between nasa and universities in meeting national space goals.
usaf witnesses before the Senate Military Appropriations Subcommittee testified under questioning that dod budget was not adequate in all areas. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, said that funds should be provided for “at least 100 more Minuteman icbm’s” than in present budget, and that he favored a “little more emphasis” in the military space program on early-warning systems. Secretary Eugene Zuckert indicated that he favored development of the RS-70 as a full-fledged weapon system.
Bell Telephone Laboratories announced the formation of a new corporation, Bellcom, Inc., to supply system engineering support to nasa’s space program. The new corporation would be owned jointly by at&t and Western Electric Corp.
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, was awarded the McCurdy Medal, honoring nasa for “outstanding contributions to the world in the field of science,” at the Canadian International Air Show, Toronto.
Speaking at general aaas meeting in Philadelphia, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy nasa Administrator, supported the thesis that science has developed most rapidly in an environment of a national social need, most often for national defense or health. In an atmosphere of highly motivated and widely supported national activities, science and scientists have received enhanced support over broad areas as well as in narrow specialties: Benefits of this have far outweighed unbalances. Such has been our national experience in the technologies of aeronautics, com munications, radar, nuclear energy, and now space. In such periods, the number of free scientists supported to work on problems of their own selection is greater than in the absence of social pressures, although admittedly there is a still greater expansion of team effort. Dr Dryden said: “. . . It is our aim in nasa to administer the [space] program in such a way as to strengthen science and engineering broadly, to strengthen our universities and our industrial base, in fact to add to our national strength in every possible way. As regards the problem under discussion, nasa has undertaken as a goal the support of about 4,000 graduate students per year in 150 qualified universities to do our part in increasing the supply.”
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, addressed NASA-University Conference on the Science and Technology of Space Exploration, Chicago: “During the first four years of the existence of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 157 sounding rockets, 55 satellites, and 9 space probes have been launched and have yielded a tremendous amount of information in all of the areas of interest. Many hundreds of research papers have appeared in the open scientific literature and a considerable portion of the scientific community, both national and international, has become involved in the effort to make the most of the opportunities afforded by the space program for the conduct of important research. It is hoped that the university community will continue to find new and challenging opportunities and wlli continue to increase and strengthen its participation which has already become a major element in the success of the program so far.”
West Side Association of Commerce (N.Y.C.) presented National West Side Award to nasa. In accepting the award, nasa Administrator James E. WTebb said: “Except in war time, no large national effort has had such a rapid buildup as the space program over the past five years. The end of the buildup is not in sight, but the rate is slowing down and is keyed to the policy . . . that this is a fast paced, driving, prudently managed and efficiently conducted program, but is not a crash program. . . . “In my view, we are entering a period when our national decisions and the debates which accompany them will not so much relate to whether and when we can achieve pre-eminence in space, but the rate at which we should proceed beyond the time when this pre-eminence is achieved—beyond the time when we have begun manned exploration of the moon. . . . “It is the contribution of all the forces, in industry, government, and the universities, under the leadership which President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson have given the program, that gives us the basis for the pre-eminence we have in most fields in space and the pre-eminence we will shortly have in all.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced establishment of nasa’s Northeastern Operations Office, to be located in the Boston, Massachusetts, area. The office will coordinate nasa’s liaison with university and business contractors in the northeast United States.
Reported that Secretary of Defense McNamara was not surprised by the Soviet double-orbiting of vostok iii and iv, and that he did not consider the flights as cause for changing the U.S. military space program.
U.N.’s reorganized 28-nation Committee on the Peacefil Uses of Outer Space opened its meetings with the reelection of Dr. Franz Matsch of Austria as chairman and his subsequent riling that the committee woild make decisions by “consensus” rather than by vote. U.S. delegate was Francis T. P. Plimpton; his deputy was Richard N. Gardner, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Orgailzation Affairs. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, was Plimpton’s technical adviser. Dr. Homer Newell of nasa and Leonard C. Meeker of the State Department were alternate representatives. Congressional advisers were Senators Howard W. Cannon and Margaret Chase Smith, and Representatives James G. Filton and George P. Miller. U.S.S.R. representative was Platon D. Morozov. V. Dobronravov, member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and space expert, was his scientific adviser.
NASA-wide conference reviewing nasa’s Future Applications Program was held in headquarters to review best means of increasing application of technological advances derived from the space program to commercial and industrial purposes.
nasa Administrator Webb named Franklyn W. Phillips, Assistant to the Administrator (October 1, 1958-present), to establish and direct nasa’s Northeastern Operations Office in Boston, Mass. Phillips served as Acting Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council from January 1959 to February 1960.
Deputy nasa Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden accepted invitation to become an Honorary Fellow of the British Interplanetary Society, an honor only accorded to eight persons who have rendered major services to astronautics over a number of years.
U.S.S.R. made unsuccessful attempt to launch Venus probe, the launch vehicle falling to achieve escape trajectory and remaining in parking orbit, NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported in Sept. 5, 1962, letter to Congress.
In an address to the Duke University Symposium on “Regional Implications of Space Research,” nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated: “I believe the regional approach is sound. It permits a number of universities to pool resources for research and to plan complementary programs directed to the needs of the region. Industry, too, has much to gain from regional cooperation . . . beginning, more and more, to look to the universities of their region for the most important resources of the age—ideas, scientific brainpower, and advanced technological skill and experience. “It is not a question today of whether a region can already qualify. . . . The question is whether the region is creatively doing what it can to equip its citizens to serve their area and their Nation in a period when our prosperity and our very existence as a free people depend on scientific and technological leadership. . .”
Results of Aviation Week poll of the members of the House of Representatives to secure “grass-roots” opinions on the U.S. space program were published. Representatives were asked to indicate how their constituents felt about key space aspects. The majority indicated that the U.S. space program is “proceeding at the right pace”; of the minority who disagreed with this, twice as many favored “speeding up the program.” Landing a man on the moon was considered “something the U.S. must do primarily to keep up with the Russians.” The majority also felt that nasa rather than the military should run the space program (“emphatic support for nasa on this question by a ratio of almost 5 to 1”). Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario noted on his questionnaire that it is regrettable tnat the space program is linked in the public mind to the cold war contest with Russia: “I am concerned by this because the space program does not therefore stand on its own and there is the resulting danger that it wlli not receive the continuous support it will need over the years ahead to do what must be done . . .”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Northeast Commerce and Industry Exposition in Boston, said: “The achievement of . . . [U.S. pre-eminence in space] requires that we learn to travel in space as we have learned to travel on the sea or in the air. We must develop what might be termed space power—the capability to utilize space for every purpose which our national interest may require. And, to fulfill the directives established by the Congress, we must develop that competence in space for the benefit of our own people, and of all mankind .... “Although creative individual effort is as important today as it has ever been, and the imagination and initiative of the individual remain the primary source of scientific and technical progress, the development and perfection of the complex equipment, the systems and subsystems which are taking men into space are rarely, if ever, the work of single individuals. Today, teams of talented and imaginative technicians are joined in each major technological achievement . . . .”
In message to the Second National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space at Seattle, President Kennedy noted that the U.S. was already “working hand in hand with scientific groups of fifty nations. “Ours is an open society and the benefits of our space program will continue to flow throughout the world. It is my hope that the Soviet Union will cooperate constructively in the proposals which we have made so that all peoples will gain in the improvement of weather observation, communications systems and the manifold output of the peaceful application of space technology.”
President Kennedy opened his news conference with the announcement that he had received Premier Khrushchev’s reply to his letter on cooperation in the peaceful uses of space and stated: “I’m gratified that this reply indicates that there are a number of areas of common interest.” He further announced that Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, had been designated to lead the technical discussions with Soviet representatives beginning in New York on March 27.
Reported that responsibility for all U.S. space bioscience programs, including animal flights, would be given to nasa as result of informal agreement between Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara and nasa Administrator James E. Webb.
In speech to the 1962 Boys Nation, nasa Administrator Webb spoke of the future of the space age: “There is an intimate connection between the space effort and the future of this nation.” Mr. Webb was made an honorary member of Boys Nation and was presented a plaque for his “interest in the youth of the nation.”
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was among five Government career men selected for 1962 Rockefeller Public Service Awards.
In a nasa press conference following the presentation of the Administration’s budget to Congress, Mr. James Webb, nasa Administrator, commented on the general attitude toward nasa’s doubled appropriation request: “I would say that the people I have talked to have felt that we ought to go forward with the effort at about the level the President has recommended. I have seen no indication as we have had advanced discussion with some of the leaders, like the Chairman of the House Committee, Congressman Miller, the Chairman of the Senate Committee, Senator Kerr, and with some of the Appropriations members; we have seen no disposition on their part to just simply throw up their hands and say, 'No, sir.’ Each one of them has said that what you have makes sense and we are going to look it over very carefully, of course, but nevertheless there has been no tendency to start out with a reaction that it was simply out of line with reality. . . . Under those circumstances my judgment is that there will be a good, strong, vigorous debate, just as there was when this agency was formed, and that when the issues are clearly out on the table, and the success of the very active flight program that we are now conducting makes itself felt, that there will be support for the program and that we will end up with about the recommendations of the President.”
Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, nasa director of grants and research contracts, told press conference in Chicago that by 1970 one out of every four technically trained persons in U.S. will be engaged in some phase of the space program. Press conference preceded first national conference between nasa and representatives of 300 universities, colleges, and technical schools, Nov. 1-3.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, speaking at NASA-University Conference in Chicago, said nasa needed help from universities in four main areas: space sciences, manned space flight, applications of earth satellites to communications and meteorology, and advanced research and technology. “Our educational institutions bear a major responsibility for the success of our national effort to explore space. Our universities and colleges are called upon to produce a body of scientists and engineers of unexcelhd competence. Some of these graduates wlli enter governmental service with nasa and other agencies participating in the space program; some wlli join private research organizations and industrial corporations. “But some must remain at the universities where they continue to advance knowledge and produce new talent. This last function should receive high priority. The government laboratory, industry, and research foundation all are users of creative and talented men without reproducing this vital national resource. The university alone is the producer of new engineers and scientists.”
nasa published an integrated series of three Quality Publications setting forth nasa’s intensified quality assurance program now required in nasa space programs from r&d concept through space operations. These publications required nasa prime and subcontractors on space system work to establish and maintain a quality program that in many elements was beyond traditional quality control. They also provided guidelines for nasa management to evaluate contractor quality performance both as a factor of current contract performance and as a consideration in award of future contracts.
U.K. and Canada supported U.S. request that U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space concentrate on international cooperation on space programs rather than on legal matters that contained elements of “a highly political and controversial nature.”
Ambassador Charles Bohlen officiated at the opening of a nasa exhibit at the Palais de la D&ouverte, Paris, France. The exhibit would stay in Paris until January 15, included models of past, current, and future nasa spacecraft; panels explaining the goals and results of the U.S. space program; a working telstar demonstration; and a Spacemobile lecture and demonstration. The exhibit was enthusiastically received by French scientific and government personages attending the inauguration.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was among the five Federal employees presented with the distinguished Rockefeller Public Service Award for 1962 by President Kennedy.
President Kennedy sent telegram to aerospace unions and industries stating that a strike would “substantially delay our vital missile and space programs and would be contrary to the national interest.” The International Association of Machinists, one union involved in threatened strike of 150,000 workers in major aerospace companies, immediately accepted the President’s request to postpone strike for 60 days.
President Kennedy congratlliated labor and management at U.S. missile sites for achieving a new low in work stoppages. According to the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, only 1 man-day per 1,100 man-days worked was lost during the year ending this date, while 1 man-day per 96 man-days worked was lost during the 1956-1961 period. The President expressed confidence that the commission would continue to receive cooperation of labor and management “in making sure that our missile and space programs go forward ... as economically as possible.”
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric, addressing representatives of Midwest industries and universities in South Bend, Ind., said: “The United States believes that it is highly desirable for its own security and for the security of the world that the arms race should not be extended into outer space, and we are seeking in every feasible way to achieve this purpose. Today there is no doubt that either the United States or the Soviet Union could place thermonuclear weapons in orbit. . . . “We have no program to place any weapons of mass destruction into orbit. An arms race in space will not contribute to our security. ...” He added that U.S. military space program has two objectives: “First, as part of our overall Defense effort, we have continuing programs to ensure that the United States will be able to cope with any military challenge in outer space. Our programs in this area are under constant review, and this review indicates that our present rate of effort is entirely adequate. “Second, as a part of our national space program, we in the Defense Department, along with nasa, are actively exploring the potentialities of outer space as a useful part of our expanding universe. We are developing through activities in space and observations from space our ability to improve our capabilities in fields such as communications, navigation, meteorology, mapping and geodesy. Many branches of industry are contributing to this endeavor by improving propulsion, electronic, photographic, communications and other components of systems for space research and utilization. These programs have great significance not only for our military forces but for the economic and scientific advance of the United States and of the whole world. The progress that they represent, like all scientific advances, is neu+ral in its political and moral content. . . .”
In testimony on proposed Federal salary reform before the House Post Office and Civil Service Committee, nasa Administrator James E. Webb stressed the requirements of the national space program for adequately paid scientific and technical personnel in government. He pointed out that one third of nasa’s personnel were professional scientists and engineers, one third skllied craftsmen and research mechanics and their supervisors, one eighth were engineering and scientific technicians, and one sixth were clerical and secretarial. The remainder were professional-level specialists in management, legal counsel, librarians, editors, etc. Mr. Webb said that in considering pay raise legislation (H.R. 10480) the Federal Government must be able to compete favorably in the nation-wide labor market and that present salaries must be raised to have “reasonable comparity” outside of Government.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa’s Director of Space Sciences, speaking to a sectional meeting of the American Society for Engineering Education at Texas Technological College, Lubbock, Texas, said: “. . . accomplishing the space mission absolutely requires the strong and vigorous participation of our colleges and universities, which in turn requires that nasa bear its fair share of the support required to make it possible for the universities and colleges to participate. The universities must bear their share of responsibility to the space program and allocate an appropriate fraction of their material, as well as human, resources to the effort. In such a partnership, nasa stands ready to invest an appreciable fraction of its resources.”
In interview with Data magazine, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, said that Houston Chamber of Commerce had predicted that the “arrival of the Manned Spacecraft Center mil influence the economic growth of the area to a degree similar to that associated with the opening of the ship channel here almost 50 years ago. Community leaders are enthusiastic concerning the diversion of Houston’s growth from an almost total reliance on the petrochemical industry. Of course, you must also remember that Houston, in terms of population increase, is one of the most dynamic cities of America. The Manned Spacecraft Center represents only a segment of its growth. . . . “Undoubtedly, there has been some immediate impact on the economy since msc’s arrival in the Houston area. More than 80 aerospace companies have opened local offices here. ...”
