nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Northwestern Univ. (Letter)
Background briefing in Pentagon on dod budget proposals for FY 1964 indicated a total request in new obligational authority of $53.7 billion. Of this, some $5.5 billion was earmarked for r*d for the three services: Army’s main emphasis would be on the modernized Nike-Zeus antimissile system and on antiguerrilla weapons; Navy’s on antisubmarine warfare; Air Force’s on missile and space systems development. The $1.66 billion for rdt&e and Astronautics represented the dod portion of the national space program, (dod Background Briefing on the FY 1964 Defense Budget, 1/16/63)
U.S. Army announced successful test-firing of Nike-Zeus antimissile missile at White Sands Missile Range. Colonel I. O. Drewry, Nike-Zeus Project Manager, said test objectives were met. (dod Release 239-62)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the Chamber of Commerce, Billings, Mont., noted that President Jefferson’s Louisiana Purchase in 1803, which brought much of the state of Montana within the boundaries of the U.S., was criticized at the time as a “prodigal waste of The public monies.’ ” Similarly the space program had been criticized. But Mr. Webb predicted that “the decisions for a dynamic national space program made by the Congress, by President Eisenhower, and by President Kennedy during the past five years will earn a place in history that, in significance will go far beyond Jefferson’s Louisiana Purchase and many of the other major decisions which have characterized turning points in our national history.” (Text)
In commencement address at Univ. of Delaware, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “. . . For the first time in the history of mankind the opportunity to leave the earth and explore the solar system is at hand. Only two nations, the United States and the Soviet Union, have the resources with which to exploit this opportunity. Were we, as the symbol of democratic government, to surrender this opportunity to the leading advocate of the Communist ideology, we could no longer stand large in our own image, or in the image that other nations have of us and of the free society we represent. “Like it or not, therefore, the hard facts of international life leave no doubt tbat we are in a contest with the Soviet Union. Like it or not, it is a fact of international life that space achievement is and will be a symbol of national character and national strength . . . .” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said:	“. . . It is important to note that the budget requested for the total program of nasa for fiscal year 1964 includes less than $50,000,000 for new programs. The remainder is to maintain the projects now underway on schedule and to pay the contractors for the work they have obligated themselves to do to meet these schedules. “The policy on which this budget is based is the mastery of space, and its utilization for the benefit of mankind. This mastery, and the relation of our position to those of other nations, will not be determined by any single achievement. Superiority in the space environment will be won and very likely can be held by that nation which first fashions into usable systems all of the scientific knowledge, all of the technology, all of the experience, all of the space launch and terminal facilities, and all of the aids to space navigation required for safety and regular operation. “These are the capabilities and resources which the United States must have, and this budget, is designed to make rapid progress toward acquiring them ....*' (Testimony)
In testimony before the House Armed Services Committee, General Curtis E. LeMay testified: “The Soviets could be proceeding actively to develop space systems for military application. We believe that the Soviets wfill produce and deploy those military space systems Which they find feasible and advantageous in comparison with other types of weapons and military equipment . . . “U.S. military achievements in space will be expensive. Our objectives will be difficult to accomplish and the risks . . . large.” “However, as in all previous military progress, risks will diminish with experience and can be minimized in early stages by thoroughly planned decision points. “We must not risk the danger of waiting for the enemy to demonstrate a capability before we undertake the development of our own. The visible threat to our National security requires a vigorous military space program.” (Text; A-N-AF Journal and Register, 3/2/63,16)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of Julian Scheer as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Scheer had been serving as consultant to nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs George L. Simpson, Jr., since November 21, 1962. (nasa Release 63-21)
Appointment of Robert H. Charles as Special Assistant to nasa Administrator was announced. Consultant to Administrator since September 1962, Mr. Charles would work closely with nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs in development and negotiation of NASA-industry contractual relationships. (nasa Release 63-134)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences began hearings on technical and scientific aspects of U.S. space program, preparatory to hearings on nasa proposed FY 1964 budget authorizations. Testifying were nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/59)
Gordon M. Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, told representatives of 11 foreign airlines that U.S. could build a safe, commercially profitable supersonic transport airliner. He stressed that “we don’t think we are lagging far behind” Britisli-French development of Concorde. (NYT, 8/22/63)	_	_
Results of Harvard Business School poll of U.S. industrialists on how they viewed America’s space program, published in Harvard Business Review, indicated that industrialists expect a considerable payoff from space in terms of tangible benefits to our planet and think that the space program is “a great energizing force on our society.” (Greenough, Boston Morning Globe, 9/2/63)
nasa announced three-year $400,000 grant to Univ. of Washington for research in new, advanced ceramics and the improvement of existing materials for use in the space program and for industrial applications, (nasa Release 63-180; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/12/63)
nasa Administrator, James E. Webb, addressed North Carolina Press Association in Chapel Hill: “Our goal is to be first in every aspect of space research, development, and exploration. To achieve it we must develop the same sort of capability in the space environment that we have achieved on land, on and under the sea, and in the air, and ‘be in a position second to none.’
Editorial in Missiles and Rockets took issue with widespread assertions that the space program was a serious drain on the Nation’s scientific and technical manpower. Asserting that no other part of the economy was known to have a serious shortage of scientists or engineers and that even if the space program were stopped tomorrow the crosstraining of scientists and engineers into some other part of the economy would be long and difficult if not impossible, the editorial concluded that the big problem of the future would be a shortage of skilled manpower against a background of a rising threat of unemployment. The Nation would need an estimated 34.5 million new jobs by 1970. “New jobs develop from new technologies. And one of the fastest and most promising routes to development of new technologies lies in the missile/space industry. “With such a demand for new jobs ahead and with a concurrent need for skilled workers, the answer seems obvious—yet has received little attention. Training of surplus manpower to fit the requirements for skilled workers is the only sensible route— not a cutback in what will soon be the nation’s largest industry. But we have yet to see any large-scale government program for training of unemployables. “Nor is it solely a government problem. It must be shared by the nation’s industrial management and labor unions.” (M&R, 11/18/63, 46)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation, pointed out the long history of naca-nasa contribution to aircraft development and its continuing research contribution to the supersonic transport. Denying that such a transport would be economically unfeasible, Mr. Webb said that further improvements were attainable during the aircraft’s development: “Reduce fuel reserves by 17%; Increase airplane lift-to-drag ratio by 7% ; Reduce engine specific fuel consumption during cruise by 3%; Reduce engine weight by 15% ; Reduce airframe structure weight by 5%. If all of these gains can be achieved simultaneously the payload can be increased 34% for a given weight aircraft designed to fly 4,000 statute miles.” (Text)
In regular press conference, President Kennedy responded to a question about the pace of the U.S. space program relative to the Soviet Union’s: “The U.S. is making, as you know, a major effort in space and will continue to do so. We are expending an enormous sum of money to make sure that the Soviet Union does not dominate space. We will continue to do it. And we will continue to take whatever steps are necessary to prevent any action against the United States. “The fact of the matter is the Soviet today with a nuclear weapon can reach the United States with a missile. So I wouh have to know in more precise detail than you [the questioner have described the exact nature of our threat before I suggestet what our counteraction would be.” (Transcript in Wash. Post, 3/22/63, A16)
nasa said it was investigating “possible improprieties” in reports that cars leased to nasa by a contractor, Management Services, Inc., at Cape Canaveral were being sold after two or three years use for as little as $50. Some of them had been sold to nasa employees, the reports said. {NYT, 10/17/63)
Even our opponents realize that we have the leading role in space,’ Khrushchev said recently. ‘They haven’t overtaken us yet, and we are not going to let them. Our people are covering themselves with glory. We shall give the capitalist world no peace, since it has to go.’ “We have a balanced, fast paced space program geared to our national needs and resources. I can assure you that the Soviets are also working hard on a well conceived program, even though they throw a veil of secrecy over their failures and try to confuse us about their objectives.” (Text)
U.S.S.R.’s most recent cosmonauts, Jr. Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova and L/Col. Valery Bykovsky, held press conference in Moscow. Both insisted that tandem flight had gone off according to schedule, both as to duration and maneuvers. Lt. Tereshkova, the first woman into space, added another fact to her official biography—that she had had pilot training prior to entering the space program. (N.Y. Herald Trib., 6/26/63)
In address at Univ. of Wichita, Kans., nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Today, it is accepted that growing industries tend to concentrate in regions where research fanilities are best. No part of the country can afford to neglect investments in advanced scientific and engineering education and in first class research facilities. “Modem industry, too, has much to gain from regional cooperation in support of the universities and associated research efforts. Industrial leaders are beginning, more and more, to look to the universities of their region for the most important resource of the age—ideas, scientific brainpower, and advanced technological skill, experience, and judgment. “It is not a question today of whether a region can already qualify—can now offer the human and natural resources required— for a particular industrial plant or government facility. “The question is whether the region is creatively doing what it can to equip its citizens to serve their area and their nation in a period when our prosperity and our very existence as a free people depend on scientific and technological leadership . . . .” (Text)
Legislative Manager of U.S. Chamber of Commerce Theron J. Rice said in public letter that CofC recommended nasa’s FY 1964 budget request be cut by $1.2 billion “and that a total of $4,512,000,000 be appropriated for nasa programs for Fiscal 1964. We believe this amount will adequately provide for a continuation of our national space program and will enable the space agency to meet the established goal of a manned lunar landing by the end of this decade. The amount we recommend will give the space agency an approximate 25% increase in appropriations over Fiscal 1963, which is the maximum growth rate we believe can be sustained and supported within the economic as well as scientific and technical capabilities of the nation . . . .” (Text, Av. Wk., 8/26/63, 21)
Total manpower working at nasa’s Michoud Operations, of which only 244 were nasa employees: 8,463. Contractor employees were: Boeing, 4,136; Chrysler, 3,207; Mason-Rust, 769; Rocketdyne, 13; and Telecomputing Services, 94. (Marshall Star, 10/23/63, 4)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket, launched from nasa Wallops Station with U.S.-Japanese experiment to measure electron temperatures and densities in the ionosphere by two different methods: Langmuir probe, supplied by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and radio-frequency resonance probe, developed by Radio Research Laboratory, Tokyo. 185-lb. payload reached 141mi. altitude and transmitted approximately 8 min. of telemetry before impacting in Atlantic Ocean about 71 mi. from launch site. Data obtained from the daytime experiment were compared with data obtained from similar experiment conducted at night, three days earlier. ( nasa Releases 211 and 218)
Washington Evening Star proposed appointment of “a devil’s advocate” for U.S. space program. He would be “a member of Government, well qualified in science and engineering and well advised on tbe doings of lawyers and publicists . . . charged with building the strongest possible case against every space proposal— before it becomes sanctified as a line item in the Federal budget .... “This functionary .. . might well save the country a good deal of money and enhance the progress of the space program at the same time . . . .” (Editorial, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/27/63, A12)
nasa announced withdrawal of controversial research grant to Columbia Univ. School of Journalism at the University’s request because of an apparent misunderstanding of its scope and purpose. nasa had awarded the grant for studying “ways of making scientific advances of the space program more readily available” to news media. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/19/631
At luncheon meeting with nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Soviet Academician Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov reported to have suggested that it might be desirable to discuss possibility of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar expedition. (Bartlett, Wash. Eve Star, 9/17/63; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/18/63; Finney, NYT, 9/18/63,11)
California’s Governor Pat Brown said in Washington that nasa Administrator James E. Webb was planning a “deliberate” effort to spread contracts throughout the nation which would result in reduction of contracts to California industries. Gov. Brown later told L.A. Times that Mr. Webb reassured him that nasa contracts would continue to be awarded competitively. Mr. Webb confirmed nasa policy “to spread the problems which we must solve in space work over the greatest number of able minds throughout the country, . . .” but that purpose of policy was not to penalize California but to “obtain the best solutions for the program .... Contracts will be let by competition alone, not on the basis of politics or geography.” (L.A. Times, 2/16/63)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in speech before American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in New York City that launching of lunik iv was an initial step “in a very well organized man-on-the-moon program.” He warned that U.S.S.R. would “employ its growing space competence for military purposes if it finds such action is effective. We must be ready to handle such a threat.” Dr. Welsh disputed former President Eisenhower’s recent charge that “enormous sums of money” were being wasted in the National space program. “Mr. Eisenhower is consistent. He was wrong about the space program two, three, four years ago, and he is wrong now.” (NYT, 4/4/63,19)
Rep. James Weaver (R.-Pa.) spoke on the space race following Premier Khrushchev’s statement that Russia was not sending a man to the moon: “This ‘moondoggle’ has been a wrong objective in a race with the Soviet Union that never existed and has resulted in a space gap which threatens our national security. “Therefore, it becomes imperative that we immediately realine [sic] our space objectives to national security and eliminate this gap. I call upon James E. Webb, Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, to carry out this objective. If he cannot immediately reevaluate and report frankly and honestly to this Congress that this has been accomplished, then I feel it is our responsibility to demand his resignation. The Congress and the public can no longer tolerate public relations gimmicks and double-talk concerning the space program and our space gap when our national security is threatened.” {CR, 10/28/63,19365)
Dr. Nello Pace, physiology prof, at Univ. of Calif., sworn in as consultant on life science programs to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release)
President of mit, Julius A. Stratton, announced plans for new Center for Space Research on mit campus, nasa would provide $3 million of the total $4 million cost. (Boston Sun. Advertiser, 1/6/63) ■January 6: Review of Space Research, report of eight-week Space Science Summer Study sponsored by National Academy of Sciences in support of nasa, was transmitted to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Consensus of the more than 100 U.S. scientists from Government, universities, and industry: “Of all the discoveries that have come from or can now be anticipated from man’s efforts in space sciences, none more easily captures the imagination nor is more likely to focus interest and acclaim than the empirical proof that there is in this universe a biota other than our own. “On solid scientific grounds, on the basis of popular appeal, and in the interests of our prestige as a peace-loving nation capable of great scientific enterprise . . . finding and exploring extraterrestrial life should be acclaimed as the top-priority scientific goal of our space program .... “What is at stake is an opportunity to gain a new level of discussion of the meaning and nature of life.” Even without “definitive evidence” of extraterrestrial life, report said there was no basis for ruling out possibility of life on Mars, Venus, or the moon; it strongly endorsed nasa policy of sterilizing interplanetary spacecraft to prevent contamination of possible extraterrestrial life. The report also recommended that trained scientist-observers be assigned important roles in future U.S. space missions. “By his presence, man will contribute critical capacities for scientific judgment, discrimination, and analysis (especially of a total situation) which can never be accomplished by ms instruments, however complex and sophisticated they become. “Hence manned exploration of space is science in space, for man will go with the instruments that he has designed to supplement his capacities—to observe what is there, and to measure and describe the phenomena in terms that his scientific colleagues will clearly understand. A scientifically trained and oriented man will be essential for this purpose.” Report asked nasa to take immediate steps to train scientists for space investigations so that: a “scientist-astronaut” would be member of each Project Apollo (lunar mission) crew; meteorologists could co-pilot future manned orbiting space observatories, beginning with two-man Gemini flights in 1964; biologists would be available for first manned flights to Mars; astronomers would be prepared for advent of space observatories and for maintenance and modification of these facilities. Urging “maximum possible participation of scientists in all space missions,” report outlined tour specific levels of training: scientist-astronauts (men combining experience and resourcefulness of trained scientist and trained astronaut); scientist-passengers (experienced, mature scientists with adequate training in critical and emergency spacecraft operations); ground scientists (leading scientists in pertinent fields collaborating with spacecraft personnel in accomplishment of scientific mission) ; astronaut observers (astronauts with varying degrees of special training in making scientific observations), (nas, Review of Space Sciences; nas Releases)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before annual meeting of Texas Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association in Houston, quoted President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations toward joint lunar exploration: “The President’s statement has captured the imagination of the peoples of the world. In itself, cooperation in space activity between the great antagonists of the Cold War is a thrilling prospect. But the significance of this possibility is not limited to space; rather, it lies equally in the fact that cooperation in space is one more step toward cooperation on Earth, toward the banishment of the fear of the annihilation of life as we know it. “The President’s statement received weight and conviction from the fact that the United States has a powerful space capability; and from the fact that this Nation is well on its way to achieving preeminence in this new environment. “This national strength in space represents a massive and productive effort on the part of the United States during the past five years, an effort whose potential value is only now beginning to emerge .... “While proceeding with the development of the launch vehicles and spacecraft of the future, more than 90 per cent of it under contract with American industry, we have also learned the essentials of space operations, and achieved a degree of reliability which has produced many specific achievements in space. “In 1958, the United States had five successful flights, but for each success we had two failures. By 1961, out of 54 flights, the success ratio was 83 per cent. In the first eight months of this year every nasa launch has succeeded, with the exception of one small Scout rocket launched from Wallops Island . . . .” (Text) September 25: Eugene Wasielewski, Associate Director of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, in address before Scientific Research Society of America in Paoli, Pa., emphasized accomplishments of nasa during its first five years: “While it is easy for me to say that nasa has, as an organization, launched over 50 satellites, of which 30 were put into orbit by Goddard . . ., I am sure that you must all realize the tremendous research and development effort that was required to put these spacecraft into orbit. “Certainly Goddard . . . owes much to the successful development of the Delta launch vehicle which has given us 20 successes in 21 shots . . . .”	(Goddard News. 10/7/63. 6]
U.S.S.R. was designing a supersonic transport aircraft from the start, not modifying a bomber design as they had done with the TU-104 and were rumored to be doing again, according to faa Deputy Administrator Gordon Bain. (NYT, 11/4/63,1)
nasa announced signing of Memorandum of Understanding with India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy, providing for cooperative U.S.-India space program. Joint scientific experiments to explore equatorial electrojet and upper-atmosphere winds from geomagnetic equator would be launched from Thumba, India, during 1963. For equatorial electrojet experiments nasa would provide nine Nike-Apache vehicles; ground launching, tracking, and telemetry equipment, ground instrumentation on loan basis; and training in U.S. for Indian personnel responsible for telemetry and launch operations. Univ. of New Hampshire would provide instrumented payloads through nasa. India would provide launching site and facilities; personnel for launch operations, telemetry, and data analysis; and supporting ground magnet ic and meteorological observations. For atmospheric-wind measurements, nasa would provide four Nike-Cajun vehicles, appropriate launching device on loan basis, and training at nasa centers for Indian personnel responsible for launch operations. India would supply four sodium-vapor-release payloads, photographic equipment, launch site and facilities, personnel, and supporting meteorological data, (nasa Release 63-5)
faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby and his Deputy Administrator Gordon Bain testified on plans for supersonic transport before Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation. They said the U.S. would cancel its development of the supersonic transport if events proved the U.S. could not produce an aircraft competitive in price with the British-French version. But they argued that estimates previously presented to the Subcommittee on costs of the aircraft were too high. Aviation spokesman had estimated cost of the U.S. aircraft at from $30 million to $40 million per aircraft, compared with the $10 to $12 million estimated for the heavily subsidized European aircraft, faa said U.S. aircraft should not cost more than $20 million. (AP, NYT, 10/30/63, 26)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology, said at Univ. of Minnesota Engineers’ Day Convocation that “all too often” the scientist “gets the credit for the work done by the engineer.” In the space program, “the boundary line between science and engineering is often so fine as to be indistinguishable . . . .” (Text)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, addressed Space, Science, and Urban Life Conference in Oakland, California: “The budget of $3.7 billion for the current fiscal year and the requested $5.7 billion for the next fiscal year are sizable sums of money, approaching one per cent of the gross national product in magnitude. But, perhaps even more important than the absolute magnitude of these sums, is the leverage they exert or can be made to exert on other more general activities and associated resources. Although the effect of the space program on the total national scene may be quite modest, in certain localized regions it can be quite large. For example, ... it appears at the present time that in Fiscal Year 1963 about 47 per cent of all nasa prime contracts will go to California firms . . . .” (Text)
Testifying at Space Posture Hearings, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Administrator James E. Webb revealed that nasa “did submit to the Director of the Budget and discussed with the President, the level of effort that might be obtained under four budget figures [$5.2 billion, $5.8 billion, $6.2 billion, and $6.6 billion] .... the figure recommended by the President, $5,712 million, was based on two policies established directly by the President after thorough disevery element respond to the surge is to cussion .... [1] the areas of space science . . . must fall under the same kind of criteria as other scientific areas in his budget . . . [2] with respect to the manned space flight activity, the budget level is set at the lowest level which will permit us to maintain target dates that give us a margin and still permit us to assure manned lunar exploration within this decade, barring some situation .... “. . . it is not a lavish budget by any manner of means; it is an austere budget set at this lowest level which would permit the maintenance of target dates that we believe are realistic .... “When John Glenn was here last week and we presented his spacecraft to the Smithsonian Institution and found it there under Lindbergh’s ‘Spirit of St. Louis’, Dr. Dryden used the phrase, ‘An aura of obsolescence is hanging over the Friendship 7.’ “It is important to recognize that just a year ago this spacecraft was the most modem thing we had in the United States. Today it has an air of obsolescence and is now in the Smithsonian Institution.” (Space Posture Hearings, 2/25/63, 3-18; Posture of the National Space Program, Rpt. of House Comm, on Sci. and Astron., 5/7/63, 5)
Stratoscope II 36-in. telescope, separated from tandem balloons by radio signal, landed 10 mi. north of Pulaski, Tenn.; balloons landed 14 mi. west of Pulaski. Project Manager Dr. Martin Schwarzchild, arriving at landing site, said he was “delighted” with condition of the instruments and termed the flight a success. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/3/63)
nasa announced appointment of James T. Dennison and Dr. Thomas P. Murphy as special assistants to nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, Dr. George L. Simpson. Dennison, formerly Director of Research and Engineering at Dennison Manufacturing Co., was assigned overall responsibilities in technology utilization. Dr. Murphy, formerly staff assistant to nasa Administrator, was assigned responsibilities in policy planning, socio-economic studies, and research projects. (nasa Release 63-159)
Astroscience Center, facility devoted to current and long-range space programs, opened in Chicago by Armour Research Foundation of Illinois Institute of Technology. Headed by Dr. Leonard Reiffel, Director of Physics Research at the Foundation, new center would coordinate research projects for nasa and enlarge space research activities of the Foundation. (NYT [West. Ed?J, 3/21/63)
Space Systems Division (ssd) recorded its 200th Thor launch. The figure includes the use of the Thor as a space booster—Thor-Agena, Thor-Delta, Thor-Able, and Thor-Able-Star—and as an intermediate range ballistic missile (irbm) . (afsc Release #312-R-114, Atch #2, 1/1/64, 2) June SO: Estimated 10,000-15,000 persons visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center on “Family Day.” (Htmtsville Times, 7/1 /63) During June: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, writing in Ordnance, said: “It should be unnecessary to point out that the space race is between the United States and Soviet Russia, not between nasa on the one hand and the Department of Defense or any of its services on the other. Yet, I believe the point needs to be made. “We are trying to build national competence and international good will and cooperation through our space program, not agency competence or intragovemmental rivalries. We are trying to build an effective image of a nation devoted to peace, to the improvement of mankind’s well-being, and to the furthering of man’s abilities and knowledge. “To do so we must be able to discourage aggression, which is the antithesis of our objectives. To fail to develop strength for peace through competence in space would, in a sense, be to disarm by default.” (Ordnance, May-June 1963,658)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb told National Transportation Institute meeting in Chicago “. . . our national defense—perhaps even our national survival—demands that we act to insure that no hostile force will be permitted to use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us.” (Chicago Trib., 1/31/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb sent a report to the Congress on the construction of facilities for the University of California: “. . . the University’s geophysics building is being expanded by the addition of wings for geology and chemistry laboratories. Accordingly, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration plans to provide funds for the construction of a 62,000 gross square foot addition to that building complex in the amount of $2,000,000. The addition will be known as the space science building.” (Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/84)
nasa’s Mississippi Test Operations (mto) had a work force of nearly 900 as of this date, of which nearly 700 were contractor employees, 81 were Army Corps of Engineers personnel, and 34 were nasa employees. Active contracts at mto now stood at some $28 million, with another $10 million out on bids. (Marshall Star, 11/13/63, 1)
Major reorganization of nasa Hq. became effective (see Oct. 9 for details), consolidating the four major program offices into three and delineating and elevating certain staff functions, (nasa Releases 63-225, 242)
Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California chemist, said at press conference in conjunction with National Academy of Sciences meeting in Washington that “more effort should be made to get more first-class scientists into the space program. If nasa really is going to use only one per cent of the nation’s scientists—how many among those will be first-class?” Comparing nasa with aec, Dr. Urey said: “The atomic energy program had a very positive base. Many top scientists worked m the program. But the space program is just the opposite, nasa grew too fast.” (Huntsville Times, 4/25/63)
Stephen J. Grillo, Director of nasa Headquarters’ Administrative Services since 1960, died.
Reported that nasa Administrator Webb and Defense Secretary McNamara were considering proposal that usaf perform military experiments during first 12 Gemini space flights, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. (Av. Wk., 6/24/63, 25)
Fourth annual Conference on Peaceful Uses of Space would be held in Boston in May 1964, nasa Administrator Webb announced. (Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, quoted in press interview, expressed his hope that Congress would continue its record of consistently taking “the necessary action to support the space program . . . As the space program builds up toward pre-eminence for the United States, a position we are rapidly approaching, the space agency is endeavoring to obtain the maximum space value for each dollar it spends and has made an excellent record in this regard .... [But] the successful and expeditious carrying out of the programs recommended in the President’s budget will require the $5,712,000,000 which he recommended . . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/1/63)
In aeronautics press briefing, nasa Administrator James E. Webb replied to reporter’s question on cost of supersonic transport development: “We can do a great deal for $1 billion. I think we could probably build a flying prototype for less than that.” In President Kennedy’s proposed plan for supersonic transport development, $750 million would be spent by Government (faa, dod, and nasa) and remaining $250 million by industry. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 7/26/63)
President Kennedy, asked in press conference if he “had any cause to reconsider” his commitment to goals of U.S. lunar program, replied: IooItaH al ii rvf nniircA xtIiab tro nrnnACAtl nnr Kntlm»i for ..	-	------	— v.	—	*' this year. We are looking at it again in relationship to next year’s budget. We are also looking at it because of the concern that has been raised in the Congress and out of the Congress. I have seen nothing, however, that has changed my mind about the desirability of our continuing this program. “Now, some people say that we should take the money we are putting into space and put it into housing or education. We sent up a very extensive educational program. My judgment is that what would happen would be that they would cut the space program and you would not get additional funds for education. We have enough resources, in my opinion, to do what needs to be done in the field, for example, of education, and to do what needs to be done in space. “Now, this program passed almost unanimously a year ago. What will happen, I predict, will be a desire perhaps, possibly, to cut it substantially, and then, a year from now or six months from now, when the Soviet Union has made another new, dramatic breakthrough, there will be a feeling of ‘Why didn’t we do more.’ I think our program is soundly based. I strongly support it. I think it would be a mistake to cut it. I think time will prove, even though we can't see all the answers which we will find in space, that tire overall expenditures have been worthwhile. This country is a country of great resources. This program in many ways is going to stimulate science. I know there is a feeling that the scientists should be working on some other matter, but I think that this program—I am for it and I think it would be a mistake to arrest it.” (Transcript, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/25/63, A5)
nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said in address before Society of Aerospace Material and Process Engineers in Philadelphia: “There is no area of technology more important to our space effort than materials and their processing. Virtually every device that is employed in space is limited in either performance or efficiency by its constituent materials. The space program is literally paced by our ability to use and process materials . . . .” (Text)
Results of marines ii flight towards and past Venus were detailed in nasa press conference. Analysis of microwave and infrared radiometer scans revealed Venus is covered by cold, dense clouds in upper atmosphere; preliminaiy estimate of Venutian surface temperature was around 800° F. Temperatures are essentially same on dark and sunlighted sides of Venus, with a cold spot in southern hemisphere. Any carbon dioxide in atmosphere above cloud layer was too small to be detected by mariner ii’s instruments. High-density electron ionosphere was not detected. Radar observation on Venus from Goldstone Tracking Station established Venus’ rotation rate as 230, plus or minus 40-50 days, retrograde, with 225 days as non-rotating status for Venus. This observation together with other ground (measurements and data from mariner n’s magnetometer indicated Venus has very low, if any, magnetic field. Analysis indicated solar plasma continuously flows out from the sun, velocity of observed solar winds varying from 200 to 500 miles per second (approximate) and having temperature of about 1,000,000° F. Density is normally about 10 to 20 protons and electrons per cubic inch. Because solar plasma “carries along with it lines of magnetic force which originate in the [sun’s] corona, and the frequent variations in plasma velocity results in the deformation of these field lines, ... it is difficult to deduce from the point-by-point measurement of magnetic field what the general undisturbed configuration of the solar field would be .... It is hoped that further data may reveal the presence of magnetic waves m space ana ciam^ me interactions oetween tne magnetic field and the plasma. ...” mariner ii data on ionized particles in space revealed a flux of about 100 million particles per sq. centimeter per sec. in the range from few hundred to a thousand electron volts. In range 0.5 to 10 mev for protons, “very few exist at times, but at other times their flux may be a number of times that of cosmic rays. In the range of energies 10 to 800 mev for protons, there is nearly complete absence of particles normally [with great number possible during solar flare]. Above 800 mev, galactic cosmic rays enter interplanetary space and these decrease in numbers quite rapidly as the energy decreases. ...” Data obtained from two-way doppler tracking of the probe during its flight would enable scientists to calculate the mass of Venus with probable error of 0.005 per cent (compared to probable error of 0.05 per cent calculated by astronomers); to determine precise locations of tracking stations on earth—specifically, to calculate exact location of Goldstone Tracking Station to within 20 yards, calculated to within 100 yards before mariner n mission; to determine value of Astronomical Unit, established by radar observations as 92,956,220 mi.—50,000 mi. longer than that by classical astronomical observations; and to determine precisely the mass of the moon, now known to certainty of 0.1 per cent. Dr. Eberhard Rechtin, Director of jpl’s Deep Space Instrumentation Facility, reported mariner ii’s flight “resulted in accumulation of some 65 million bits of information with an accuracy of at least one per cent and yet with the use of only three watts of radio frequency power.” (nasa Releases 63-36-1, -2, -3, -4, -5; nasa Press Conf. Transcript)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was elected to third four-year term as Home Secretary of National Academy of Sciences, (nas Release)
In introduction to U.N. Annual Report, Secretary General U Thant “. . . the development of cooperation in outer space exploration and use continued in an encouraging manner, especially in the scientific and technical field. “The Scientific and Technological Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its second session held in Geneva in May 1963, agreed upon a series of pew and revised recommendations concerning the exchange of information, encouragement of international programs, education and training, potentially harmful effects of special experiments and the organization of international sounding rocket facilities. The meeting of the subcommittee provided once more the occasion for the scientists of the two leading space powers to continue their private talks on cooperative space programs. “The World Meteorological Organization, the International Telecommunication Union and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization continued to participate actively in the field of peaceful exploration and use of outer space. “No agreement was reached on legal problems relating to outer space, but a valuable exchange of views took place in the Committee and its legal subcommittee . . . .” (Text, CR, 8/27/63, 15099-103) During August: The Atlantic Monthly published an article “Why Land on the Moon?” by Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director, Goddard Institute for Space Studies, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, Director, Office of Space Sciences, nasa. “These are the specific values of space exploration: the benefits of basic research, economically valuable applications of satellites, contributions to industrial technology, a general stimulus to education and to the younger generation, and the strengthening of our international position by our acceptance of leadership in a historic human enterprise. The current discussion of these values of the space program has served the United States well in directing its attention to questions of national purpose. But, however we may try to break the program down into its elements and to attempt a detailed balancing of debits and credits, the fact remains that the space effort is greater than the sum of its parts. It is a great adventure and a great enterprise, not only for the United States but for all humanity. We have the power and resources to play a leading role in this effort, and it is inconceivable that we should stand aside. “Scientific administrators ask . . . can we afford the cost of the space program in technical manpower? Their concern is heightened by the fact that federal activities in defense, space, and atomic energy together consume nearly half of the science and engineering talent available in the United States. But is the space agency the major consumer of trained manpower within this federal complex of technical agencies? In actuality, nasa will be using six percent of the national manpower pool in science and engineering through its contracts with private industry, plus an additional one percent in government laboratories. If the space program has substantial value, this is not an overwhelming drain.” (Text)
faa Administrator Najeeb Halaby announced appointment of Gordon M. Bain as Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development. Formerly Assistant Administrator for Appraisal, Bain would head faa organization charged with overall responsibility for Government-industry development of supersonic transport aircraft. ( faa Release 63-69)
Peaceful purposes,’ the Administration admits, means ‘keeping the peace’ as well as engaging in scientific exploration and m commercial activities in space. President Kennedy has said we must insure that no other nation gains a position in space that would threaten our security. And we are orbiting numerous unmanned space vehicles which could have significant militaiy purposes. But the disturbing fact is that we continue to put overwhelming emphasis on nonmilitary space programs and limit military efforts to a small list of defensive possibilities . . . .” (Sat. Eve. Post, 6/15/63,10,12)
In press conference, President Johnson discussed preparation of FY 1965 budget:	• “I am working from a budget of $98.8 billion this year. It appears that we will expend about that amount, and maybe a little under or a little over, but substantially $99 billion will be the expenditures this year. That was the amount of Mr. Ken-nedy’sbudget. There are built-in increases of $1,790 million that are mandatory —military pay increase for 9 months, military retired pay, civilian pay, National Aeronautics and Space contracts, the Agency for International Development, Post Office rise, Federal Aviation Agency, urban renewal, and public assistance grants.. .. “In the Roosevelt war years we spent as high as 46 percent of our gross national product for administrative budgets. During the transition period under Mr. Truman we spent 29 percent. In 1954, under Mr. Eisenhower, we spent 18.6 percent. We are hoping that we can come under that figure in our budget next year—in other words, that our budget expenditure as a percentage of our gross national product will be less for the fiscal year 1965 than it has been for any of these periods I mentioned . . . .” To the question, “Mr. President, have you reached a hard decision on changing the space program, including eliminating the Rover project?” the President replied: “No.” (Transcript, CR, 12/19/63,24005-007)
usaf was studying a novel method of protecting spacecraft from meteoroid hits, according to Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Demler (usaf) , Commander of the AF Research and Technology Div. usaf’s Flight Dynamics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, was studying the concept of surrounding the spacecraft with a 40-in.-thick layer of metallic dust held in place by an electrostatic field. A meteoroid hitting the vibrating dust layer would be shattered or vaporized. {M&R, 11/25/63,29) During November: Military role in the U.S. space program is “generally misrepresented and largely misunderstood,” Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Commander of AF Space Systems Div., told the World Affairs Council meeting in Los Angeles. The national policy of using space for peaceful purposes “serves to put the military into space, not restrict space to purely non-military activities. What-every shape and direction our ventures into space ultimately take, military considerations cannot be separated from the political, economic, psychological, technological and sociological implications of space development.” {M&R, 11/25/63,30)
