Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, received honorary degree in mechanical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute of the University of Milan, (nasa Release 64-74)
DOD announced award of $7,112,913 contract to Franchi Construction Co. for construction of NASA launch operations center headquarters building at Merritt Island, Fla. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers. (dod Release 96-64) During January: President Johnson sent letters to all major space/defense contractors urging them to achieve significant reductions in expenditures. In separate letters from NASA Administrator James E. Webb, contractors were told of three areas offering greatest potential for significant savings: purchasing at lowest price compatible with reliability requirements, placing greater emphasis on incentives, and reducing operating costs, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/10/64,1)
Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D.-Wash.) was quoted as saying: “In view of the tremendous success of the Saturn flight, perhaps further savings in the cost of the space program might be possible between now and the first Saturn V flight by leap-frogging some of the intermediate steps.” (SBD, 1/31/64,169)
NASA Administrator James E.' Webb was presented with Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association’s Distinguished Service Honor Gold Medal Award and Certificate at the Association’s annual banquet. {A-N-AF J&R, 5/23/64,2)
It was reported that NASA planned to cancel its lease for a Lockheed JetStar at the ksc in Florida and purchase the plane outright. This came out in a report by NASA to a Senate appropriations subcommittee. The report indicated that NASA planned to operate a total of 80 aircraft in FY 1965, an increase of 4 planes. NASA officials told the committee that 37 of the 80 would be used for research, 20 for proficiency and flight training, and 23 for administrative aircraft. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64,
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Commercial Club of Chicago: “There is an analogy between our national space program and our national history. The exciting adventures of the settlement of North America captured popular fancy. But it was the quiet development of the free spirit of Americans and the growth of our form of selfgovernment that were to weigh heavier in the scales of history than Indian raids and campaigns of the colonial wars. “Another analogy closer to us has been the change in public attitudes that has led Americans to adopt new scientific ideas and concepts that may have been rejected only a few years ago. “Today we live in a period of unprecedented scientific and technological explosion. ... To be visionary is no longer to be labeled as impractical.” (Text)
Aviation Week reported that NASA and jpl were seeking a compromise to House subcommittee recommendation that NASA appoint a general manager to act as deputy to the director of jpl. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, opposed the suggestion that NASA make the appointment. It was reported that jpl was seeking someone mutually acceptable to the committee, NASA, and JPL. (Av. Wk., 6/22/64, 25)
NASA-DOD-AEC committee studying space power requirements of U.S. space program through 1975 presented its report to Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (aacb). (M&R, 6/22/64)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, DOD Deputy Director for Space, Directorate of Defense Research & Engineering, discussed the objectives of the military space program at Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers’ Winter Convention on Military Electronics, Los Angeles: “Our problems . . . are twofold: First: the United States military space program must be one of action, not reaction. We must concern ourselves with military space developments—not necessarily to match or offset any Soviet development, but to sustain and augment our own versatility and strength. The successes we have already obtained should encourage us in this drive. Second, mindful that in the past we often have been optimistic in the short run and pessimistic in the long run, we must expect that some of the new discoveries and developments that appear may suggest applications and capabilities in wholly unplanned ways. Accordingly, while we pursue efforts where applications are clear we must also lay a foundation of technology, knowledge, and experience which is sufficiently broad in scope to provide for future contingencies as they materialize or are identified. “From these considerations, then, are derived the two fundamental goals of the Defense space program: “First, to continue with the development and exploitation of space systems and capabilities which measure up on a cost-effectiveness basis to meet clearly defined high priority national defense requirements. “Second, to develop through a program integrated with other government agencies, such as NASA and the AEC, a broad base of technology and experience to permit the timely development and exploitation of space systems and capabilities which may be needed in the future, recognizing that lead times in certain areas, such as manned military space operations, may be 10 years or longer. . . .” (Text, DOD Release 106-64)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an article written for the Florida Times-Union: “Expansion’s of man’s geographical horizons have almost invariably been linked with surges of creativeness in the arts and sciences. The Space Age could well revitalize human affairs even more than did the vigorous world-ranging of Western navigators that ended the stagnation of the Dark Ages in Europe. . . . “Already some philosophers see the possibility that world-wide interest in the space program and growing international participation in it could be the first steps toward providing our troubled race with a moral and constructive substitute for war. “It is entirely possible that, along with broadening of perspectives, there will be basic changes for the better in man’s aspirations as astronauts of many nations venture deeper and deeper into the vastness of space in which ours is but one small planet circling a sun-star of relatively minor importance. . . .” (Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said U.S.S.R.’s successful orbiting of three-man voskhod I spacecraft “shows they are actively in the race with manned spacecraft.” He noted Soviet emphasis on life sciences in their space program. “They have done more in this field, I believe, than we have.” Asked about U.S. chances for landing a man on the moon before U.S.S.R., he replied: “We have a 50-50 chance of getting there first.” But, he added, U.S.S.R. might be first with a circumlunar flight. Citing buildup of Soviet space program, Dr. Welsh said ratio of their spacecraft launchings in 1964 to comparable portion of 1963 was about 3-to-1. He described voskhod i as a “logical follow-on from a very rapidly stepped-up space program.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in address at Annual Management Banquet of the National Management Association, in South Bend, Ind., that the “most important trend in NASA’s procurement activity today ... is our effort to use more incentive contracts. “Three years ago we had no incentive contracts. Today we have 52 totaling more than half a billion dollars. And we expect to raise that to one billion before the end of this year. . . . “So far we have experimented with a new type of incentive contract called the award fee. ... So far our experience with this type of incentive contract has been good; and efficient contractors who appear to be saving the government money have earned extra profits for themselves. The award fee contract is especially applicable to service contracts where targets are difficult to fix. We feel that the award fee has motivated contractors to perform better, to cut costs, and to make quick corrections when they have been deficient. Contractors, in turn, have expressed their satisfaction with this new procedure. . . .” (Text)
NASA announced Univ. of Arizona would receive $1,200,000 NASA grant to construct Space Sciences Center on the campus at Tucson. The four-story structure would “further the University of Arizona’s multidisciplinary program that is proving invaluable to the national space effort,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said, (nasa Release 64-183)
In a speech before the Briefing Conference on Government Contracting for Research and Development sponsored by the Federal Bar Association and the Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., in Boston, Ernest W. Brackett, NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator for Procurement Policy, spoke of NASA’s policy towards incentive contracts: “Incentive contracts are not the answer to everything, but much good can and will come from them. They will effect more realistic cost proposals. When a company’s incentive fee or profit is based on its cost proposal, it will not be on the low side. This means less cost overruns which are subject to so much criticism and which disrupt Government budgets. . . . There will also be more careful and detailed work definitions because a contractor wants to know what he is expected to do and be able to price it out if his incentive fee depends on performance and cost. It takes longer to negotiate incentive contracts and negotiations are harder. . . . Government personnel will be more careful, particularly in the technical areas, when incentive provisions are included. Another advantage should be fewer controls by Government over contract administration details, such as approval of overtime or sub-contractor selection. NASA would like to see contractors make higher profits but wants to have proof they have earned them. The health of the aerospace and electronics industries depends on their realizing a reasonable return for what they do. Incentive methods of contracting appear to be the best way this can be done.” (Text)
Brig. Gen. Thomas J. Hayes, III, Assistant to the Chief of Army Engineers for NASA Support for the past two years, received certificate of appreciation from NASA Administrator James E. Webb. General Hayes supervised such Engineer Corps activities as design and construction of NASA facilities, lunar mapping, and advance engineering related to future programs. He was cited by NASA particularly for his “skillful direction” in the “planning, design and construction of the massive and complex structures required for the manned space Right system.” (NASA Release 64-84)
usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif., acquired 12 more students, bringing enrollment to 35. The school’s one-year course was designed to produce pilots, project managers, or consultants for future manned space programs. {A—N—AF J&R, 5/30/64, 17)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in letter to NASA Center Directors and Heads of Headquarters Program and Staff Offices: “I call upon each of you ... to demonstrate full equality of opportunity without regard to sex, and that personal attitudes must not be allowed to operate adversely against women, or men, in recruitment, selection, training, or promotion. ... I now ask your full cooperation in meeting these stated objectives.” (nasa Hq. PB 64-14)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in his remarks in Grand Rapids, Mich.: “We have a fighting chance to maintain our schedules for the manned lunar exploration mission in this decade. By so doing, we will increase our ability to operate in space for any mission the national interest may require. And we will be using space for peace, discouraging those with other ideologies from political propaganda or military threats. . . .” (Text)
In NASA Hq. ceremony, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented cash awards to 10 inventors in recognition of their outstanding contributions to space science technology. Awards under the Space Act: $1,000 to Conrad Josias of jpl for invention of “bipolar logarithmic current-to-voltage transducer” which made possible the discovery of interplanetary plasma; $1,000 to James D.	Acord and Howard C. Vivian of jpl for invention of “space vehicle attitude control” employed in Ranger and Mariner spacecraft; $2,000 to Robert C. Baumann and Leopold Winkler of gsfc for invention of “spin adjusting mechanism” used on oso I, syncom ii, and Aerobee sounding rockets; and $4,000 to Harold R. Kaufman of lrc for invention of “ion rocket engine,” representing great step forward in ion propulsion r&d—the engine will he used in first Space Electric Rocket Test flight (Sert I). Awards under the Incentive Awards Act: $1,000 to Pleasant T. Cole, gsfc, for invention of “system for recording and reproducing pulse code modulated data,” capable of achieving significantly larger packing density on magnetic tape to reduce weight requirements; and $1,400 to William C. Morgan, Jack B. Esgar, and Richard H. Kemp of lrc for invention of “thin-walled pressure vessel” for use in testing materials subjected to cryogenic temperatures. (Hootman Memo, 2/18/64; nasa Release 64-45; lrc Release 64—16)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of .NASA, said he hoped for cooperation on space flights between the U.S., the U.S.S.R., and other countries at some future time. He asserted that such cooperation was not possible at the current time because of the secrecy that surrounded Soviet space efforts. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/5/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to the President that nasa had accomplished cost reductions totaling $128,783,000 in FY 1964. This greatly exceeded the agency’s target of $81,780,000. (nasa Announcement 64-162)
Both stages of first Titan II launch vehicle for Project Gemini were successfully static-fired for 30 seconds at Launch Complex 19, Cape Kennedy, producing combined total thrust of more than half a million pounds. Purpose of test was to evaluate overall Gemini launch vehicle system performance—fueling, countdown, ignition and cutoff commands, guidance control, and telemetry; and to verify engine performance by thrust generation and engine gimbaling. The stages were mounted side-by-side on separate mounts; electrical signal cut off first-stage engine after 30 sec., then started second-stage engine, which was cut off by radio signal from ground computer just as in actual flight. Charles W. Matthews, Gemini Project Manager, Msc, said static-firing test met all prelaunch requirements, (msc Release 64-9; M&R, 1/27/64,10)
Disclosed at press conference in Florence, Italy, in connection with COSPAR meeting, mat U.S.—U.S.S.R. cooperative space negotiations would be held in Geneva within two weeks. Heading U.S. team would be NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, meeting with Soviet team led by Anatoli Blagonravov. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/14/64)
Editorial in Washington Evening Star said postponement of manned Gemini space flight into 1965 came as “scant surprise,” since “as long ago as last Christmastime a ‘space forecast’ story in the Star made the prediction that this would be the case, and for several months the ‘last quarter of 1964’ target date has been hardly more than a tongue-in-cheek fiction at NASA Headquarters. . . . “Of course, it is far better to delay the flights than to run the risk of tragic failure due to haste or carelessness. Wouldn’t it make sense to forget about phony schedules—and phony excuses for not keeping them—and just carry on with the space program as fast and effectively as possible?” (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/64)
NASA instituted revised patent waivers and related procurement regulations in accordance with the late President Kennedy’s directive for a more uniform patent policy among Federal agencies. New regulations gave contractors greater chance to obtain patent rights to their commercially applicable inventions made in the course of work on Government contracts. Announced Aug. 21, the new regulations were expected to accelerate contractors’ efforts to identify and report technological advances, thus enhancing technology utilization from the space program. (NASA Release 64-209; Av. Wk., 10/5/64, 26)
Soviet Government had rejected the space agreement negotiated in Geneva by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Soviet Academician Anatoli Blagonravov last June, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. After the negotiators had returned to their respective countries, Simons reported, U.S.S.R. notified U.S. in July that it chose to reject the agreement. NASA officials had no comment on the report, but other sources (unnamed) said the tentative agreement had called for exchange of information and publication of a book about space medicine and bioscience by Soviet and U.S. experimenters. U.S.S.R. refusal was based on insistence that topics be covered by either U.S. or Soviet author, although Blagonravov had agreed to U.S. proposal that each topic be covered by a Soviet and a U.S. author. This was said to be first instance of exercising the usual option to reject the space agreement reached by negotiating teams. (Simons, Wash. Post, 10/6/64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden said in address before National University Extension Association in Washington: “The exploration of space is a continuation of the geographical exploration by man of unknown areas of the earth from the days of the Phoenician mariners three thousand years ago. The New World, the polar regions, the depths of the ocean, the limits of the atmosphere— have each in turn been the temporary goal. Space is the new frontier. . . . “We have as a nation accepted the challenge of the new frontier, and this year are spending a little more than five billion dollars on the exploration of space for peaceful purposes. This represents an expenditure of approximately 50 cents per week by each of the 200 million inhabitants of our country. . . .” (Text)
NASA announced revision of its patent policy and regulations for waivers of commercial rights to inventions resulting from space program work. Effective September 28, the revised patent waiver and related procurement regulations implemented Presidential patent policy statement of last October which established guidelines for a more unified approach among Federal agencies regarding allocation of patent rights to inventions produced in performance of Government contracts. The new regulations also reflected more than three years of intensive study, including public hearings, on ways to improve NASA patent policies. NASA officials anticipated that they would encourage and accelerate contractors’ efforts to identify and report technological advances, thereby increasing the flow and dissemination of technical information derived from the space program, (nasa Release 64-209)
Breene M. Kerr, who had been NASA’s Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization, became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization. He thus took over part of the duties of Dr. George L. Simpson, who would function as Associate Deputy Administrator and Assistant Administrator for Policy Planning. (NASA Release 64-291)
NASA officials told Missiles and Rockets that Phase I of the floxed Atlas development program, which was to end this year, would be continued until mid-1965. Also delayed was the decision whether to move on to Phase II, which called for development of flight hardware and two flights in the 1966-67 period. (M&R, 11/9/64,9)
Republican National Committee Chairman Dean Burch said in open letter to President Johnson that NASA Administrator James E. Webh was engaging “in the most blatant and transparent politics by suggesting he will shift the top space scientists and executives from Huntsville, Ala., to New Orleans. . . . This is political blackmail, pure and simple. . . .” (ctps, Chic. Trib., 10/27/64)
A six-month study was concluded of public acceptability of sonic boons that had been conducted by the faa in the Oklahoma City area since February 3, 1964. The study was designed to gather data on public reaction to the noise that would follow the supersonic airliners of the 1970’s. During the test approximately 8 booms a day (total in test, 1,253) were created. During the 6 months the agency received 12,588 telephone calls, most of them complaints. In addition to these direct manifestations of opinion, the Univ. of Chicago conducted a detailed public opinion survey in conjunction with the experiment. Gordon M. Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, said in announcing the completion of the study: “Sonic boom presents the most imposing single challenge to design and operation of a supersonic transport plane. The people of Oklahoma City have been helping explore this challenge as, in effect, major participants in the nation’s supersonic transport development program.” (faa Release 64-74; Clark, NYT, 8/1/64)
At Missouri Valley College commencement exercises, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “For some time we in NASA have been concerned with doing our part to help build up the nation’s supply of scientific and engineering manpower, and to ensure that our national competence grows rather than diminishes. Accordingly, in 1962, the agency initiated its present program of training graduate students in space-related fields, and nearly 900 students are already in training. “This fall the number of schools participating will grow from 88 to 131, located in 47 states—with four of these colleges here in Missouri. . . (Text)
President Johnson transmitted to Congress his annual space report, United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, 1963 (H. Doc. 207). In his accompanying message the President said: “. . . Our space program, in both its civilian and military aspects, is peaceful in purpose and practice. Moreover, it combines such objective with a policy of international cooperation based upon a mutuality of participation and benefits as well as the wide dissemination of knowledge. “Space progress is essential if this Nation is to lead in technology and in the furthering of world peace. Such progress requires the use of substantial resources, which must be employed efficiently and effectively in order that we obtain the maximum benefits with a minimum of waste. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/27/64,1045)
President Johnson presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom, highest U.S. civilian award, to Clarence L. Johnson, designer of U—2 and A—11 aircraft, and 29 other distinguished Americans in White House ceremony. (AP, NYT, 9/15/64, 26) *	NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in New Orleans that progress in development of vehicles for manned lunar flight was “very good.” He predicted: “If things work well, we’ll be there by late 1969. This would not be possible if it were not for Michoud [nasa Michoud Operations].” At present, he said, 11,505 persons were employed at Michoud Operations and $927 million worth of contracts had been let there since it opened. Mr. Webb was in New Orleans to meet with former members of NASA New Orleans Coordinating Committee, formed in 1961 to assist NASA in establishing Michoud Operations. (N.O. Times-Picayune, 9/15/64)
Col. Robert P. Young (usa), Executive Officer of NASA since 1961, was awarded NASA’s Medal for Outstanding Leadership. In making the award, NASA Administrator James E. Webb cited Young for “his outstanding leadership and dedicated service displayed in all aspects of performance while serving as executive officer of NASA, and for his significant and noteworthy contributions in co-ordinating internal management of the agency.” (nasa Release 64-181; Wash. Post, 7/22/64)
The report that the White House might establish a “space czar” cabinet post to direct dod and NASA space programs was discounted. The White House was against it, as were Secretary of Defense McNamara and NASA Administrator Webb. (M&R, 11/16/64, 7)
faa announced purchase of runway traction device to enable engineers to predict stopping distances for aircraft on wet or slippery runways. Designed and developed by J. I. Thompson Co., the equipment consisted of hydraulically operated mechanism mounted on aircraft tire and towed behind specially equipped truck; special controls permitted technicians to duplicate actual speed, skid, and braking effects of aircraft landing on slick runways, (faa Release T'64-44) “. . . Space propulsion using nuclear energy offers a capability for accomplishment of high energy increment, high payload missions in space beyond the capability of the chemical combustion propulsion systems when considering practical operating limitations. Work now underway in the United States indicates that nuclear rockets can be anticipated for earliest use in the space program. Reactor tests being conducted during this year should provide a firm technical basis for system development. Electric propulsion using the nuclear reactor energy source offers promising storable propellant performance if light-weight, long-life power supplies can be developed. Technology investigations are now underway to evaluate the feasibility of achieving the required performance. This work will simultaneously provide the information that is required to provide large amounts of electric power for non-propulsive purposes in space. Beyond these systems, a host of new and advanced concepts have been proposed. These are not well enough defined or evaluated to assure that their high performance potential can actually be achieved. Some research work is underway on these systems.” (Text)
Vice Adm. Rufus E. Rose (usn, Ret.) was sworn in as Director of Policy Planning Div., NASA Office of Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. The most recent assignment during Admiral Rose’s 44-year career was as Commandant of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, (nasa Release 64-73)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director for Space, Defense Research and Engineering, said in address before National Space Club in Washington that the Manned Orbiting Laboratory would be the first phase of DOD’s National Orbiting Space Station and would provide means of carrying out experiments to prove or disprove the military role of man in space. mol would carry two astronauts for 30 days, also would carry experiments of nonmilitary nature, primarily for NASA. Discussing nonmilitary unmanned space program, Dr. Hall disclosed that the Army had secretly launched secor last month and that it was performing “exceptionally well.” (SBD, 2/19/64, 274; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/19/64)
Addressing Oklahoma Frontiers of Science Foundation in Oklahoma City during ceremonies celebrating its tenth anniversary, NASA Administrator James E. Webb pointed out that “some of our NASA projects in education and in the transfer of space technology to the general economy owe much to the philosophy and concepts threshed out in the early days of the Foundation. . . .” (Text)
First test patterns had been sent over special cable link between Suitland, Md., and Moscow, for exchange of meteorological data, according to U.S. Weather Bureau. The link was considered operational, could be used any time U.S. and U.S.S.R. agreed on scheduling and other details of the cooperative exchange. The cable was result of cooperative space agreement reached in 1962 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden for the U.S. and Academician A. A. Blagonravov for the U.S.S.R. (Gustaitis, Wash. Post, 10/13/64)
NASA msc officials announced first Gemini spacecraft for a manned spaceflight (GT—3) had passed design and engineering inspections; project manager Charles W. Mathews declared it would perform its mission in satisfactory fashion. (Houston Chron., 6/11/64; msc Roundup, 6/24/64,8)
