The number of women earning more than $10,000 annually in scientific government jobs had increased dramatically from 1959 because of interest in space programs, Mrs. Catherine Dryden Hock, NASA systems engineer, informed the New York Section of Society of Women Engineers. Between 1959 and 1963, number of women in Government grades of GS-12 and above in computer fields rose 790% ; in mathematics and mathematical statistics, 137% ; and in physical sciences, 122%. NASA’s engineering force was 3% women, (nasa Release 65-60)
The vast accumulation of knowledge generated by the space program required a “new wave” of science reporters to challenge and stimulate “a new wave of readers and viewers who are seeking answers,” Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, told the Sigma Delta Chi National Convention in Los Angeles. He referred to a need to look “beyond the obvious and the glamorous to what is happening in space and science and what impact this will have socially, diplomatically, politically and economically.” (Text)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff would not terminate his service with nasa September 1, 1965, to assume the presidency of Case Institute of Technology as NASA had previously announced, but would continue as Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology until a successor was selected and had assumed these duties. Dr. Bisplinghoff would then become Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb in the advanced research and technology field. (nasa Release 65-274)
Donald E. Crabhill of the Bureau of the Budget discussed “Space Programs and the Federal Budget” before the National Space Club: “What are some of the significant factors to be pointed out in the relationship between the space program and the budget? “The first is, of course, the matter of growth in the funding for space and the current absolute amount of funds allocated to space programs, including not only NASA, but also dod, aec, and activities in this area by other agencies. In FY 1957, approximately $150 million was expended by the Federal Government on space programs. In FY 1960, the total was still below $900 million. In FY 1966, the tenth year of the space age, the President’s budget provides for space expenditures of $6.9 billion. “Where does this amount stand in relation to amounts in the administrative budget for other programs? It is less than the total amounts to be spent in 1966 on national defense; on health, labor, and welfare programs; and on interest on the national debt. But it is greater than that to be spent for any other function of Government. Space expenditures of all agencies will be greater in 1966 than those for international affairs and finance, for agriculture, for natural resources, for commerce and transportation, for housing and community development, for veterans benefits and services, or for other general Government. “The space program has not been, since it was initiated, and is not today, a budgetary underdog. “The second specific point to be made is that the budget process by its very nature is an exercise in priorities. ... A great many merely desirable projects get deferred throughout the Government every year under the press of the budgetary process. “In the past, this pressure has not been felt as severely in the space area as it has in most others because of the emphasis that has been given to creating in a hurry a vast capability to operate in space. The space program has been very successful in meeting this aim. In fact, it has been so successful that space is now coming of age with other Government programs. We will soon have a technical capability to do a great many more space missions than we as a nation will probably want to pay for. . . . “There is one other point that, as a budget examiner, I feel I must mention. Funding and schedule estimates for space programs have been historically quite unreliable. Cost estimates have tended not so much merely to grow, but to multiply! At the same time, schedules have tended to slip, slip, slip. “This was an understandable situation while the space program was new, but we have had enough experience that there will be considerable resistance from now on to escalation in price and radical slips in schedule of the next generation of space projects. The more detailed planning we are doing now, the phased project procurement processes, and the experience we have gained in the technology and the techniques of Space operations must be expected to show returns in better ability to make good cost and schedule estimates in the first place, and then to meet the cost and schedule targets that are approved.” (Text)
Pocomoke City, Md., radio station wdmv proposed that Wallops Island, Va., be renamed Dryden Island in memory of Dr. Hugh Dryden, late NASA Deputy Administrator, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/ 27/65, Bl)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb sent a letter to the House and Senate space committees outlining major reprograming of funds planned by NASA during the remainder of fy 1965. Webb said $13 million had been allocated to large solid rockets in fy 1965 and nothing in the following year “due to the President’s decision not to include funds in the NASA ’66 budget.” Close-out costs for the large solids would amount to $8.5 million in addition to the $13 million already earmarked “and would yield no technical confirmation of the planned objectives.” By adding another $5.3 million, “bringing the fy ’65 funding to $26.8 million,” NASA would “carry the Phase I program through to completion.” Phase I called for the manufacture and firing of two “half-length” rockets 78 ft. long and 260 in. in diameter. Additional close-out funds were also granted to the other programs not included in the fy ’66 budget: $2.15 million for Snap-8; $3 million for the M-l engine. (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings [Part 4], 279-88)
NASA announced four major personnel changes: Willis H. Shapley, Deputy Chief of the Military Div. of the Bureau of the Budget, would become Associate Deputy Administrator effective September 1, 1965; Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, would become Special Assistant to Administrator James E. Webb, effective immediately; Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Sciences in the NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, would become Acting Director, Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. John W. Townsend, Assistant Director, Goddard Office of Space Science and Applications, would become Deputy Director of gsfc —a new post. When Shapley’s appointment became effective, the present Policy Planning Board would be discontinued; the office of Policy Planning would aid him in preparing policy matters for the Administrator, Deputy Administrator, and Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 65243)
NASA Assistant Deputy Administrator Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., was named Chancellor of the University System of Georgia and would assume the duties of the new post July 15. Simpson, who had joined NASA in 1962 as Assistant Administrator of Public Affairs, later became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning. In July 1964 he assumed the additional duties of Assistant Deputy Administrator. A native of North Carolina, he had been a professor at the Univ. of North Carolina and a planner of the Research Triangle, cooperative endeavor of the Univ. of North Carolina, Duke Univ., and North Carolina State College, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/5/65)
KSC technicians began to repair Pad 19 for the Gemini vi launch immediately after gemini vii had lifted off. Damage was minimal, NASA officials reported, and they were optimistic about being able to launch Gemini vi Dec. 13. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/5/65, 1)
Emergency landing of voskhod ii was the third such failure in the Soviet space program, according to an unidentified Czechoslovak scientist, member of the Astronautic Commission of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, during a panel discussion on Radio Prague. He said there had been two earlier failures in the unmanned Vostoks. The disclosure was made in reply to a listener’s letter. {NYT, 4/1/65, 6)
NASA awarded $1,190,000 facilities grant to the Univ. of Florida for the construction of a Space Science Building on campus. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, said the new grant “will permit the expansion of theoretical and experimental research in aeronautical and space sciences and will enable the university to train an increased number of highly qualified young researchers.” (nasa Release 65-248)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in dedicating Boeing’s new Space Simulation Facility at Kent, Wash., said NASA planned to increase its aeronautical research. Webb pointed out that while the industry-Government relationship sometimes appeared to be that of vender and buyer, it was actually a partnership	with all of its problems. Significant influences on this partnership in recent years had included: the demand on industry for faster rates of technical advance; the increased complexity and technical difficulty of major programs with consequent delays and cost overruns; the decreasing volume of production work and increasing volume of research and development contracts; the steady increase in the requirements for technical and program management personnel; the requirement for Government to better define its objectives and requirements; the emphasis in the procuring agencies on increasing competition at all stages, including research and development; changes in contracting methods which offered more incentives but imposed more risk on contractors; and necessary increases in Government controls on configuration, quality, and on financial data in multiple contract, large and long-lead-time projects. (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking on statistical standards at the National Governors’ Conference in Minneapolis, said: “. . . the timely availability of accurate, comprehensive data—based on valid and accepted concepts and definitions—will become increasingly important to the effective conduct of state government. The need for compatibility between federal and state data systems is recognized at the top levels of government. . . . “It is clear that the goals of complete uniformity, perfect comparability and total integration of statistical and management information systems will not soon be accomplished. But it is equally clear that urgent efforts toward these goals are being made and are necessary if state and local governments are to keep pace with the needs of modern society.” Webb recommended that each state: “1. Establish a state statistical standards unit ... 2. Sponsor a National Conference on the Comparability of Statistics Among the States . . . and 3. Examine applicability of modern information technology at the state and local levels. . . .” (Text)
A Gemini in experiment in which blood cells subjected to a known dosage of radiation were allowed to float around weightless in a container showed that weightlessness had no effect on irradiated human blood cells, according to Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager. He also explained why GEMINI ill landed about 60 mi. short of predicted spot: The pilots were instructed to fly a bank angle based on wind-tunnel data of Gemini spacecraft’s lift characteristics. But in actual reentry, the spacecraft’s “lift was only about % of what we had expected it to be.” Onboard instrumentation showed the discrepancy, but the command pilot followed ground instructions. When he ultimately changed the angle, based on the onboard display, it was too late to achieve the spacecraft target. (Transcript)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the Washington Board of Trade, said: “In 1959, when NASA attempted 14 space flights, we had 37 percent success in missions and launch vehicles. Last year we attempted 30 missions, more than twice as many as in 1959, and the percentage of success in missions went up to 83, with 93 percent success in vehicles. So far this year, the percentages are holding close to those of 1964.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb presented NASA Exceptional Service Award to Dr. George F. Simpson, Assistant Administrator for Policy Planning, in an informal Headquarters ceremony. Having joined NASA in 1961, Dr. Simpson resigned to become Chancellor of the State of Georgia University System, (eph)
The U.S. showing at Le Bourget was discussed by Robert Hotz in an Aviation Week and Space Technology editorial: “The United States is presenting a sorry spectacle at the 26th Paris Air Show [June 11-21] that does grave injustice to its genuine aerospace capability in relation to its principal competitors, including the Soviet Union. As the show draws to a close, only a bold stroke of public relations, such as jetting Astronauts White and McDivitt with their Gemini capsule to Le Bourget for a weekend finale would offer any chance for the U.S. to recoup the prestige lost last week through the combination of top-level government indifference, official naivete and the stifling channels of interagency bureaucracy between the various government departments involved in the U.S. show effort. . . . “For the past two Paris air shows, the NASA exhibit has been a major sensation, convincing Europeans of U.S. technological leadership. This year, nasa was conspicuously absent. Even frantic pleas from the French to have Astronaut John Glenn appear to match the Soviets’ Yuri Gagarin were strangled in the maze of interdepartmental coordination. . . . “The net result of this sad combination of government bungling at Le Bourget has been to spend large sums of the taxpayers’ dollar to create the impression that the United States is resting smugly on its technical oars, complacently relying on rapidly obsolescing military hardware for the present and craftily confident this aging equipment can be foisted on its European allies in the near future.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 6/21/65, 13) June 21-July 16: Space Research Summer Study—1965, convened at Woods Hole, Mass., by nas-nrc Space Science Board, reviewed the National space program. Various working panels were formed to examine in detail the three topics of particular focus: planetary exploration, astronomy requirements, and the role of man in space research. About 200 invited scientists participated in the multi-disciplinary review, which was under general chairmanship of George P. Woollard, Director, Hawaii Institute of Geophysics. NASA provided financial support-(nas—nrc, News Report, 9/65, 5)
Gen. Mark E. Bradley (usaf, Ret.), former commanding general of USAF Logistics Command, was appointed consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on management matters and evaluation of NASA’s contributions to supersonic transport development and aeronautical research programs, (nasa Release 65-330)
In season’s greetings to NASA employees, Administrator James E. Webb said: “During 1965 we have continued our effects to place and keep the United States in a position second to none in space and aeronautics. This is significant for many reasons, but the most important of these, perhaps, is the fact that our efforts constitute a very real and significant contribution toward the ultimate realization of the true meaning of Christmas—peace on earth.” (nasa Hq.)
A briefing given by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to President Johnson and the Cabinet in session said that the success of the last two Gemini missions “has proved the design and confirmed the results of the ground tests, has increased our confidence in the reliability of the over-all Gemini systems, and has enabled the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to advance the Gemini program such that rendezvous and docking are now scheduled during calendar year 1965.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee’s Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights, said: “Fundamental to NASA’s approach to the patent policy question and to technology utilization is our belief that active effort must be expended, and meaningful incentives provided, if the byproducts of the space efforts are to flow to the general public through entrepreneurs willing to risk investment capital. . . . “If NASA’s experience has served to establish one principal, it is . . . that ‘a single presumption of ownership does not provide a satisfactory basis for Government wide policy on the allocation of rights to inventions.’ NASA’s experience further establishes . . . that the ‘Government has a responsibility to foster the fullest exploitation of the inventions for the public benefit.’ ” (Transcript)
Gen. Charles P. Cabell (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in as consultant on organization and management development activities to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Military assignments during his career included that of directing the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff. He was deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1962. (NASA Release 65-226)
Report to industrial and defense management on the technical and economic status of magnesium-lithium alloys had been published by NASA’s Technology Utilization Div. The report was prepared for NASA by the Battelle Memorial Institute. A NASA technology utilization report based on cryogenic research directed toward evaluation of the stress distribution near abrupt changes in wall thickness of pressure vessels also became available, (nasa Releases T-65-12 and T-65-10)
The extent of the economic impact of the space program on a sevencounty Central Florida area around Cape Kennedy was disclosed in a report by the Univ. of Florida Bureau of Economic and Business Research. Total personal incomes in the seven counties had increased from $372,779,000 in 1950 to $572,375,000 in 1954, then more than tripled to $1,738,566,000 in 1963.	(Houston Post, 10/6/65; ksc Historian )
Policy statement on participation by NASA employees in “widely-attended dinners honoring aerospace pioneers” was issued by Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden:	“nasa policy does not prevent acceptance of an invitation from a company to attend such affairs, provided the expense borne by the company is limited to the cost of tickets. Lodging or travel expenses may not be accepted.” (NASA Ann.)
Stanford Univ. received a $2,080,000 facilities grant from NASA to assist in the construction of a space-engineering research building. After signing the NASA/Stanford agreement, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “Construction of these facilities will help Stanford provide the laboratory areas so urgently needed by scientists engaged in NASA-supported research and training activities. The national space effort will further benefit by thus increasing the capability of Stanford to train greater numbers of highly qualified young scientists, engineers and researchers.” (nasa Release 65-285)
Dan Schneiderman, Mariner project manager at JPL, had invented “Conrad,” a self-contained radio navigation aid for amateur sailors. The device would sell for less than $100 and function as an entertainment radio when not in use. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/24/65)
NASA Hq. reorganization plan, effective Jan. 2, 1966, was disseminated throughout NASA. Two main effects of the changes: establishment of Office of the Administrator, in which the Administrator and Deputy Administrator would be supported by the Associate Deputy Administrator with a strong Secretariat; and, establishment of operating pattern within this office delegating authority and responsibility to the Deputy Administrator, who would serve as general manager as well as Acting Administrator in the Administrator’s absence. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Deputy Administrator, retained the additional title of Associate Administrator. Other changes included: Director of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition would be made Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; heads of functional staff offices except General Counsel would have the title Assistant Administrator. Heads of all functional staff offices as well as the four program offices would be responsible to the Deputy Administrator. (NASA Memo)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator, succeeding Dr. Hugh L. Dryden who died Dec. 2. Dr. Seamans, who had been Associate Administrator, would also retain that position for an indefinite period, (nasa Release 65-388)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb swore in R. Walter Riehlman, former Republican member of the House of Representatives from New York’s 34th District (Syracuse) as a consultant on policy matters. (NASA Release 65-9)
Six Navy and Marine flyers emerged from a cylindrical chamber at Philadelphia’s naval air engineering center where they had spent 34 days in a simulated journey into space in an experiment sponsored by NASA. The project was designed to collect and analyze information on long confinement in a space atmosphere, specifically, how pure oxygen would affect the blood, the lungs, thinking, and eating. Cdr. Kenneth R. Coburn, project manager, called it “a major success,” noting that “we find that man can live for long periods of time—for a month anyway—without any bad effects.” (ap, Chic. Trib., 4/20/65)
Six key appointments at NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility were announced by mtf Manager Jackson M. Balch: Henry F. Auter, Deputy Manager and Chief of Projects Control Office; L/Col. Frederic C. French (usa), Assistant Manager for Construction and Installation; Waldo H. Dear-ing, Chief of Management Support Office; Myron L. Myers and Robert A. Bush, project managers for s-ic and s-il operations, respectively; and Myrl E. Sanders, project manager for support activities, (msfc Release 65-278)
Facility grants in the amount of $2,226,000 to the Case Institute of Technology and $1 million to the Univ. of Rochester, had been approved by NASA. The grant to Case, together with funds from Institute sources, would permit construction, on land owned by Case, of the Case Laboratory for Space Engineering Research. The Univ. of Rochester grant would be used to build a five-story addition to be used for space-related research in optics, geology, exobiology, physiology, and cosmic ray physics. NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “The new facilities will permit expansion of NASA-supported research directly related to the national space effort and will enable both institutions to train greater numbers of highly qualified young researchers.” (NASA Release 65-270)
Jean Delorme, president of France’s L’Aire Liquide and head of Eurospace, said he believed there could be no large-scale European space program without formation of a European equivalent to the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. He called for establishment of a central coordinating body that would be the supranational European NASA, with the power to make financial decisions. Delorme was addressing opening of 12-day U.S.-Eurospace conference in Philadelphia, (ap, NYT, 2/27/65, 17)
In an article in the San Diego Evening Tribune deploring the strikes and labor unrest at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island, Victor Riesel said: “Well over $100 million had been lost in strikes. “nasa officials report 78 walkouts between Dec. 1, 1962, and Feb. 15. 1965. Total work loss has been 63,784 man days. This means there has been an average of more than five vital strikes a month. At least 35 of them have been illegal and have cost 49,596 man days.” (Riesel, San Diego Eve. Trib., 3/18/65)
Joint Congressional Atomic Energy Committee, in hearing on aec’s fy 1966 authorization, asked NASA Administrator James E. Webb why NASA was dropping funds for the Snap-8 spacecraft nuclear auxiliary power project. In the joint nasa-aec project, aEC was working on the reactor and NASA was working on the power conversion machinery. Snap-8 was one of three projects that had been deleted from the nasa fy 1966 budget request. Mr. Webb said:	“	... in the over-all budgeting . . . the President has a hard problem of adjusting resources to the needs of the Government. In this case, it was decided that these systems, these three systems, could not be financed within the resources available for allocation to NASA and therefore they were eliminated in the final decision relating to the President’s budget, but not on our recommendation. . . . “Because we are on the verge of significant technical milestones with our power conversion equipment, we believe we should phase out the program in an orderly way and provide the maximum amount of experience and data for future use. “Therefore, we plan to continue current testing of components combined in the test loop to achieve at least 1,000 hours of operating time on each of the major components, by reprogramming our remaining fiscal year 1965 funds into these specific task areas. “. . . we expect to present to you and the committees, if you will permit us to do so, an orderly plan for using the resources we now have. This gives the Congressional Committees an opportunity to look at and plan and decide whether it does really fit what they believe is in the national interest rather than to take a sudden action. . . .” Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, expressed his belief “that it is too bad that the Bureau of the Budget trimmed you down on this work. I wish you had gone ahead with it through the test period, we would have learned some very significant things. I disassociate it from the other two [canceled projects] but Snap-8 should have gone on priority.” (Transcript)
Discovery of a malfunction in the computer on Gemini 6 spacecraft might prevent a December 13 launch, nasa officials speculated. The computer, whose “memory” had been altered, was removed from the spacecraft to have new information fed into it. (Wilford, NYT, 12/8/65, IOC)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced during a ceremony at Western Reserve Univ. honoring retiring Dr. T. Keitb Glennan, president of Case Institute of Technology, that Glennan had been asked to return to NASA as an adviser. Webb said Glennan would be asked to review NASA spending plans for the next ten years. Glennan, Webb’s predecessor as NASA Administrator, was appointed by President Eisenhower to head the agency when it was formed in 1958. (Ludwigson, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 5/15/65)
“Our military space program is a wall decoration,” said James J. Hagerty, Jr., in an editorial in the Journal of the Armed Forces. He continued: “The technology is there, but we are not exploiting it. Our DOD civilian leadership is content to drift along with the idea that someday we’ll get around to it if we need it. This attitude seems to be based on the theory often advanced by Secretary McNamara and echoed by [NASA Administrator] Mr. Webb in his Hill testimony, that there is Tittle chance that the Russians can develop a surprise military [space] capability’ ... If there is any chance at all, we should be doing something more than we’re doing.” (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 4/3/65, 8)
Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed nuclear-rocket technology in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The recent reactor test experience shows that nuclear rockets can be made available to furnish thrust at high specific impulse for many possible post-Apollo missions. Whatever direction the future space program may take—whether toward extensive manned lunar exploration, unmanned solar-system exploration, or manned planetary exploration—the performance advantages of nuclear rockets will be available, valuable, and, certainly for the latter mission, necessary. Through this program the country will have the options it must have in selecting future missions. For the manned planetary missions, which they can perform for all planetary opportunities, nuclear rockets offer such substantial spacecraft weight reductions, and associated savings in cost, that no less-efficient form of spacecraft propulsion could be seriously considered. . . .”	(A&A, 6/65, 34-35) During June: A decade of nuclear-rocket research at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory was described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Roderick W. Spence and Franklin P. Durham, both of LASL. The 10-yr. effort reached new levels of attainment in 1964—65, with successful tests of the Kiwi-B-4E and nrx-a2 reactors, and initial strides in the more advanced Phoebus reactor program. “The entire operations of both Kiwi-B-4E and nrx-a2 gave very close to the desired results and met or exceeded all of the test objectives. “. . . the past decade of experience has given us confidence that nuclear-rocket engines can be built and that they will prove to give good performance with high reliability.” (A&A, 6/65, 42-46)
