nasa’s contributions to multidisciplinary research in support of development were discussed by NASA Administrator James E. Webb at a meeting of the West Point Society of the District of Columbia. Webb described how NASA programs fulfilled need pointed out by the late NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden in 1949 for cooperative research channeled "into directions permitting early application.” (Text)
nasa officials accepted Gemini 8 spacecraft from McDonnell Aircraft Corp., St. Louis, after studying data supplied by nearly 6,000 subcontractors involving close inspection of over 6,000 test points. The spacecraft, scheduled for launch in March, would be encased in a plastic shroud and flown to ksc in usaf C-124 cargo plane Jan. 7. (Wilford, NYT, 1/7/66)
Project managers for the Mariner series deep-space exploration missions to Venus and Mars were announced by Alvin R. Luedecke (M/G, USAF-Ret.), Deputy Director of jpl: (1) Dan Schneiderman would manage the Venus project involving a single spacecraft to be launched in 1967, in addition to continuing his duties as mariner iv project manager through 1967; (2) H. M. Schurmeier, former Ranger project manager, would manage the Mars project involving two new Mariner spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1969. Effective Feb. 1, Geoffrey Robillard would replace Schurmeier as Voyager capsule system manager in addition to continuing his present duties as deputy Voyager project manager, (jpl Release 372)
Commentary in the Washington Sunday Star: "One of the saddest lessons of Gemini 8 is that bureaucrats will be bureaucrats. . . . NASA officials suppressed for about 18 hours tape recordings of ground-to-orbit conversations under circumstances that strongly suggest their only reason for the suppression was to make sure nothing embarrassing was on the tapes. "For as long as the United States has been active in space, it has cultivated an image of openness in contrast to the Russians’ obsession with secrecy. The overnight gag on tape recordings—which turned out to be legitimate items of news interest—only served to tarnish this image of candor.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/20/66, Gl)
Senate confirmed appointment of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as nasa Deputy Administrator. (CR, 1/29/66, 1469)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Interavia that in addition to possible "definite and direct” economic and technological benefits, the "greatest impact the continuing exploration of space will have upon man will be upon his own philosophy: that is, his view of himself in relation to the universe as he imagines it.” (Interavia, 10/66, 1479)
Formation of Science Advisory Committee, composed of astronomers, biologists, physicists, and geologists from eight universities, to advise nasa on conduct of future space projects was announced by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Chaired by Dr. Norman F. Ramsey, Harvard Univ. physicist, committee would work directly with Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, but would study future space activities on NASA-wide basis, including manned and unmanned flight programs. In particular, it would review how best to conduct such programs as Voyager planetary spacecraft, including automated biological laboratory, post-Apollo lunar exploration program, and National Space Astronomy Observations— projects recommended by nas Space Science Board, (nasa Release 66-55)
U.S. had reaped many unexpected benefits from NASA’s manned spaceflight program, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Federal Executive Board in Seattle, Wash. Specifically, nasa was (1) "making a definite effort to stimulate the development of technology generally . . . [and had] set up what may well be a unique, formal endeavor to transfer technology which has been developed in the space program to more general usage in the industrial community ... (2) striving to promote a rising educational level among the people . . . (3) developing industrial skills, management techniques, and a high degree of quality control that are of immense benefit to the Nation in such mundane things as washing machines, television sets, transistor radios, and other household items ... (4) helping to assure the country of a hard core of engineers and scientists, technicians and managers, laboratories and industrial facilities, which have responded to the challenge of working on important projects in aeronautics and astronautics. . . .” (Text)
U.S. offer at U.N. Sept. 22 to provide U.S.S.R. with tracking facilities on U.S. territory for Soviet space program received editorial comment in New York Times: "If all the Russians are after is improved tracking facilities for their own space program, the . . . offer . . . should be most agreeable to Moscow. Conclusion of a Soviet-American treaty for this purpose would very likely help smooth the way for similar bilateral agreements between the Soviet Union and other non-Communist countries. . . . Ambassador Goldberg’s suggestion points the way to satisfying legitimate Soviet needs without forced infringement on the national sovereignty of others.” (NYT, 9/24/66, 22)
700-seat auditorium would be built at National Academy of Sciences and a special award established as a memorial to Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late nasa Deputy Administrator. Financing would be by Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fund, established by Dr. Dryden’s personal friends and scientific associates shortly after his death in December 1965. Announcement was made jointly by Mrs. Dryden, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz. Commenting on proposed memorial, Webb said: "To a very large degree nasa and nasa’s program owe their existence and success to Hugh Dryden. . . . His wise leadership as Deputy Administrator of nasa and as nasa’s first scientist, played a leading role in creating effective working relationships between Government, industry, and the universities of the Nation to meet the tremendous new scientific and engineering tasks of the space age.” Dr. Seitz said: "It is particularly appropriate that funds raised in the name of Hugh Dryden, who served the Academy for ten years as its Home Secretary, be used to provide the Academy with an auditorium in which scientific and engineering questions of national importance could be discussed and considered. Dryden’s remarkable personal gifts as fundamental scientist, engineer, and public administrator were responsible, in great measure, for this nation’s preeminence in aviation and its successes in space. To all his activities, he brought ethical and professional standards that were deeply admired by all who knew him.” (nas-nrc Release; nas-nrc-nae News Rpt., 1; Wash. Post, 9/28/66, B4)
On the floor of the House, Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) discussed Committee changes made in Dept, of Transportation bill, H.R. 13200. A "clean bill,” H.R. 15963, was introduced giving proposed Secretary of department responsibility for aviation and making Federal Aviation Administration (new name for faa) a division of Dept, of Transportation. Civil Aeronautics Board aircraft accident investigation unit would also be under Secretary of Transportation. (CR, 6/30/66, 14272-5)
Soviet physicist Peter Kapitsa, who had received the 1966 Rutherford Prize for Physics May 3 in London, told a press conference that U.S.-U.S.S.R. rivalry was good, stimulated research, and produced variety of solutions to different problems. Kapitsa said he thought the Soviet space program was ahead of U.S., but could not prove it. {Wash. Post, 5/5/66, A20)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences unanimously approved nomination of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as NASA Deputy Administrator. (Transcript)
kasa Administrator James E. Webb, in an article written for AP, discussed national power in space: "The question that arises is this: in terms of national power, is there going to be a real contest for the control of this new environment? Is there going to be a shared mastery or an effort at domination? "The danger is clear in having such a very great power available to only one nation, and especially to the Communist nations who have a strong, determined drive to dominate the world, to enforce their views on others. .. . "The U.S. space program gives us a mastery of the space environment. It gives us the knowledge which permits us to judge what is in our own interest. It gives us the assurance that we are going to be at the decision table when the big decisions of the future are made. It also gives us the image of a 'can do’ nation, the image of a nation that is not going to focus on pure commercialism or fail to respond to a great challenge. It gives us also the power to exploit space.” (Text)
M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), made 12th glide flight at Edwards afb after air-launch from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude. Purposes of flight were to obtain data on stability and control at 7° and 11° angles of attack and on upper flap effectiveness, (nasa Proj. Off.) Need to develop a V/Stol aircraft as an "air bus” for faster short-haul transportation of cargo and passengers within large urban areas was rapidly increasing with growth in population, asserted Jack D. Brewer, program manager for V/Stol research, NASA Hq. By 1985, according to prediction, more than 130 million persons—half the U.S. population— would be living in super metropolitan areas at San Francisco-Los Angeles, Buffalo-Chicago, and Boston-New York-Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 66-282) Cooperation as well as competition would be necessary to meet challenges of future air transportation, John C. Brizendine, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Aircraft Division vice president for engineering, told the Congress. He said progress in solving problems such as noise, limiting effects of weather, congestion of airports and airways, and rapid transportation needs between airports and cities, should be accelerated. ". . . if society is to realize the progress and benefits technology can offer, we as leaders of large segments of society also must display increasing unity of purpose in striving to overcome the major environmental problems common to all of us.” (CR, 1/23/67, 5729-31)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in a speech at Mills College, Oakland, Calif., that the "complex interdevelopment of technological power and of the social organization necessary to control, direct, and exploit it ... is a central element of the space age. . . . The success of our space program is helping to grove to ourselves and to the world that we have the will and the capacity to establish far-reaching, difficult goals and bring them surely to fruition. This kind of proof is a major basis for national prestige and international cooperation.” (Text)
Dr. Otis E. Lancaster, professor of engineering education at Pennsylvania State Univ., was sworn in as a consultant to NASA Administrator. He would advise on the subjects of NASA-university relationships, methods for strengthening engineering education programs, and ways to provide stronger engineering/administrative ties, (nasa Release 66-256)
Columbia Univ. professor of business administration Dr. Leonard R. Sayles was sworn in as consultant to nasa Administrator on organization policy and managerial practices and procedures, (nasa Release 66-235)
Administrative History of NASA, 1958-63 (SP-4101), by Dr. Robert L. Rosholt and with a foreword by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, was published by NASA. Volume—first in history series covering major programs and other aspects of NASA operations—would be available through Superintendent of Documents, Gpo. (nasa Release 66-158)
Rep. Hale Boggs (D-La.) told House: ". . . no businessman would invest tens of thousands of dollars in a locomotive and then allow it to rust in the yard for lack of a $5 part. Neither can we invest tens of billions in a space program and leave it to falter for the lack of funds.” Calling the present budget "austere,” Boggs warned that in future budgets we could not put important elements of our capability into mothballs. "We must use it or see it rust.” (CR, 6/21/66, 13707-08)
Lawrence Levy, founder and president of Allied Research Assoc., Inc., and former Defense Adviser to U.S. Ambassador to NATO, was sworn in as a consultant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb on "cooperation with western Europe and future space programs. . . .” (nasa Release 66-231)
Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Commander-in-Chief of U.S. European Command, was sworn in as a special assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 66-288)
Franco-Soviet cooperative space agreement was being viewed with skepticism by French scientists who foresaw effort would break down for same lack of Soviet candor that had stymied useful information exchange between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Aviation Week reported. In addition, French Communists were protesting to Kremlin that high Soviet sanction of President De Gaulle’s space program was weakening Communist political stature in France. {Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 23)
nasa awarded George Washington Univ. a three-year, $750,000 grant "to undertake a multidisciplinary program of policy studies in science, technology, and public administration.” Program was expected to contribute to analysis of various policy questions related to development of the space program and utilization of knowledge derived from it. (nasa Release 66-240)
Achievements in space since first flight in Gemini series March 1965 had been "phenomenal,” stated Washington Post editorial: ". . . the people of this country can feel pride in the officials of. . . [nasa] who have deliberately but confidently advanced the space program without catering to pressures for spectacular stunts. The total achievement, in and of itself, is spectacular beyond the wildest hopes of a few years ago.” (Wash. Post, 7/20/66, A20)
Complexities of modern society required a new concept of management, nasa Administrator James E. Webb told graduation class of Harvard Univ.’s Graduate School of Business Administration. "The kind of challenges that we in management are facing today . . . call for new and experimental approaches to organization. One ... is the question of the chief executive function. In traditional thinking, the structure of an organization peaked in the chief executive. . . . However, as organizations have become more complex and their challenges more interdisciplinary . . . there has been an increasing tendency to experiment with the idea of the multiple executive. ... We saw this kind of need at the very beginning of nasa’s history. We evolved, therefore, a partnership arrangement which included Dr. Hugh Dryden, Dr. Robert Seamans, and myself. We all had many common ideas, and yet each brought to our work on the critical decisions affecting the nation’s space effort certain specialized experience. To do it any other way would have deprived us of the kind of mutual support and broadly-based leadership that I think we achieved.” (Text)
Charles H. Ruby, president of the Air Line Pilots Assn., charged faa had implied pilots were to blame for four recent Boeing 727 jet aircraft crashes although investigations were incomplete. He referred to "premature and seriously questionable public assessment” of the 727 during a Feb. 17 faa meeting at which faa said the aircraft was airworthy and had no serious defects: "We don’t believe this [cause determination] can be expected to be achieved with total objectivity by closed door meetings of parties with a substantial stake in the outcome.” Ruby added pilots felt the 727 was basically a "good and safe aircraft.” (vpi, Wash. Post, 2/24/66, A2) Gemini program director Charles W. Mathews announced that NASA had canceled plans for land landings of Gemini spacecraft because of "development time constraint”; U.S. spacecraft would continue to make ocean landings "for the foreseeable future.” (Text; Houston Post, 2/24/66)
Senegalese President Leopold Sedar Senghor, speaking at a press conference in Dakar, criticized the wealthy nations for spending money on space programs and abandoning the world’s poor. He said that was the reason he had never cabled congratulations to heads of state for their countries’ space exploits. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 4/7/66)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) Secretary-General Renzo di Carrobio, addressing members of "Britain in Europe” committee in London, contrasted "present hesitancy” on space programs in Europe with positive U.S. position. Americans, Carrobio said, were aware of economic benefits from technological applications of space research and were "making great efforts to ensure that the spin-off from their heavy investment in space research is put to good use in the industrial sector.” He noted that U.S. $5-billion space budget meant $26 per capita annual expenditure, while Europe spent $200 million annually or $1.15 per person. (Science, 3/18/66, 1372-4)
Dr. Lee Arnold, chairman of New York Univ.’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and director of Daniel Guggenheim School of Aeronautics, was sworn in as a consultant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb on technology utilization, (nasa Release 66-271)
Siberian-born scientist Mikhail K. Yangel, elected to Communist Party’s Central Committee in April and to Supreme Soviet June 12, had been tentatively identified as new head of U.S.S.R.’s space program. Several other scientists known or believed to be associated with space program had been selected to Supreme Soviet for first time; however, since Yangel was only one also to occupy seat in Central Committee, this was taken as indication he occupied top position. (Shabad, NYT, 6/26/66,
In a White House ceremony, President Johnson awarded the National Medal of Science to 11 scientists, including the late Dr. Hugh L.	Dryden, former nasa Deputy Administrator. Dr. Dryden was cited for his "contributions as an engineer, administrator, and civil servant for one-half century to aeronautics and astronautics which have immeasurably supported the Nation’s preeminence in space.” Mrs. Dryden accepted the medal—first ever awarded posthumously—for her husband. President Johnson told recipients that "in a nation of millions and a world of billions, the individual is still the first and basic agent of change. Without the unfettered curiosity of individual men probing and reaching for new truth our planet would be a dry and dreary place.” {Pres. Doc., 2/14/66; NYT, 2/11/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/11/66, A2; Balt. Sun, 2/11/66)
AiAA-sponsored tour of European aerospace companies began in Paris with briefing arranged by Eurospace, the Council of European Industrial Groups, aiaa President Raymond L. Bisplinghoff led the combined tour, which then broke into three groups for visits to facilities in France, U.K., Belgium, the Netherlands, West Germany, and Italy. In a welcoming address in Paris, Eurospace President Jean Delorme said his group would (1) urge establishment of a "European Space Authority” modeled after esro, (2) encourage greater national investment in cooperative r&d progress, and (3) point out discrepancy between Europe’s high economic potential and low investment in aerospace R&D. (Newbauer and Hersey, A&A, 1/67, 46-56)
NASA awarded Univac $30-million, five-year contract to provide "new computing system” for msfc beginning in 1967. Computer Sciences Corp. was selected to provide support services for msfc Computation Lab. under $5.5-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract with provisions for four one-year extensions. Services would include computer operation, maintenance, and programing, (nasa Releases 66-164, 165)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was elected to National Geographic Society’s board of trustees. (NYT, 4/8/66, 3)
Apollo Command Module (Cm) hardware could be recovered and refurbished for use on extended earth-orbital missions and long stays on the lunar surface, North American Aviation, Inc., Vice President Dr. John McCarthy suggested at aiaa-aas Forum discussing "After Apollo— What Next?” in Washington, D.C. "Such refurbished hardware could be available within 18 months at no interference to the lunar landing program and would permit the gathering of vital data and experience for the more difficult task of exploring the planets,” Dr. McCarthy said. He recommended an integrated space program which would include developing one advanced earth reentry module, single basic laboratory module, and modular launch vehicle system; he emphasized the need to determine the Nation’s 10-yr. space objectives "as soon as possible.” (Text)
V/Adm. Rufus E. Rose (usn, Ret.) resigned as special assistant on policy studies and analyses to nasa Administrator James E. Webb to become an assistant to the president of Allied Research Associates, Inc. Admiral Rose, who joined nasa in 1964 after 44 years usn service, would be involved with "planning, organization, management, and overseas operation” at Allied, (nasa Release 66-148; Marshall Star, 6/22/66,3)
Deactivation of Gemini launch pad at etr’s Complex 19 began. Equipment that could be used in other space programs would be salvaged; other components would be reduced to scrap. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/13/66, A6)
Editorial on five years of "outstanding service” by nasa Administrator James E. Webb appeared in Technology Week: ". . . it is time to state . . . our belief that Mr. James E. Webb has done an outstanding job as nasa Administrator. He has presided over an explosive growth of the agency which would have overwhelmed a less capable administrator; he has met and solved some exceedingly thorny management problems; he has dealt effectively with some of the world’s most temperamental scientists; he has successfully steered the space agency’s budget through the perils of both Administration and Congressional financing; he has given the space program a nationwide base of facilities and political strength; and, most important of all, he has forged a team which is writing an unparalleled record of technical accomplishment. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk, 7/25/66, 152)
