NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced resignation of Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., effective Jan. 5,1968. “Dr. Seamans joined the government with a commitment to serve two years, but . . . served seven years . . . [and] has now decided to return to private life,” Webb said. “His departure will leave a wide gap [in NASA leadership].” A former mit aeronautical engineering professor, RCA engineer, and member of naca technical committees, Dr. Seamans joined NASA in 1960 as Associate Administrator. In 1965 he was appointed Deputy Administrator and was presented NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, for distinguished service to U.S., outstanding leadership of NASA, and “ability to bring together into a framework of effective action thousands of industrial organizations, tens of thousands of scientists and engineers, and hundreds of thousands of aerospace workers.” He had also received Naval Ordnance Development Award (1945); aiaa Lawrence Sperry Award (1961); and Godfrey L. Cabot Aviation Award (1965). (nasa Release 67-257; O’Toole, W Post, 10/3/67, A3)
NASA established Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to review safety studies and operations plans, report on them to the NASA Administrator and advise him of any hazard in facilities and proposed operations, and perform other duties. Panel of chairman, vice chairman, and seven other members would review, evaluate, and advise on all elements of NASA’s safety program, (nmi-1156.14)
NASA announced personnel changes, effective Jan. 1, 1968. Adm. W. F. Boone (usn, Ret.), Assistant Administrator for Defense Affairs, would retire after five years of service with NASA. He would continue to serve as a part-time consultant. Functions of Admiral Boone’s office would be included in new Office of Department of Defense and Interagency Affairs, headed by Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf,Ret.). Gen. Smart, Assistant Administrator for Policy, would be replaced by Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, who would also continue as a Special Assistant to the nasa Administrator on aerospace safety. NASA Administrator James E. Webb, expressing his appreciation for Admiral Boone’s service, praised the “effective cooperation developed between [dod] and NASA in the .. . buildup ... of large launch vehicles and spacecraft required for a lunar landing and exploration ... in large measure due to [his] leadership. . . .” (NASA Release 67-314)
NASA’s Mariner V would fly within 2,500 mi of planet Venus at 1.34 pm edt, Oct. 19, at communications (direct) distance of about 49 million mi from earth, NASA announced. Launched from etr June 14, spacecraft would have traveled about 217 million mi in its arching trajectory. Scientists and engineers hoped their instruments would record precise data on planet’s atmosphere, ionosphere, temperatures, and perhaps even surface qualities. As Mariner V approached Venus, its scientific instruments would begin measuring planet’s magnetic field, charged particles, gases present in upper atmosphere, and radiation levels. Spacecraft’s flight path would curve behind Venus and would vanish from view of tracking stations on earth. Just before spacecraft went behind planet (as seen from earth) its radio signals would pass through atmosphere of Venus. Effect of Venusian atmosphere on Mariner Vs radio signals would be measured, thereby providing measure of density of planet’s atmosphere. Current scientific theory on density ranged from five times earth’s atmosphere to several hundred times. Density measurement by occultation was one of prime objectives of spacecraft’s flight. Since launch of spacecraft, engineering and science subsystems had performed as planned. Master timer had-commanded Canopus cone angle update as scheduled on Aug. 24, Sept. 10, Sept. 26, and Oct. 10; timer had also commanded spacecraft transmitter to switch to high-gain antenna on Oct. 2. Encounter sequence would be initiated by command from dsn station in Australia, at 10:49 pm edt, Oct. 18. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 67-260, 67-267)
NASA awarded General Dynamics Corp. a one-year, $21.1-million, costplus-award-fee contract to provide management and engineering services for Centaur launch vehicle, ending Sept. 30, 1968. This vehicle had been used successfully to launch six Surveyor spacecraft and would continue in use for lunar and planetary as well as earth orbital missions. LeRC was Centaur project manager. (LeRC Release 67—72)
NASA established the NASA Lunar and Planetary Missions Advisory Board to “ . . . develop and review . . . scientific objectives and general strategy for manned and unmanned lunar and planetary missions [and to formulate] guidelines and specific recommendations for the design of missions and for the scientific payloads. . . The Board would have a close working relationship with all senior NASA officials involved in lunar and planetary exploration and would work “. . . through the Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications.” (nmi-1156.12)
Detailed information on French space budget for 1968, expected to be approved soon by National Assembly, was reported to total $141 million, increased about $36 million over 1967 budget. It would include $121.5 million for research and operations and $19.3 million for facilities and administration under spending plan being developed by Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). Research and operations funds would be divided, $87.8 million for French programs and $33.7 million for ELDO and ESRO projects. About $1 million also had been allocated for bilateral space research projects outside eldo and ESRO. Major items of budget included: development costs for eldo Europa l/PAS launch vehicle and Diamant B launch vehicle; R&d costs for two Roseau radio observatory satellites (scheduled for U.S.S.R. launch in 1971); planning costs for two Symphonie communications satellites (joint French-West German venture with one spacecraft structure group and two avionics groups to be chosen from competing groups in both countries); construction costs for Kourou launch complex in French Guiana; and partial costs of new Toulouse complex for satellite development and balloon sounding projects. Budget also contained funds for future studies for second phase of France’s space program, according to ones officials. French fifth financial plan committed about $408 million in 1965 for the first phase through 1969. (Fink, Av Wk, 11/6/67,24)
NASA awarded contracts: (1) IT&T Federal Electric Corp. received a $4.6-million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for logistical and technical information support services at msc; (2) IBM Federal Systems Div. was selected for negotiations on a three-month, $998,000 contract extension for computer programming and engineering support services at GSFc’s Real Time Computer Complex (rtcc) ; and (3) Bendix Corp. was selected for negotiation of a $4,500,000, 18-mo, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for “design, development, qualification, and delivery of long-duration cryogenic gas storage tanks” for first 56-day manned Apollo Applications (aa) flight. Bendix contract award would not be made until NASA’s FY 1968 appropriation and expenditure levels were established, (nasa Releases 67-269, 67-270, 67-271)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reviewed nasa-university relations at dedication of Univ. of Illinois’ Coordinated Science Laboratory building in Urbana, 111.: “During NASA’s first year of operation . . . [$3 million] was invested in research at universities. . . . The second year, approximately $6 million went to universities, and the third year about $14 million . . . [primarily for] solution of immediate problems. . . .” Appraisal of program in 1961 concluded the universities were already making significant contribution to the space program, but that with the right kind of help they could do more for themselves and for NASA. Expansion included support of research, construction of facilities, and establishment of graduate fellowships, until program reached peak in 1966 with 10,600 campus participants. Today, however, need was “to reduce expenditures for research, to preserve at minimum cost the essential strength needed for the future, and to increase the multidisciplinary flux that will magnify the values the nation can derive from the activities we can support.” To find the best ways of reducing the program, he said, nasa had formed a “special task force to evaluate all our relationships with the academic community and to come up with specific recommendations as to least harmful methods we can use. There is no longer any doubt that NASA’s university support programs will have to be redefined quite drastically in some areas.” Since much of the program was funded in three one-year steps, this would help spread the impact over a longer time period. Ph. D. candidates now holding NASA grants would be able to obtain their degrees. Looking to the future, Webb urged the universities to think, reorganize, and work in interdisciplinary groupings. “The development of a few university teams working together across the traditional disciplines, combining the best efforts of technology, the social sciences and management capability which they have created and which make them the best available source of trusted information in our society can write a new chapter of history of problem solving in this nation.” (Text)
U.S.S.R.’s Academician Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, Chairman of Soviet Commission for Exploration and Use of Outer Space, writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics, explained that general trend- of Soviet space program was similar to that of U.S. program, and refrained from “any forecasts [on] . . . further programs in space research,” He said work planning Was difficult “because [it] calls for additional checkups or presents prospects of new and unforeseen investigations.” He believed “realistically” in prolonged manned space flights, and said there was “no doubt that it will be possible to overcome all the difficulties. . . .” (Blagonravov, A&A, 10/67, 70-8)
Our national security depends upon progress in science and technology as much as or more than any other aspect of our national strength,” Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, said at Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute in Tulla-homa. “The Federal budget for research and development test and evaluation [rt&de] has experienced a steady and phenomenal growth over the past twenty-five years . . . from 7/10s percent in 1941 to almost 3% in 1965. Most recently, we have been through a period of highly accelerated growth in which the initiation of a massive space program added to a rising curve of cost for development, and acquisition of ballistic missiles resulted in rdt&e growth rates ... of 20% per year. . . . This trend, if it were to continue from the level of ’66 for ten years, would result in a Federal RDT&E budget almost as large as the total budget of today by that time.” (NASA lar VI/129)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb received an honorary Doctor of Science in Commerce degree from Drexel Institute of Technology in commencement exercises in Philadelphia, (nasa pao ; P SB, 6/18/67)
U.S. experts believed establishment of permanent lunar colonies and exploitation of lunar resources were among long-range goals of Soviet space program, Heather M. David reported in Technology Week. Analysis of research reports had indicated that future Soviet missions directed toward these objectives would include: (1) orbiting of three or four cosmonauts for three weeks; (2) extensive practice of extravehicular activity and assembly in orbit; (3) orbiting of animals to continue studying effects of long-term weightlessness and radiation; and (4) lunar landing of animals for observation. David predicted preparations for interplanetary travel would be initiated shortly after establishment of permanent lunar colonies. (David, Tech Wk, 1/2/61, 18) .
Latest Trendex poll indicated 69% of Americans believed U.S. space program should continue at its present pace even if U.S.S.R. were to achieve first manned lunar landing. (Jackson, LA Herald-Examiner, 1/11/67)
Although arc was the smallest NASA field center, Newsweek said, it was producing “some of the agency’s biggest ideas.” Summarizing arc history, the article noted that when center opened in 1940 it had been primarily a site for testing warplane aerodynamics. “Ames still maintains its original wind tunnel—the world’s largest—as well as 29 others, [but aeronautics] . . . represents only a quarter of the effort at Ames today. Most of the scientists are otherwise engaged in pure research in such fields as planetology, exobiology . . . and chemical evolution. “. . . the center’s laboratories enable more than a thousand scientists, engineers and technicians to pursue as wide a variety of problems as their imaginations and the broad guidelines of the space program permit. The problems now range from designing a new hard space suit to studying the effect on mice of reproducing in a 2G environment.” (Newsweek, 6/12/67)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed l/g August Schomburg (USA, Ret.) as a consultant. Schomburg, whose last duty assignment was Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces, would work in areas of national security, NASA’s interfaces with industry and defense, and education in industrial affairs for NASA’s field centers. (nasa Release 67-280)
Briefing on NASA FY 1968 budget was held at NASA Hq. NASA Administrator James Webb said: “. . . I believe that on this budget we can build an excellent foundation for the work that we as a nation will need to do in 1970 and heyond. “I believe it is a balanced program that makes the best use of the resources that we have created since 1958. I believe it includes those items that enable the Congress and the country to clearly see and judge the issues which are basic to our future in space. “I believe it assumes success. That is, that it is a minimum budget for the work that is required and does not provide for losses of stages or for unexpected catastrophes such as are always a possibility in this program. “. . . finally, I believe that this budget indicates that we have proven in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration that the space capability of this nation can be developed, that this job he is putting in this budget can be done, and I believe it indicates clearly that he believes it is important that we continue to develop our national space capability. . . .” (Transcript)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at White Sulphur Springs 86th Annual Meeting of Proprietary Association, presented social implications of the Nation’s space program. He asked: “If our future is now more dependent than ever on human intelligence, and if these activities made possible by the rocket engine are adding large increments of grist for the human intelligence mill, and trained workers to use the result, how much more important is it today than ever before for leaders in an industry like yours to understand those institutions of organized society that will foster, encourage, and make proper use of the vast powers the human mind is deriving from its understanding and use of the forces, materials and forms and activities of life which are provided by nature in this universe?” He added: “The comprehension of space exploration and its implications for mankind is a tremendous human intellectual enterprise . . . and our capability to use it effectively is only limited by our ability to systematically order it into viable patterns.” (Text)
NASA Wallops Station employee James C. McConnell had been awarded $1,000 for his invention “A Method of Plating Copper on Aluminum” by NASA Inventions and Contributions Board. Award was part of agencywide program to encourage and reward NASA employees for meritorious inventions and contributions. A second Wallops employee—Joseph W. McAllister—had been named one of the 1967 Economy Champions under President Johnson’s national economy program for his “Device to Salvage Power Line Guy Anchors.” An economy champion was a Government employee whose achievement or adopted suggestion during FY 1967 had shown first-year measurable benefits of $10,000 or more. (WS Releases 67—9, 67—10)
Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development, OMSF, addressed the National Student Conference in Ann Arbor, Mich.: 324-801 O—69 . . the more dramatic aspects of the space program sometimes tend to overshadow the fundamental purposes of the space effort. Just as the moon had influenced the course of young lovers for centuries, so has the excitement of lunar exploration blinded many to the deeper purposes and far reaching benefits of the nation’s overall space program, and its deep impact on present and future generations. “. . .a dynamic space program will . . . bring rewards in knowledge, wonders, and resources far surpassing the investment it requires in money, materials, and brainpower. We do not know all that we shall learn when we are able to place men, instruments, telescopes, and laboratories beyond the envelope of the earth’s atmosphere. But we do know that we shall know a great deal more than we can possibly now know about the reality of which we are a part.” (Text)
msfc had awarded Astro Space Labs, Inc., a $93,136 contract for further development and testing of a remotely controlled device to handle tools, equipment, and men in space. Called a serpentuator, device was invented by Hans Wuenscher of msfc’s Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory. It consisted of links connected by powered hinges, which could be remotely controlled from either end of the device; one end would be connected to the spacecraft; one would be free. Small versions of the device could be powered by a hand pump or batteries; larger versions, by electric motors, (msfc Release 67—151) During week of July 24: West German Cabinet approved $456-million five-year plan which would substantially expand national space program. Commenting on the approval, Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, Minister for Scientific Research, told the press that enlarged national program was necessary to create a basis for improved cooperation with other technologically advanced nations. Plan would emphasize projects that provided a “rapid spin-off” of technical knowledge for industry and the economy, he said. Among the areas of special interest would be new materials, energy sources, electronic components, and new methods of planning and managing. (NYT, 7/30/67,13)
In the last decade, the Nation acquired vast new knowledge, wrote nasa Administrator James E. Webb in Aerospace Technology’s Seventh Annual NASA issue, and it entered “a new era, a stirring period of exploration and adventure comparable to the Age of Discovery in the 14th and 15th Centuries.” Benefits from our mastery of space, he said, “are opening to us and others new sources of national power and new arenas in which to seek international cooperation as important to our future and the future of the world as sea power and air power have been in the past.” He challenged: “Unless we are prepared to move ahead with new programs of [planetary exploration, and work with useful machines and systems in earth orbit] ... we will be backing out of the Space Age almost before we enter it.” (Webb, Aero Tech, 11/20/67, 24-5)
Science press briefing on Surveyor III was held at NASA Headquarters. Dr. Ronald F. Scott, Cal Tech, showed a movie composed of a time-lapse sequence of still pictures of the surface sampler digging a small lunar trench. The device also picked up a small rock in left side of scoop and tried unsuccessfully to crush it, exerting between 200-300 psi. Dr. Scott concluded that rock examined was at least harder than sandstone, which would have broken under impact of about 200 lbs. Surveyor III also confirmed that moon’s surface could support manned lunar landing. Consistency of surface was found to be comparable to wet sand with bearing strength between three and eight psi. Dr. Scott said of an exploring astronaut: “He’ll leave a definite footprint, that’s all.” Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said a series of 50 color photos taken by Surveyor Ill’s cameras using color filters indicated that lunar surface was gray. “The gray varies in shade from a pale to a very dark gray, but it appears to be basically all gray.” He said this color probably resulted from lack of moisture and of air on moon. Minerals on earth were brightly colored because of higher state of oxidation possible under earth environment. Dr. Shoemaker noted that some of the lunar material photographed by Surveyor III was very dark, suggesting that it had been coated with a darkening substance which he nicknamed “lunar varnish.” Among photos displayed were two pictures of the eclipse in which earth was depicted as a dark circle sitting between spacecraft and sun. Earth appeared to have partial halo of deep sunset color in one photo and orange areas connected by a faint purple halo in the other. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/24/67, A12; Clark, NYT, 5/24/67, 50; Hines, W Star, 5/25/67, A13)
New Jersey Governor Richard J. Hughes proclaimed April 1, 1967, TirosEssa Day in New Jersey to,mark seventh anniversary of first Tiros launch and to pay tribute to NASA and U.S. space program. (Text)
David S. Gabriel, former Program Manager for the Advanced Agena at Bell Aerosystems Co., was named Deputy Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo). (nasa Ann; NASA Release 67-131)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, would become nasa Associate Administrator Oct. 1, NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced. He succeeded Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., who became Deputy Administrator Dec. 21, 1965. In his new position, Dr. Newell would work closely with Webb and Dr. Seamans on the planning, development, and conduct of the space program. D. D. Wyatt, Assistant Administrator for Program Plans and Analysis, would report directly to Dr. Newell, (nasa Release 67—228)
Dr. Roger W. Heyns, Chancellor of the Univ. of California at Berkeley, was named chairman of NASA’s Ad Hoc Science Advisory Committee, replacing Dr. Norman F. Ramsey of Harvard Univ., who resigned to devote more time to his new duties as president of the Universities Research Assn. Established in March 1966, the Committee advised NASA on the conduct of future space programs, including manned programs. (NASA Release 67-191)
nasa Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., reporting on gravity of budget situation in the light of pending congressional action, said that study of program alternatives would continue while hiring of additional personnel would be suspended. He gave elements of NASA Hq. guidance on restricting activities, to provide maximum flexibility for future decisions when budget and expenditure limits were clarified. (Text)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, called for “developing a greater public awareness of the benefits of the total space program and . . . driving home the point of how close we are to realizing magnificent achievements in bettering our lives.” Writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics he said the space program “is no longer insulated from the tough competitive struggle for resources. . . . More bluntly, the NASA part of the national space program no longer has a very high priority.” He explained that “scientific and technological programs are the least understood of our national efforts. Tracing national growth and prosperity directly back to research and development is admittedly a tough job, hut I am convinced that space technology stimulates social and economic progress.” On budget levels through early 1970s, he said, -“Compared with earlier forecasts, it seems that a considerably stretched-out program will he characteristic. ...” In spite of his pessimistic outlook for the present, Rep. Karth said: “This outlook should not cause despair because the long-range prospects for progress are enormous . . . [hut] prospects must be sold to the public and top policymakers in terms of what makes sense for the overall benefit of society.” (Karth, A&A, 10/67, 86-92)
For the Saturn V program NASA purchased nine S-IVB stages from McDonnell Douglas Corp. for $146.5 million, fulfilling requirements for currently approved 15 Saturn V and 12 Uprated Saturn I launch vehicles. Delivery would begin in April 1968 and end in May 1970. Purchase brought total S—IVB contract for both vehicles to $957,182,093. McDonnell Douglas also received a $24-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract extension for S—IVB launch services at ksc, which increased total value of contract to $34 million. Included were stage receipt, checkout, launch, and launch evaluation, (nasa Releases 67—258, 67259)
Request for stricter controls to prevent “instrument abuse” at ksc was made by R. L. Wilkinson, chief of Measurement Systems Div. at ksc, in memorandum to NASA employees and contractor officials. An increasing number of instruments were requiring repairs because of tampering, “simple carelessness,” and apparent thievery, Wilkinson noted. He said he had instructed technicians in his instrument calibration shop to report all “cases of obvious instrument abuse or missing rechargeable batteries”; reports would be “reviewed and forwarded-through appropriate management channels for corrective action.” (Hines, W Star, 3/27/67, Al, A8)
NASA-Smithsonian Institution agreement providing for transfer of NASA’s historical artifacts to the Smithsonian for display in National Air and Space Museum became effective. Agreement also specified that Smithsonian would establish a Committee on NASA Artifacts, which would include the NASA Administrator or his designee, to make curatorial decisions on aeronautical and space artifacts “with regard to their significance, preservation, and ultimate disposition.” (nmi 1052.85)
Secretary of Agriculture Orville L. Freeman and . six other Government officials visited msfc. nasa Administrator James E. Webb had invited cabinet members and representatives of other agencies to visit NASA centers to become more familiar with NASA activities, (msfc Release 67—45)
In response to charge by Harry Schwartz in the New York Times that “the costs to both countries [U.S. and U.S.S.R.] of . . . ten years of space rivalry have been enormous” and prediction that “the economic and technical problems ahead will force the space race to stop at the moon with cooperation replacing rivalry,” aiaa Executive Secretary James J. Harford defended space program in letter to New York Times: “The modest scientific dividends which he [Schwartz] credits the space program with producing are puny, indeed, compared to the effects space technology will certainly have on civilization in eons to come. . . . Technologically, both the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. are enormously stimulated. . . . Politically, the space program has produced the first international treaty in history. . . . Philosophically, the space program has made the world vividly aware that it is, itself, a spacecraft with three billion passengers, traveling in a solar orbit, in a vast universe.... “Everyone is for international cooperation, but two nations with icbm’s aimed at each other have understandable problems working out cooperative programs. . . . Perhaps the time for serious joint effort is coming. ... In the meantime, a peaceful program costing less than 1 per cent of the G.N.P., which has produced new technology at a rate that only wars have equaled in the past, . . . should not be diminished because of serious domestic problems.” (Schwartz, NYT, 10/2/67,47; NYT, 10/14/67,26)
nasa contract awards: (1) Brown and Root-Northrop Corp. were selected for negotiations of a one-year, SI0-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide jointly operational support services to msc’s laboratory and test facilities; (2) Graham Engineering Corp. and ltv Range Systems Div. were selected for competitive negotiations of a one-year, $ 10-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for facility support services at msc. (nasa Releases 67—180, 67—181)
Minor fire broke out during an unmanned vacuum chamber test of Lunar Module (lm) descent stage mockup at wsmr. nasa officials said vehicle was under a vacuum soak condition when fuel escaped into the vacuum chamber; fire apparently developed from spontaneous combustion. It was extinguished immediately by the water deluge system, and damage was believed to be minor, (wsmr Release)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Armed Forces Reserves Joint Assembly at nasa Hq. “It is a mistake to think of the space program only in terms of the * rockets and spacecraft we launch. These are the focal points of our attention, but we are also developing the ability to organize and manage vast scientific and technical enterprises that involve large segments of our economic, social, and political decision-making process. This complex interdevelopment of technological power and of the social organization necessary to control, direct, and exploit it... is a central element of the space age.” (Text)
erc Director James C. Elms announced appointment of Dr. Richard M. Head, Manager of ERc’s Aeronautics Programs Office, as erc Chief Scientist. In his new position Dr. Head’s responsibilities would include research in erc aeronautics and space programs and on solar flares. (erc Release 67-44)
U.S. should measure its return on space technology in terms of such things as the development of communications, meteorological, and simulation systems, rather than in dollars, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in the Second Annual Cortez A. M. Ewing Lecture at the Oklahoma Center for Continuing Education in Norman. “The marginal
Report by House of Commons Estimates Committee urged U.K. to appoint a space minister and initiate a five-year national space program at a cost of $84-$98 million annually. Program should be directed toward the 1971 launch of a comsat which could be used for both commercial and military operations. Report criticized U.K.’s current space effort for lack of purpose and organization, noting that money “had been poured into international projects without a properly conceived national program.” {W Post, 8/9/67, A16; SBD, 8/10/67, 205)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices. Asked by Sen. Spessard Holland (D-Fla.) to make a choice between a substantial cut in funding for the Apollo Applications (aa) program and the Voyager program, Webb replied that both were vital to the U.S. space effort. “The Apollo application is a small investment to expend on something you have already spent $15 billion to get and it seems to me that this is important. “On the other hand, the United States, if it retires from the exploration of the planetary field, in my view . . . [will face] the most serious consequences because the Russians are going to be moving out there and our knowledge of the forces that exist in the Solar System can affect the Earth and can be used for many purposes to serve mankind or for military power. . . .” Criticized by Sen. Holland for refusing to make a choice, Webb said he did not want “to give aid and comfort to anyone to cut out a program. I think it is essential that we do them both.” (Transcript, 2382—3)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., visited msfc and MTF to discuss progress in AA and Saturn launch vehicle programs. He would visit msc June 28. (msfc Release 67-132; Marshall Star, 6/28/67, 1)
Engineers check the United Kingdom’s Ariel III before successful launch by mas a from wtr for U.K, Science Research Council, to investigate atmosphere and ionosphere. return on the investment in the space program is greater than in any other area. . . . One must take into account the value of the services rendered.” Asserting that U.S. investment in the space program served as “a message to the world that we do not expect to be behind the world in the area of effective use of energy,” Webb noted the success of U.S. space efforts. “We have accomplished in a decade what most informed sources in 1957 thought would take several decades.” Webb presented the Cortez A. M. Ewing Foundation with several photographs of the moon taken by Surveyor spacecraft, two atlases of the moon made from photos taken by Rangers VIII and IX, and color photos of India and Saudi Arabia taken by Gemini astronauts. (Norman Transcript, 5/7/67, 3; Howard, Oklahoma Daily, 5/9/67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying at Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ hearings on aeronautical r&d, recommended establishing a “civil aircraft technology” to counteract growing divergence between requirements for civil and military aircraft systems. Webb observed that most modern military aircraft could not be readily redesigned into economical commercial systems: “When unit costs were low and interaction between the elements of the design were small, a manufacturer could afford a substantial element of uncertainty to developing a new airplane, since it was not too difficult or costly to correct deficiencies exposed during flight operations. . . .” With the complexities of modern aircraft, however, deficiencies would lead to “major escalations in cost and could mean financial disaster for a commercial venture. . . . Economics thus require the designer to take an increasingly conservative approach in applying new and advanced concepts. . . .” This conservatism was causing an increasing gap between “the advanced technology that research indicates is possible and the technology actually being used in commerce. To assure pre-eminence in aeronautics, advanced technology must continually be incorporated into new designs. . . .” Webb said NASA was working closely with Dept, of Transportation and faa to identify and solve critical and specialized civil aviation technology requirements. He cited major efforts in supersonic transport field, including work on second-generation propulsion, sonic boom phenomena, and aircraft handling qualities; and study of jet engine noise-suppression problems. (Testimony)
