Republican presidential contender Richard M. Nixon told group of Southern delegates to nominating convention U.S. must restore balance of power in missile and space programs. “This Administration has allowed it to deteriorate. That is why I am opposed to any kind of program—such as defensive missiles—which allows the United States to take second place to the Soviet Union. We are going to restore our strength in the missile program.” In the space program, he said, “We have sort of a budget problem . . . and we may have to trim it in some places. But as far as these great and important objectives that involve national defense . . . [and] prestige, we have got to be sure that the United States is first and never second in space . . . [for] any great nation, to remain great, must explore the unknown. ... As far as I am concerned . . . there is a research gap at the present time. We aren’t putting enough money into basic research to keep ahead of the Soviet Union. We are going to close that gap—and then create one where they are behind us all around the world.” (M Her, 8/7/68, A22; Cocoa, Fla., Today, 8/7/68; SBD, 8/8/68,162)
nasa appointed Ronald J. Philips Director of Technology Utilization Div., succeeding George J. Howick, who had resigned to join International Research and Marketing Corp. Philips, who had joined NASA in 1964 as management intern at MSC, had been principal staff assistant to NASA Administrator and Executive Assistant to Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, (nasa Release 68—166)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb began testimony on President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He outlined significant NASA achievements and said “remarkable series of successes shows how far we have come since the beginning of the Space Age ten years ago. . . . Today . . . success is treated almost routinely, no matter how difficult the task or how significant the achievement.” Describing budget as “a compromise,” he said President “was forced, in spite of his conviction as to the importance of a larger effort in aeronautics and space, to accept reductions. . . . This means that for NASA 1968 and 1969 are . . . years in which we will be completing programs started in previous years and endeavoring to make limited further advances. Under these conditions we will devote a major effort to stabilizing our organization and the resource base we have built.” (Testimony)
Commenting on retirement of James E. Webb as NASA Administrator, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) on House floor said: “I share with Mr. Webb his continuing concern that the Soviets are determined to be the No. 1 power in space. Jim Webb has counseled us often and with great clarity on the seriousness of such a situation. We must heed Jim Webb’s warning that the United States should be first in space. . . . [He] is to be congratulated for his unselfish dedication and great skill in leadership. ... It will be difficult for any man to fill those large and capable shoes.” (CR, 9/20/68, E8135)
Chicago Tribune criticized “ridiculously small” congressional cuts in NASA FY 1969 authorization bill: “Of all the ways in which the government has found to spend taxpayers’ money, the space program is the most expendable. ... It is irrelevant to the war in Vietnam . . . irrelevant to the problems of poverty, crime, violence, and urban decay.” It could be “scrapped in its entirety without Seriously affecting any of the critical problems we face today.” However, “today’s space research does have a bearing on tomorrow’s defense. It is better to keep the machinery running in low gear than to shut it down and then try to start it up again.” (C Trib, 6/13/68)
nasa announced that Dr. Mac C. Adams, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, would resign July 1 to return to private industry. He would be succeeded by James M. Beggs, Director of Purchases and Traffic, Westinghouse Electric Corp,, who would join nasa June 1. Bruce T. Lundin, Associate Director for Development, LeRC, was named nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. Commenting on Dr. Adams’ departure, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said, “He brought to NASA strong management and engineering competence . . . [and] gave us brilliant leadership in critical times.” (nasa Release 68-92)
Science editorial on NASA administration: “In terms of numbers of dollars or of men, NASA has not been our largest national undertaking, but in terms of complexity, rate of growth, and technological sophistication it has been unique. . . . Keeping all of [its] parts—often working right at the edge of technological knowledge and capacity—finely tuned and in close harmony has been an organization achievement of high order. . . . Ever since the space program began to take shape there has been talk of technological spin-offs. It may turn out that the most valuable spin-off of all will be human rather than technological: better knowledge of how to plan, coordinate, and monitor the multitudinous and varied activities of the organizations required to accomplish great social undertakings.” (Wolfle, Science, 11/15/68, 753)
At White House press conference nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced his resignation, effective Oct. 7, his 62nd birthday. He wished to retire to devote his time to interests in education and foreign and urban affairs after 25 yr in Government and nearly 8 yr as nasa chief. President Johnson would name Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator, to succeed him as Acting Administrator. Webb would remain as consultant to Dr. Paine until Jan. 20, 1969. Webb told press: “I leave NASA well prepared and with a conservative financial structure to carry out the missions that have been approved. They will go forward. What we have not been able to do under the pressures on the budget has been to fund new missions for the 1970’s. So, there is going to be a period when there will be fewer flights than would, in my view, have been important to do. . . . We planned with the President’s leadership in 1961 and his recommendations to President Kennedy to develop an ability to fly six Saturn V’s per year and six Saturn I’s per year. . . . Under the reductions in the budget beginning in 1964 ... we have reduced that anticipated flight schedule, or production schedule, [until] we have now cancelled the production lines on both these boosters. . . . what we will have to do is develop a new base of technology for the next generation of boosters [and] . . . the country will have to look with great care into what it is it wants to do with those boosters that will be in storage.” Answering query, Webb said, “I am not satisfied with the program. I am not satisfied that we as a nation have not been able to go forward to achieve a first position in space. What this really means is that we are going to be in a second position for some time to come. ... I am satisfied with what we have developed in every field and that we have been flying three successful generations of spacecraft. ... I think now the question is what will the fourth . . . be. We have a vast amount of capability. As the U.S.S.R. proceeds to fly and remains in the number one position, we will have the capability to start new programs as the need is clearly indicated. . . . We have worked up to a work force of 420,000 people. At the end of this fiscal year, we will be down to just over 200,000. So we have shown the administrative capability to build up and then to reduce without losing pace in the program.” Webb said NASA had decided to man third Saturn V flight in December. “We did calculate that we needed 15 Saturn V’s in program to make sure we would do the Lunar landing. We have funded eight. . . . Now we can only fly seven. So the real question is can we make the landing by number seven?” A good many people, Webb said, have tended to use space program “as a sort of whipping boy. . . . But in essence, if it were not for the fiscal problems faced by the President and the Director of the Budget I would believe that the program would have been supported in the Congress and in the country at a higher level than it has been.” Webb thought U.S. had reached parity with U.S.S.R. 2y2 yr earlier except in large boosters and spacecraft. If U.S. could have had 12 Saturns a year in late 1967 or 1968, “I think we would have forged ahead.” Instead, “while we are reducing down to half to two-thirds of our program, they are still increasing.” Webb said current U.S space program had created capability that could be used for major efforts in exploration if adequately funded. “Any danger to the United States that would come from the Russian program would be visible in time to use this capability to start out. But they are going to have the reality and the image of being out in front for a number of years to come. How dangerous that is, you will have to judge yourself.” (Transcript; Sheehan, NYT, 9/17/68, 1; Kilpatrick, O’Toole, W Post, 9/17/68, Al; Dobbin, B Sun, 9/17/68, A9)
During visit to msfc, Republican presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said of space program, “I would have this clearly understood: that I consider this program as one of our national imperatives, that it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress, that the ups and downs ... in planning, programming and financing must be brought to a halt, and that as President I will make certain our country retains leadership in this great endeavor. ... It is an inescapable fact of our national life today that we cannot afford to do all we wish. But we must do all we can. ... I assert my conviction that among the claimants for Federal support I consider the space program both indispensable and of major importance to our country. . . . In every area of science—in every area of knowledge—the United States must continue to probe the unknown. In terms of our long-range security and growth, the most critical gap which we could allow to develop would be a research gap.” (Text; NYT, 9/7/68, 1; upi, W Post, 9/7/68 [photo]; B Sun, 9/7/68)
nasa FY 1970 budget request, totaling $4,698 billion, was submitted to Bureau of the Budget. Subsequently, Acting Administrator Thomas 0. Paine met with bob Director Charles J. Zwick, and bob staff members held budget hearings with nasa officials, (nasa Off of Admin)
nasa appointed Jerome Freibaum, Assistant Executive Secretary, Office of the Administrator, to succeed l/c Wayne Mathews (usaf, Ret.) as Program Manager of ComSatCorp-related activities in Space Applications Programs Office. Col. Mathews had joined Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (nasa Ann)
In Washington Evening Star Carl T. Rowan wrote: “Some disenchanted Americans shake their heads as they note the poverty, the hunger, the sickness, the ignorance that plague the earthlings about them, and they ask what logic provokes our government to ignore critical problems at hand while investing vast sums in space ventures of doubtful value. ... we have become an ‘either/or’ society. . . . Even though our gross national product is now running at a fantastic level of $871 billion a year, it is absolutely inconceivable to most taxpayers that we can have guns and butter, space spectaculars and dramatic domestic change. . . . Well, no man of vision, imagination, or hope can possibly believe that we are wrong to search the darkest reaches of outer space. . . . Who can say that contributions to medicine, to weather control, to science in general, to the problems of feeding man, to national defense, and ultimately to peace may flow from the space program?” Space program was “inherently and intrinsically, justification enough for spending $340 for every man, woman, and child in America. But are we not wise to ask: what is man profited if he harness the universe and yet fail to conquer the meanness . . . the hatreds, that dog those who inhabit the earth? . . . Much of the public is not in a mood to finance anything else. So we shall be stuck with the ordeal of setting priorities where there is scant room for making choices.” (W Star, 10/25/68, A15)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, was sworn in as consultant by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Webb said Dr. Seamans would “lend his talents and experience to the complex problems we face as the space program moves into its second decade.” (nasa Release 68-7)
Former NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., became visiting professor in mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and at Sloan School of Management. He would continue as part-time consultant to nasa. (Boston Globe, 3/6/68; SBD, 3/11/68, 51)
Republican Coordinating Committee released statement on U.S.—U.S.S.R. relations, including policy on space: “Outer space should be seen as the focus for ever increasing United States-Soviet collaboration rather than as the site of an endless series of increasingly expensive prestige races. Because our society is open, so much is known about our space program that inviting Soviet participation in the nonmilitary projects would be unlikely to endanger national security. By insisting upon reciprocal privileges we would acquire much additional knowledge about their space efforts, thus achieving a net gain for United States security. At the same time, we must not intimate that the Soviets and ourselves have an exclusive role to play in this area. We must constantly reiterate our willingness to collaborate with NATO and other Allies in space technology.” (Text; upi, NYT, 4/30/68, 95; Unna, W Post, 4/30/68, A5; SBD, 5/1/68, 2)
With task of designing equipment for U.S. space program largely over and because of cuts in NASA-spending, hundreds of scientists and engineers were losing their jobs or getting out “while the getting is good,” said Peter H. Prugh in Wall Street Journal. Boeing Co. was laying off several hundred at New Orleans and Cape Kennedy; its Huntsville work force was down from 4,600 in 1966 to 3,000, with more cuts coming. Chrysler Corp. had cut employment at New Orleans from 3,300 to 1,500 and most of its 900 Cape Kennedy employees faced layoffs or shifts to other cities. Huntsville office of Alabama State Employment Service said area employment had declined 3,500 in past year with biggest drop in aerospace field. Space scientists and engineers were finding even mundane jobs difficult to land because of their specialized skills and relatively high salary demands. Exodus was worrying space experts, “who fret that a new emphasis on U.S. space efforts or new military needs would leave companies hard pressed to fill the rows of desks being vacated now.” (WSJ, 11/6/68,1)	>	_
nasa Manager for Space Nuclear Propulsion Milton Klein explained to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that aec’s nuclear space power work would “establish technology in advance of missions, with specific system development undertaken as mission requirements dictate.” He presented a sampling of aec’s activities as it worked closely with nasa and dod “to keep in focus the types and likely timing of future mission needs.” (Testimony)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Deputy Administrator [see Jan. 31]. (Transcript; nasa LAR VII/10; UPl, NYT, 2/8/68,4)
Howard H. Haglund, jpl Surveyor Project Manager, had been named Stanford-Sloan Fellow for 1968—69. Recipient of National Space Club Astronautics Engineer Award and NASA Exceptional Service Medal, Haglund would attend special nine-month Stanford Univ. graduate course in advanced management. (Pasadena Star-News, 8/16/68; Glendale News-Press, 8/19/68)
Newsweek said nerva project had “become one more casualty of cutbacks in the space program.” Workers at Nevada test site “say only a skeleton staff will be left on the project by spring.” (Newsweek,
President Johnson—watching world’s largest aircraft, USAF C—5A Gallaxy jet, roll off production line—called event “a long leap forward in the effective military might of America.” President praised USAF, Lock-heed-Georgia Co., and General Electric Co. for carrying out “a great new adventure” in aviation and completing the job “on time.” (AP, NYT, 3/3/68, 1; afsc Neivsreview, 3/68, 1) tions of magnetosphere. Secondary objectives were to demonstrate technological capability of OGo’s three-axis stabilization system in highly eh liptical orbit for extended operations of 135 days or more and to conduct electric-field, gamma-ray, and radioastronomy observations. On March 16, second of two 30-ft-long extendable antennas was deployed to complete post-launch checkout and NASA reported Ogo V was operating satisfactorily. All experiments except one, low-energy electrons and protons experiment, which had stopped operating March 11 when input power apparently failed, were acquiring data effectively. Data provided first observations of hydrogen cloud surrounding earth (geocorona), first detailed measurements of electric fields at shock and magnetospheric boundaries, and first spark chamber observations of gamma rays. . Ogo V was fifth spacecraft in NASA’s six-mission OGO series, last OGO planned for highly eccentric orbit, last spacecraft to be launched by Agena launch vehicle, and last to be launched from Complex 13. Agena would be replaced by Atlas-Centaur, and Complex 13 would revert to usaf. Scientific instrumentation for Ogo V’s 24 experiments had been provided by six U.S. universities; four groups from U.K., France, and the Netherlands; four Government centers; and two private companies. Ogo V joined three other operational OGOs—Ogo / (launched Sept. 4, 1964), Ogo III (launched June 6, 1966), and Ogo IV (launched July 28, 1967)—in providing data for studies of earth’s environment and solar-terrestrial interactions during period of maximum solar activity. Ogo II, launched Oct. 14, 1965, had been turned off in November 1967. Of 85 experiments assigned to four missions still operating, 68 were still obtaining useful data, including 12 for which instrumentation was working after 42 mo in space. OGO program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. LeRC was responsible for Atlas-Agena launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—38, 68—53; LeRC Release 68-14; upi, M Her, 2/25/68; W Star, 2/27/68, A9; NYT, 3/5/68, 17; W Post, 3/6/68, A7)
Rep. Silvio 0. Conte (R-Mass.) inserted in Congressional Record results of questionnaire mailed to his constituents which showed 3,857 out of 8,145 would reduce Government spending on space program. Second and third most popular candidates for cuts were public works (2,298) and poverty program (2,070). (nasa LAR VII/55)
In Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial Robert Hotz said, “The national space program is approaching a critical watershed at about the same time the Nixon Administration will assume stewardship. ... It is obvious now that space technology has demonstrated its ability to provide a wide range of benefits for better living on earth. It would be a national tragedy, if this country failed to capitalize on the substantial investment it has already made in developing space technology. It will fall to the Nixon Administration to make the critical decisions during the next few years that will determine the future course of the national space program.” (Av Wk, 11/25/68,11)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial said: “The principal criticism of the proposed cuts in the space budget is that they aren’t deep enough. NASA will be left with an expenditure of nearly $4 billion in the current fiscal year. With the nation in a financial bind and the Administration pledged to prune $6 billion from the federal budget, it seems that a good deal more than now suggested should be lopped off the space program.” (St. Louis G—D, 8/7/68)
Oakland Tribune editorial, “Space Race Has Big Stakes”: “The orbital bomb is one chilling example of the potential military threat posed by the Soviet space program. Yet, so far, the only officially announced U.S. reaction . . . has been reports of plans for an over-the-horizon radar to lengthen the warning time against orbital devices and missiles. “It would be more reassuring to the nation if the Pentagon were given the authority to devote whatever resources it requires to counter the orbital bomb threat, not simply with defensive measures but with an offensive military capability of our own. . . . The ultimate prize in the space race may be national survival.” (Oakland Trib, 5/1/68)
Resignation of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as Deputy Administrator of NASA, announced Oct. 2, 1967, became effective. (NASA Release 67-257)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb conferred with West German Science Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg in Bonn on U.S.-German space projects. (AP, Min Trib, 8/28/68)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb delivered first of three McKinsey Foundation lectures, “Reflections on Government Service,” before Columbia Univ. Graduate School of Business: “Our society has reached a point where its progress and even survival increasingly depend upon our ability to organize the complex and do the unusual. We cannot do the things we have to do except by employment of large aggregations of power in highly specialized forms.” Present technological revolution was “the most decisive event of our times.” Great issue of the age was whether U.S. could, within framework of acceptable institutions, “organize the use and development of advanced technology as effectively as the USSR with its totalitarian system of allocating and utilizing human and material resources.” Webb believed capabilities of U.S. system had “immense advantage over all other systems.” (Text)
Col. Albert J. Wetzel (usaf, Ret.), Director of Sponsored Programs at Tulane Univ., was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Former technical assistant to Director of Defense Research and Engineering and former Titan icbm program director, Col. Wetzel would advise Webb on NASA Project Management System and other technical and personnel management activities, (nasa Release 68—156)
President Johnson reads citation before presenting NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal to fames E. Webb, who retired as NASA Administrator Oct. 7. Medal was given for outstanding leadership of America’s space program. * Business Week commented on results of “two bad decisions by agencies of the federal government.” Boeing Co. was scrapping swing-wing concept on SST in favor of fixed-wing and “word seeped out of the Pentagon that a real fight has developed over whether to cut back production of . . . F—111.” How were such mistakes to be prevented in future? “One lesson that emerges ... is that the government must learn to avoid premature commitment to any huge-scale project. , . . Another lesson is that in such major decisions, an independent, technologically competent judgment should be brought to bear on the issue. On the F—111, the President’s Science Advisory Council did not even look at the design features of the aircraft. On the SST, a Special Presidential Advisory Committee was set up, but it was chaired by [then Secretary of Defense Robert S.] McNamara and was dominated by top Administration officials. Such changes in procedures may not wipe out all mistakes, but they could greatly reduce the chances of astronomically costly blunders.” (Bus Wk, 11/2/68)
President Johnson announced appointed of David D. Thomas, Deputy Administrator of faa, as Acting Administrator, {PD, 8/5/68, 1190)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Special Consultant to NASA Administrator and former NASA Deputy Administrator, had been elected to board of trustees of Aerospace Corp. (Aerospace Release; SBD, 7/8/68, 10)
In last of three McKinsey Foundation lectures NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed “Executive Performance and Evaluation.” NASA program at peak level had employed more than 400,000 full-time workers and 20,000 contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers and drawn on more than 150 universities, in addition to 8,000 NASA-supported professors, scientists, and technicians. It had worked with urban communities on problems, reclaimed wasteland, constructed massive buildings, and developed new transportation means. NASA would not be viewed in history as unique but was likely “to prove a prototype.” As Administrator, Webb said, his purpose was to work toward environment within which NASA could be as innovative in the management of all its activities as it was in its scientific and technical work. Large-scale endeavor required executives of unusual type and had to be designed to enable executives to perform in an unusual way. (Text)
LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson was appointed Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb and head of NASA Hq. Interim Working Group to evaluate future manned spaceflight projects. LaRC Deputy Director Charles J. Donlan would serve as Acting Director in Dr. Thompson’s absence, (nasa Release 68—41; W Post, 3/1/68, A7) During February: nasa published 1967 Summer Study of Lunar Science and Exploration (nasa SP—157), results of July 31—Aug. 13, 1967, conference at Univ. of California in Santa Cruz. Conference recommended nasa: (1) develop lunar flying unit (lfu), Saturn V dual-launch capability, and dual-mode local scientific survey module (lssm) for lunar surface mobility; (2) make available in 1970—75 Block II Surveyor or another system capable of deploying numerous experiments; (3) increase total returned payload to 400 lb so that at least 250 lb of lunar samples could be returned on Apollo Applications (aa) missions; (4) increase flexibility of alsep stations’ design, possibly by adopting modular concept; (5) provide for continuous telemetry coverage of all payload elements and operations; (6) develop subsatellite system for deploying instruments in close lunar orbit; (7) implement any extension of Apollo science program by open solicitation of experiments from scientific community; (8) undertake strong programs in scientific instrument definition and development and in lunar supporting research and technology; (9) establish position of Project Scientist within manned spaceflight program; (10) include ability in field geology as a major requirement for astronauts who would land on moon; (11) conduct immediate and intensive program of detailed mission analyses for prime lunar landing sites and traverses suggested by the conference; and (12) include in lunar surface studies observations of micrometeoroid environment, radio-frequency noise levels, surface impedance and conductivity, lunar ionosphere, gamma rays and x-rays, soil mechanics, thermal effects, and contaminants, (nasa SP—157; AP, NYT, 2/19/68,
Resignation of James E. Webb as NASA Administrator, announced Sept. 16, became effective. Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, assumed duties as Acting Administrator, (nasa Off of Administrator; Off of Acting Administrator)
President Johnson announced his intention to nominate Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, manager of General Electric Co.’s Technical Military Planning Operation (tempo), as NASA Deputy Administrator to succeed Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., who resigned Jan. 5. (PD, 2/5/68, 176)
Dr. George Kozmetsky, dean of Univ. of Texas College of Business and of Graduate School of Business, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, NASA announced. Specialist in system analysis, organization theory, quantative methods, and system management, Dr. Kozmetsky would serve on NASA’s Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—153)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Associate Administrator (1960—67) and now mit professor and consultant to the NASA Administrator, was nominated as AIAA President for 1969. (A&A, 10/68, 106)
In statement on dod FY 1969 budget released by Senate Armed Services Committee, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said dod was requesting $79 million more for r&d in FY 1969 than in FY 1968 to “support more vigorously many scientific fields that show great promise and clear relevance to our future security.” dod would continue working closely with NASA to ensure maximum interchange of personnel, ideas, technology, and hardware and to avoid wasteful duplication of effort in national space program. Under new budget work on mol development would be increased substantially. “FY 1969 is expected to be a peak year of activity in the MOL program, including the completion of a major portion of the structural test programs on flight hardware, continued fabrication of hardware for the first three flights, developmental test firings of the seven-segment solid motors for the Titan III—M, and installation of the ground equipment in the launch complex.” (Text)
NASA personnel changes: Thomas B. Shillito of LeRC’s Office of Development Evaluation and Management Review was appointed Supersonic Transport Program Coordinator for nasa in Washington, D.C. He would have offices at faa and would “stay abreast of technical progress in the sst program [and] inform nasa ... of any impending requirements.” Shillito would report to nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology (Aeronautics) Charles W. Harper. Harvey Sherman and James M. Beggs were named consultants to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Sherman, Port of New York Authority’s Director of Organizations and Procedures Dept., would be member of senior group of advisors on management matters. Beggs, Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Assistant Director of Purchases and Traffic, would advise on management concepts and policies. (LeRC Release 68—7; nasa Release 68-22) During January: New knowledge of movement and state of electrons in Van Allen radiation belts that explained movement of electrons into and out of belts and trapped electron activity was reported from three new discoveries. Bell Telephone Laboratories used energetic particle collectors aboard NASA’s Ats I, launched Dec. 6,1966, to show that high-energy outer Van Allen belt electrons exhibited bunching phenomenon as they drifted around earth in its magnetic field. Bell scientist Charles S. Roberts presented theory that “radio noise in the charged particle gas” surrounding earth was “responsible for the loss of electrons from the Van Allen belts, rather than the mere presence of lightning-bolt-initiated whistlers alone, as previously believed.” At Nov. 16, 1967, meeting, Dr. James A. Van Allen had presented satellite-collected data suggesting that “both electrons and protons enter the outer Van Allen radiation belt” drawn by high voltage generated across earth’s magnetic field, caused by earth’s spin between dawn and evening sides of earthsurrounding magnetic envelope. (Strasser, Aero Tech, 1/29/68, 18-20)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator in NASA Hq. ceremony. Nomination had been confirmed by Senate Feb. 7. (nasa Ann)
President-elect Richard M. Nixon named Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, retiring President of Cal Tech, as his Science Adviser and announced formation of task force under Dr. H. Guyford Stever, President of Carnegie-Mel-lon Univ., to make recommendations in general science field. Task force headed by Dr. Charles Townes, Nobel Prize winning physics professor at Univ. of California at Berkeley, would recommend in space field. Dr. DuBridge described as a “very critical matter” loss of momentum in U.S. space program because of appropriations cuts and said reducing activities in basic and applied research damaged nation’s future. Later, National Science Board Chairman, Dr. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., said of Dr. DuBridge, “He has one rare attribute . . . wisdom, an unusual commodity. He is knowledgeable about the role of technology in our society and has a deep belief in the importance of fundamental research to the health and welfare of the country. And he is usually understanding of the problems of the private universities.” Homer, W Star, 12/3/68; Cohn, W Post, 12/3/68, A7; SBD, 12/4/68, 141; W Star, 12/4/68, A13)
Col. Robert L. Stevens (usaf), holder of four of nine new world speed and altitude records set in Lockheed YF—12A jet interceptor, was named technical adviser to faa sst Program Director, m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf), (faa Release 68—32)
