Senate confirmed nomination of George M. Low as NASA Deputy Administrator. {CR, 11/26/69, S15140, D1126)
U.S. News & World Report published interview with Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. Apollo 11 lunar landing would be “culmination of America’s satisfying everyone that it is indeed the leading technological nation that it thought it was before Sputnik blazed across the skies.” U.S.S.R. would continue to put great stress on space and move ahead steadily. “. . . there’s always the danger that we may feel we can relax now—having attained the lunar goal—and perhaps slack off. ... if we were not to start new programs now, I think the situation might well reverse and the Soviets might once again develop superior technological capabilities in space.” Space technology could affect future defense posture. In the past, “wherever man has flown farther and higher and faster, wherever he has developed new capability to observe from higher areas, to carry out operations in new media, this has had a major effect on the equations of international power. We’re quite confident that this will probably be true again in space.” Application of space to defense area was DOD’s job. “We do not consider Apollo applications as any kind of substitute for mol.” Journey of man to another solar system was “completely out of the realm of possibility” for next generation; “but in the more distant future, if it were ever possible ... to control the energy of nuclear fusion and adapt it in some efficient way to the propulsion of spacecraft, it might be possible to think in terms of longer voyages to another star.” Fundamental breakthrough would have to be made. Chance that life existed in other solar systems seemed “absolutely 100 per cent.” (US News, 7/7/69)
Eugene S. Burcher, NASA Tektite Program Manager, omsf, received Navy Distinguished Public Service Award for “distinguished and outstanding service to the United States and to the Department of the Navy as a participant in Project tektite i mission, as well as its planning and implementation.” (nasa Hq WB, 6/2/69, 6)
In address at Clarkson College of Technology in Potsdam, N.Y., Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “We know that hydrogen bombs work (unfortunately)—the Lord made the Universe that way. And, of course, we know that (fortunately) fusion energy keeps the sun shining every day. Our great visionary dream is to find out how to unlock this energy for spaceship propulsion. This is a great challenge but consider the new tools that we have available: giant magnetic fields with superconducting magnets, tremendous power densities from lasers, the great energy of nuclear power, and new high temperature materials. These, with new plasma dynamic developments, may usher in fusion power in the eighties, the nineties, or in the next century. Harnessing fusion power for propulsion is an even farther-out challenge, but it could prove to be one of the more direct applications. We won’t have to convert the fusion energy to electricity; just fuse a couple of deuterium atoms and then let them blast out the back of the vehicle! “So fusion remains a tantalizing promise for the future. ... If we ever do achieve such propulsion, we’ll be able to move with some ease out from our little 8,000-mile-diameter Solar System. All of the 9 planets, 32 moons and 1600 known asteroids will come within reach of our vehicles. And, indeed, if we could achieve high efficiencies in a fusion propulsion process, we could talk of eventual relativistic velocities, of time compression, and of travel to the nearest stars.” (Text)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Administrator, told news conference aboard U.S.S. Hornet he expected U.S.S.R. to land men on moon within 18 mos. “My guess is it’ll be much sooner than most people think.” He thought U.S.S.R. had lost race “by keeping their program so secret.” U.S. had encouraged suggestions from scientists throughout non-Communist world, while details of Soviet program were known only to “small elite.” Apollo 11 success would eventually lead to closer cooperation with U.S.S.R. in space exploration. “I don’t look for any early change in the attitude . . . but a steady interest on their part. I don’t see joint efforts but cooperation from time to time.” (upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 30)
Portrait of James'E. Webb, second NASA Administrator (1961—1968), was unveiled in anniversary ceremony at Smithsonian Arts and Industries Building. Painted by Gardner Cox, portrait would eventually hang in NASA Hq. (Program; nasa Release 69—140)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Brown Univ., his alma mater, (nasa Off of Administrator)
First day of public display of lunar rock at Smithsonian Institution attracted 8,200 visitors, including former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Webb said: “The rock represents all the work and all the submergence of personal ambitions that thousands put into the space effort. It proves we have the scientific, technical and managerial capability of expanding our space values for use under the' sea, on the land and in the air.” (Schaden, W Star, 9/18/69, B4)
In Bonn Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and West German Science Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg signed Memorandum of Understanding calling for NASA and West German Ministry for Scientific Research cooperation on Helios. Most advanced international scientific space program, Helios would consist of two solar probes carrying 10 scientific experiments 28 million mi—closer to sun than any other yet scheduled—in 1974—75 to provide new understanding of fundamental solar processes and sun-earth relations by studying solar wind, magnetic and electric fields, cosmic rays and cosmic dust. NASA would launch two German-built spacecraft on Atlas-Centaur vehicles one year apart. Seven experiments would be provided by German scientists and three by gsfc in cooperation with U.S., Australian, and Italian experimenters. (nasa Releases 69—86, 69—91)
At nonpartisan farewell dinner given to President Lyndon B. Johnson in New York, former NASA Administrator James E. Webb read statement on accomplishments in space effort under Johnson Presidency: “Lyndon Baines Johnson has done more than lead the United States forward in space. He has stamped on our program its significant characteristics: that it be conducted in the open for all the world to see; that it be carried out so as to strengthen and not to undermine the basic institutions and values of our society; that it be dedicated to the cause of peace and the benefit of all mankind. “Of all the debts the American people owe President Johnson, none is likely to loom larger over time than that he started them on the road to mastery of this new, unlimited environment by means of the new rocket technology. ... It is the lasting tribute to Lyndon Baines Johnson that he has seen from the beginning that accomplishments in space and the capability which can sustain and increase these accomplishments constitute a new barometer of the stature of our Nation.” (CR, 1/17/69, S496)
NAS announced appointment of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator (1958—1961) and Assistant to Chairman of the Urban Coalition, as Chairman of nrc’s Committee on Radio Frequency Requirements for Scientific Research. Dr. Glennan had been President of Case Institute of Technology, AEC Commissioner, and President of Associated Universities, Inc. (nas PIO; nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 4/69, 10)
Scientists from U.S., Canada, and France, participating in NASA-sponsored 25-day probe of aurora borealis Nov. 24 to Dec. 18, had discovered very high ratios of red oxygen emissions to blue nitrogen emissions in earth’s upper atmosphere, NASA announced. Higher measured ratios indicated many solar electrons that bombarded atmosphere might have been low energy. There might be more oxygen in polar atmosphere than at other latitudes, or high temperatures in upper polar atmosphere. Studies in airborne laboratory—NASA Convair 990 jet aircraft Galileo—also detected bombardment of earth’s atmosphere by protons. Comparison of light emission caused by protons and electrons would help explain particles’ origin. Measurement from six photometers and three spectrometers would provide explanation of newly discovered phenomena, (nasa Releases 69—165, 69—169)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences ordered favorably reported the nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Administrator. Nomination awaited approval by Senate. (NASA LAR, VIII/42)
Sen. Ralph W. Yarborough (D-Tex.) offered amendment to H.R. 11271, FY 1970 NASA authorization bill [see June 24], to increase funds for NASA R&D and program management from amount reported by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to amount passed by House. Increases would total $256.50 million in R&D and $6.35 million in research and program management. He said: “My amendment authorizes the bare minimum that we, as a nation, should commit to space. Its adoption is vital to the proper balance in our national priorities; it is vital to the future of our exciting and promising space program; and it is vital, in my opinion, to the interests and well-being of our country.” {CR, 8/7/69, S9383)
On ABC radio-TV program “Issues and Answers,” Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said he did not favor increased military participation in U.S. space program. “We’ve had very good cooperation between the military and our civilian programs and I think that’s the way it should continue.” (B Sun, 5/19/69, Al)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Administrator. (CR, 3/20/69, S2949)
Dr. George M. Low—veteran o) Mercury, Gemini, and Apolh pro-grams^was sworn in as Deputy Administrator of nasa by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Administrator, after Nov. 26 Senate confirmation.
In Washington Evening Star, Crosby S. Noyes said: “. . . it would be a mistake to consider the space program itself as nothing more than a kind of inspirational stunt to show us what we can do if we really put our minds to it. The idea that once the demonstration is over, we should divert all of its resources to domestic problems is excessively simple-minded. Of all the resources that have gone into the space program, the money that is so much on everyone’s mind is undoubtedly the least critical. The major resources . . . are people and organization and a continuing process of research and application. These resources cannot be ‘diverted’ into new areas; nor can a program such as this be turned off and on again like a spigot. Once the process is interrupted and the concentration of talent is broken up, it will be virtually impossible to reassemble it.” (W Star, 5/22/69, A9)
President Nixon’s Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, announced at his first Washington press conference that overall plan for next decade of U.S. space program would be drafted at President’s request by his office, NASA, nasc, and DOD for submission to President about Sept. 1. Charting “new directions, new goals and new programs for the entire United States Space program” was necessary. “Bringing to the benefit of people the marvelous space technologies that have been developed in the last decade and certainly orbiting satellites for the purpose of learning more about the earth must be an important element in our future space program,” Dr. DuBridge said. “Whole problem” was balance between that enterprise and planetary and lunar exploration and “this is the problem which our group will seek ... to bring into perspective as we project ahead and consider the budget problems that also lie ahead.” In answer to question on White House appointments, Dr. DuBridge said, “We have not yet located the right man” for either Administrator of NASA or Executive Secretary for Space Council. (Transcript; White House Memo)
Rep. Charles W. Whalen, Jr. (R-Ohio), inserted in Congressional Record results of annual opinion poll of his constituents which showed 51% preferred continuation of space funding at present level, 21% preferred cutback with reallocation of space funds to social welfare programs, 16% wanted acceleration of space program with increased funding if necessary, and 12% wanted none of these. (CR, 4/22/69, E3230)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released 1969 Aerospace Facts and Figures. During 1968 industry sales reached #29.5 billion, up 8.1% over 1967, with civil transport aircraft accounting for major share. These sales were expected to decline in 1969 when current models were phased out before third-generation jet transports were delivered in substantial quantities. Total industry sales were expected to decline to #28.7 billion in 1969 but 1968 backlog for 60 major companies was #31 billion— approximately 2% times that in 1960. Overall space program expenditures during FY 1969 were estimated #6.3 billion—#4.1 billion for NASA, #2.1 billion for dod, $117 million for aec, and #34 million for other agencies. Space expenditures declined approximately $300 million from 1967. Aerospace r&d, including nasa’s, reached $8 billion. (Text)
Space program spinoffs of medical benefit to mankind were described by Howard A. Rusk, M.D., in New York Times. NASA’s Scientific Information Div. provided stockpile of knowledge indexed in computer tapes and distributed on microfiche. Collection of 250,000 documents increased by approximately 75,000 items annually. NASA Technical Utilization Div. selected inventions, ideas, and new techniques for use in nonaerospace activities, including medicine, and distributed them through eight regional centers. Under interagency agreement, NASA and hew Social and Rehabilitation Services Administration reported results of aerospace research to solve problems of 4 million physically or mentally disabled Americans of working age. Research had developed technique for sharpening x-rays, micrometeorite sensor to record Parkinsonian tremors, and technique for applying electrodes with spray of conductive material. (NYT, 8/10/69, 55)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, told Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, “Our intellectual resources—not our material resources—are the limits to what we can now achieve.” During hearings on H.R. 35, bill to promote advancement of science and education of scientists through institutional grants to U.S. colleges and universities, he said: “We hear it said that if we only spent as much money on urban programs as we did, say, on the atomic bomb project or on our space program, we could quickly solve the crisis in our cities. But let us not forget that we launched the Manhattan project and the space program only after, and not before . . . efforts in basic research over the previous 30 or 40 years had uncovered the knowledge which showed us how we could build atomic bombs or launch payloads into space. Neither the Manhattan project nor the space program could have been dreamed of 10 years before they started, because we did not even know enough to even formulate a development program. Now, in many ... of our present crises we are in the same position as far as technology is concerned. We do not know enough about certain technologies and . . . many social phenomena to justify mounting a concentrated, technically based attack on these problems now. We must . . . greatly enhance . . . measures to relieve immediate suffering and injustice. But at the same time we must encourage and support new efforts to learn more, to extend our base of fundamental knowledge in science, technology, social science, so that we can move sure footedly toward long-range solutions.” (Transcript)
Madrid ceremony marked takeover by Spanish crew of operations at U.S. Deep Space Network tracking facility. Attending were NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine; Spanish Space Research Council President, Gen. Luis Azcarrago; U.S. Ambassador Robert C. Hill; and Gen. Antonio Perez-Marin, President of Spanish Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial. Dr. Paine sent final U.S. signal to Pioneer Vlll (launched Dec. 13, 1967) orbiting sun. Short time later Gen. Azcarrago sent first signal under Spanish control. Dr. Paine said, “Spanish determination to participate in this exciting 20th Century form of exploration reminds us that five centuries ago Columbus’ great voyage of exploration was carried out under the flag of Spain.” (NASA Release 69-93)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, announced resignation of Albert F. Siepert, ksc Deputy Director (Management), effective Dec. 1. He would become Program Associate at Univ. of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research and project manager for large-scale organizational research study sponsored by General Motors Corp. Siepert had been executive officer at National Institutes of Health before joining NASA and had received HEw’s Distinguished Service Award (1955), Arthur S. Flemming Award (1950), NASA Exceptional Service Medal (1968), and NASA Distinguished Service Medal (1969). (ksc Release 464-69)
President Nixon sent directive to Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Science Adviser to the President, asking assessment of proposal to appoint interagency committee to advise President on post-Apollo space program. Directive also asked report on “possibility of significant cost reductions in the launching and boosting operations of the space program,” with judgment on “how best to assess future developments in this area.” White House announcement from Key Biscayne, Fla., Feb. 8 said directive had asked assessment of recommendations that dod and nasa be directed to coordinate activities in this area. (PD, 2/17/69, 249; 3/10/69, 349-51)
