TV commentator Walter Cronkite was named by Boston Museum, Boston, Mass., as 1970 recipient of Bradford Washburn Award for his “superlative presentation” of U.S. space program. Gold medal and $5000 honorarium were awarded annually in spring for “outstanding contribution toward public understanding of science, appreciation of its fascination, and the vital role it plays in all our lives.” (upi, NYT, 1/16/70)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, delivered commencement address at Univ. of New Brunswick in Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada:<l.. .the Space Age, being only a decade old, has not (yet had time to develop a professional university curricula. Thus, we have not been able to hire graduates specifically trained in space and astronautical engineering. . . . This parallels the experience we had when solid-state electronics replaced vacuum tubes, and we had to move ahead by retraining people. ... It was also true at the start of the nuclear age, when we had to develop new nuclear power plants without the benefit of professionally trained graduates. The message for you here is that all of these programs were successful because the primary discipline that universities teach is intellectual discipline itself.” (Text)
Julian M. West, former MSC Special Assistant for Long Range Planning, was sworn in as consultant to Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. George M. Low. West would advise on potential space and aeronautics development programs. (NASA Release 70-164)
Dr. Eli L. Whitely, President of U.S. Congressional Medal of Honor Society, presented NASA with plaque honoring agency for “making America first in space.” Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, accepted plaque on behalf of NASA and other organizations that had contributed to space program. (NASA Release 70-87; Citation)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, former msfc Director, was sworn in as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. (Off NASA Dep Assoc Admin)
Employee Assistance Center at NASA Hq. had mailed resumes of available former nasa employees to 600 prospective employers in effort to place about 200 personnel affected by budget cutbacks, NASA reported. Engineering was largest single category of jobs eliminated by reduction in force. Administrative positions made up second largest category, (nasa Release 70-168)
George A. Derbyshire, Executive Secretary of nas-nrc Space Science Board, died in Bethesda, Md., at age 52. He had been responsible for more than 20 scientific reports on lunar programs, space goals, and physics goals, and had directed scientific conferences on space program and planetary exploration. (WPost, 9/18/70, CIO)
NASA announced it had installed remote terminal for high-speed computer service in offices of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. recon (remote console) system—linked to computer at NASA Scientific and Technical Information Facility in College Park, Md.—would permit Committee members to make literature search of NASA’s worldwide collection of scientific and technical documents. Pilot project initiated by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Committee Chairman, would evaluate equipment over several months. Miller said it was first time agency of Executive Branch had been tied directly by computer to a committee of Congress. (NASA Releases 70-75, 68118)
Dr. Charles H. Townes, Nobel Prize winning Univ. of California physicist and member of NAS Council, was appointed Chairman of NAS-NRC Space Science Board. Dr. Townes had headed President Nixon’s task force to make recommendations on national space program in 1969. (NAS PIO; NAS-NRC-NAE News Rpt, 3/70; A&A 68)
Nixon Administration was finding “no takers” in its efforts to replace Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator, New York Times said. Lack of NASA Administrator seemed “as much a reflection of the low level of attention that space commands among White House priorities as it is an indication of the unavailability of candidates.” Since Dr. Paine’s Sept. 15 retirement, U.S.S.R. had successfully launched 33 space payloads. (Lyons, NYT, 12/13/70, 50)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received President’s Safety Award on behalf of NASA in White House ceremony. Award recognized Federal Executive departments and agencies which best safeguarded lives and health of Employees. Other 1970 winners were USAF and Civil Service Commission. (NASA Hq WB, 7/13/70, 2)
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced intention to nominate Dr. T. Keith Glennan, former NASA Administrator, to be U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency with rank of Ambassador. Dr. Glennan would replace Henry DeWolf Smyth, who had resigned. Dr. Glennan had served as mfcmber of Atomic Energy Commission from 1950 to 1952, Nomination was submitted to Senate June 1. (PD, 6/1/70,703; 6/8/70, 734)
NASA announced appointment of members of Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright: Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong; Robert F. Allnutt, Assistant to NASA Administrator; Dr. John F. Clark, GSFC Director; B/G Walter R. Hedrick (usaf), Director of Space, DCS/R&D; Vincent L. Johnson, OSSA Deputy Associate Administrator (Engineering); Milton Klein, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office; and Dr. Hans Mark, ARC Director. (Off NASA Administrator; Wilford, NYT, 4/22/70,27)
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Dr. Raymond L.	Bisplinghoff, Dean of MIT School of Engineering, as NSF Deputy Director. Dr. Bisplinghoff had been NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, 1963-1965, and Special Assistant to NASA Administrator, 1965-1966. (PD, 8/17/70, 1068)
upi reported in Washington Post that NASA report not yet made public acknowledged General Electric Co. was permitted to submit bid for controversial $50-million ATS-F and ATS-G contract one week later than the deadline its competitor Fairchild Hiller Corp. was required to meet. NASA denied knowledge of any leak to GE of Fairchild Hiller’s design and price. Report said Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had been told before he announced award of contract to GE on April 8 that both companies had submitted bids on same date —March 6. Actually, UPI said, Fairchild Hiller proposal had been submitted Feb. 27—NASA deadline—and copies were circulated among NASA personnel before GE proposal was submitted March 6. (Cassels, UPI, WPost, 6/13/70, E8)
Nixon Administration had decided against big space program for 1970s, Thomas O’Toole wrote in Washington Post. There would be “no set goal for landing men on Mars, no plan to colonize the moon and no sudden push to orbit a permanent manned space station above the earth in the next five years.” While space program would “not be allowed to shrink much” in 1970, Administration would ask Congress for no more than $3.7 billion for space in FY 1971, “the lowest request for space funds in almost a decade.” Low funding level meant space spending would not rise above $4 billion annually for at least several years and new programs would not be started in near future. (WPost, 1/11/70, Al)
Washington Post editorial urged House to follow Senate in denying sst funding [see Dec. 3]: “For that was no idle expression of narrow interests or shallow sentiment on the Senate’s part; it was. . .almost an explosion of public concern, as surprising to the backers of the move as it was apparently shocking to the supporters of the sst.” What Senate vote said “was that somewhere out there, away from the corporate boardrooms and the offices of the Federal Aviation Administration and the corridors of Congress, a lot of people care more about the quality of life and the nation’s urgent economic and social needs than they do about breakfasting in London and New York at roughly the same time on the same day.” (W Post, 12/8/70, A 20)
mit oceanographer Dr. Henry Stommel commented in Science, on prospects for physical oceanography: “Is the dynamics of the ocean similar to or fundamentally different from that of the atmosphere? Only measurement will tell, and it will have to be measurement at a level of technological sophistication quite beyond the present level and beyond that proposed for routine monitoring. Access to somebody’s monitoring system, or to a few years of ship time, will not suffice to obtain the kind of information the scientist needs about the oceanic velocity field. Some carefully designed measurement programs are going to be needed—on a scale larger than an oceanographic institution can manage but smaller than the space program. To be useful scientifically, these programs will have to give first priority to questions of hydrodynamics. To date there is little indication they will do so.” (Science, 6/26/70,1531-6)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, named Oran W. Nicks, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, as Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective immediately. Nicks succeeded Bruce T. Lundin, who had been named LeRC Director. (NASA Release 70-11; NASA Ann, 1/23/70)
Dr. James A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa physicist and discoverer of radiation belts encircling earth, said in Durham, N.H., that U.S. should phase out manned space programs. Maintenance of men in spacecraft “increases the cost of a given mission enormously and risks human life unnecessarily, and in a conspicuous and dramatic way.” Dr. Van Allen was in Durham to deliver first Spaulding Distinguished Series lecture at Univ. of New Hampshire. (AP, WPost, 11/6/70, A7)
General Electric Co. said it would not challenge NASA decision to reverse award of $50-million contract for ATS-F and ats-g [see Sept. 5]. In statement to press, Leon L. Farnham, General Manager of Spacecraft Programs at GE Valley Forge Space Technology Center, said GE still thought NASA decision was wrong but that the “further delay [of a court challenge] would be injurious to NASA and the total space program.” (Jones, W Post, 9/30/70, D9)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, began six-day visit to Australia to discuss space program cooperation. (Reuters, W Post, 2/13/ 70)
Senate passed S.J.R. 193 appointing former NASA Administrator James E. Webb as Citizen Regent of Board of Regents of Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 4/27/70, S6234-5)
Development of Fluorel, which could be applied by spray to fireproof material against temperatures to 1500 K (2200°F) was described by Jerome F. Lederer, Director of Safety, OMSF, in interview released by AP. Compound was developed by Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co. under direction of msc engineers. Fluori-nated copolymer paste developed to reduce flammability hazards in spacecraft consisted of 20% of Fluorel solids homogenized to form methylethylketone solution. It had been designated Refset L-3203-6 by manufacturer, Raybestos-Manhattan, Inc. Fluorel would be among nonflammable and fire-resistant materials developed for U.S.' space program and reviewed by NASA for industry and Government agencies at safety conference at msc in May. (AP, NYT, 1/12/70, 10; nasa Release 70-7)
Recommendations on conduct of “comprehensive review and analysis of the complete NASA acquisition process from determination of requirements through final contract award” were requested by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, in memo to Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs. NASA procurement policies were “sound ones which have in general fairly treated our contractors while giving NASA excellent value for its money,” Dr. Paine said. But NASA was now planning programs in “changed economic environment with more limited resources.” (NASA Release 70-146)	.
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, to be U.S. representative to International Atomic Energy Agency with rank of Ambassador. (CR, 6/25/70, S9950)
Atlantic magazine article said U.S.S.R. had “used aid and trade, backed by its newly acquired sea power, to build a vast arc of influence around the northern rim of the Indian Ocean and up as far as the home islands of Japan.” Included were “two large mooring buoys laid near the Seychelles Islands in connection with the Soviet space program.” They provided “refueling base for the Soviet flotilla.” {Atlantic, 5/70)
Blue Ribbon Defense Panel, with Gilbert W. Fitzhugh as Chairman, submitted to President Nixon Report to the President and the Secretary of Defense on the Department of Defense. Report offered 113 recommendations, including top-to-bottom dod reorganization, removing Joint Chiefs of Staff from involvement with day-to-day problems of war, streamlining military staffs, reorganizing all U.S. combat forces under three main operating commands, and abandoning contracting policies that led to cost overruns and weapons that didn’t work. Panel had been appointed by President and Secretary of Defense in 1969 to study dod problems. (Text)
Chemist Dr. Gustaf O. S. Arrhenius of Univ. of California at San Diego said in interview that he was working with NASA on plans to expand U.S. space program by sending unmanned spacecraft on “mission to an asteroid.” He said idea had been presented to NASA in 1969 by Dr. Hannes O. Alfven, 1970 Nobel Prize winner in physics. (UPI, NYT, 11/4/70)
NASA officials would meet with Soviet counterparts to discuss possible compatible space docking arrangements in Moscow Oct. 26-27, NASA announced. Discussions were outgrowth of correspondence during year between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences. Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh had proposed Moscow meeting in Sept. 11 letter to NASA and had invited NASA to select dates. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, had accepted invitation and proposed dates in Sept. 25 letter. Keldysh had confirmed acceptability of dates. NASA officials attending meeting would be: Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director; Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; George B. Hardy, Chief of MSFC Program Engineering and Integration Project; Caldwell C. Johnson, Chief of MSC Spacecraft Design Office; and Glynn S. Lun-ney, Chief of MSC Flight Director’s Office. (NASA Release 70-173)
Use of aerospace management to solve social problems was advocated by Albert J. Kelley, Dean of Boston College School of Management, in Astronautics A Aeronautics. “In the quest for application of technology to domestic and other internal problems, aerospace management with its ability to marshal resources to solve complex problems may well be the greatest [space program] spinoff. In addressing current and emerging problems, the most urgent tasks will be to identify the parts of the problem that can be solved by existing technology, to recognize the parts of the problem that need more r&d, to identify the resources needed to solve all elements of the problem, and to organize the resources and efforts and get the job done,” (AAA, 8/70,46-52)
Finance was one of main reasons for resignation of Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator, Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. At 48, Paine had four children in college and private school. His NASA salary was $42 500 per year “which after taxes barely pays for his children’s schooling, his housing and his everyday expenses.” While “nobody at GE will discuss it,” Dr. Paine apparently would move into “executive suite” at General Electric Co. “whose chairman (Fred Borch) makes $275,000 a year and whose four top executives under Borch all make more than $200,000 a year.” (W Post, 7/30/70, A2)
Cause of July 23 failure of ion engine on board orbiting Sert II had been identified and could be prevented in future, LeRC announced. Project Manager Raymond J. Rulis said beam from neutralizer had eroded and broken off small piece of metal from one of two grids at back of engine. Metal, attracted by forces of electric field between screen grid and accelerator grid, had been welded between grids by high voltages and had caused short circuit that shut down grid power lines. Although damaged thruster on Sert II could not be repaired, erosion problem could be prevented in future by relocating neutralizer and redirecting its beam to eliminate localized wear on grid. Second ion engine on board Sert II was operating satisfactorily after more than 1300 hrs. Engine would be shut down in late November for three months while spacecraft was in earth’s shadow and then restarted to complete six-month test. (LeRC Release 70-49)
Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), discussed space program spinoff on House floor: “Between 1965 and 1971 NASA awarded grants and research contracts for 1640 programs to 223 colleges and universities in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The total university expenditures by NASA from 1959 through 1969 totaled $2.7 billion and contributed to this Nation’s educational goals by the development of new scientific disciplines, technologies and educational facilities.” NASA’s educational efforts in secondary and elementary schools had been “many and varied, but one of the unpublicized and most important has been its programs to assist underprivileged youth in the inner city. The problem has been tackled in a number of locations by a wide variety of techniques, including special materials, instructors, and so forth.” (CR, 4/21/70, H3317-25)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Kenneth M. Smith, President and Chief Executive of Windecker Research Inc., to be faa Deputy Administrator. He would replace David D. Thomas, who had resigned. (PD, 3/30/70,421,447)
Accomplishments of Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, retiring Presidential Science Adviser and OST Director, were described in Science. Dr. DuBridge was credited with influencing Nixon Administration to moderate space program, initiating steps to meet electric-power generating-capacity crisis, contributing to President’s renunciation of biological warfare, and assisting “modest recovery in the fortunes” of nsf. (Walsh, Science, 8/28/70,843-3)
Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) introduced S. 4430, “Economic Conversion Act” to create Economic Conversion Commission composed of government and industry representatives including NASA Administrator. Measure would require that 1216% of each contractor’s profits from space and defense work be held in trust by commission to finance implementation of conversion plans developed by contractor and to pay benefits to workers who might suffer during transfer to civilian production. (CR, 10/2/70, S16995-7003)
Experience in space program, Borman said, “has been the most rewarding of my life. This new opportunity will enable me to work with a major industrial firm, continue an association with the space effort and to devote a substantial amount of my time through the Foundation to many issues which have interested me for a long time.” (NASA Release 70-14)
South African surgeon Dr. Christian N. Barnard, heart transplant pioneer, toured msfc and addressed NASA audience. He asked for closer cooperation between heart transplant research and space program so that studies of effects of weightlessness could be more closely observed. (Marshall Star, 2/25/70, 1)
Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial on President’s space goal message: “Underlying the message seemed to be one word—flexibility. And because the space program deals with the unknown, it is reasonable to accept flexibility as a necessary factor.” (C Plain Dealer, 3/8/70)
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel submitted report to NASA in form of letter to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, from panel chairman, Dr. Charles D. Harrington. Panel found that Apollo 13 Review Board procedures and scope of inquiry had “proved effective in their task.” Board had “performed a thorough and technically competent analysis in the reconstruction of the factors contributing to the Apollo 13 abort.” Panel “found no evidence and no reason to doubt the technical validity of their determination and findings.” (Hearing, Sen Com on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Apollo 13 Mission Review, 6/30/70,51, 56)
NASA released text of Oct. 29 agreement with Soviet Academy of Sciences for joint efforts to design compatible space docking and rendezvous arrangements. Agreement had been confirmed by exchange of notes between Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy. [See Oct. 29.] (nasa Release 70-210)
Atlas of the Universe by Patrick Moore was published by Rand McNally & Co. Volume contained almost 1500 maps, drawings, and charts, many provided through cooperation of NASA and U.S. Geological Survey. Book had foreword by Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, and epilogue by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, former NASA Administrator. (Gordon, W News, 11/16/70)
dod announced General Dynamics Corp. was receiving $191 297 000 as final payment for cost overruns on production models of F-lll aircraft. Original contract, managed by Aeronautical Systems Div., had been for $3 251 947 744. (dod Release 693-70; WSJ, 8/26/70,4)
House passed S.R. 193, to provide for appointment of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb as Citizen Regent of Board of Regents of Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 5/4/70, H3828-9)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced appointment of Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, effective March 1.	Dr. von Braun would be succeeded by his deputy, Dr. Eberhard F.	M. Rees. Dr. Paine said: “It is essential that we bring NASA’s best talents to bear on our future space planning.” NASA must select its “new space ventures with the best critical judgment and make every dollar count. Dr. Wernher von Braun has an unmatched record of looking to the future to choose the most promising avenues of technical advance. He brings to his new assignment sound vision, insight, and technical competence. .. .” (msfc Release 70-19; NASA Release 70-13)
usaf announced award of additional $78 million to General Dynamics Corp. to cover cost of overruns on F-lll aircraft and said further overrun payments were forthcoming. USAF had announced award of $191.3 million to General Dynamics Corp. Aug. 25 as final payment for cost overruns on production models of F-l 11. (WSJ, 12/1/70) During November:	usaf total-force concept for 1970s was described in Air Force and Space Digestby Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force: Increased numbers and total payload of Soviet icbms and Soviet deployment of abm system could reduce effectiveness of U.S. land- and sea-based missiles. “We are deploying abm protection for our missile fields and strengthening the penetration capability of our missiles with the deployment of mirv. But . . .effectiveness of our missile forces will tend to vary, depending upon the length of time it takes us to respond to new Soviet capabilities.” Dispersed manned bomber force with quick reaction would provide stability. “It might be possible to undermine the effectiveness of either missiles or bombers alone, but to counter both at the same time would be a vastly more difficult problem.” B-l bomber represented most economically feasible means to retain stabilizing capability. “Given the decade of leadtime involved, we must expedite the development of this aircraft.” With Soviet fighters “becoming superior to our own,” air-to-air combat was “primary concern in our development of the F-15, which will have superior capability for close-in, highly maneuverable combat” and “provide the effective weapon system necessary to defeat any enemy fighter. . . .we are convinced that effective close air support will continue to be a vital mission.. .and that an aircraft especially tailored for that role is required. . . .we are proceeding with the development of the A-X. To modernize our airlift capability, we are relying heavily on the C-5, which will produce a revolution in air mobility.” In 1973, “with the C-5 in the inventory, projections indicate that we will be able to move an Army division with equipment and six fighter squadrons with support units to Europe in less than one week.” (AF/SD, 11/70,68-71)
Kenneth M. Smith, former President and Chief Executive of Windecker Research Inc., was sworn in as faa Deputy Administrator. (FAA PIO>
Agreement under which U.S. Coast Guard would conduct National Data Buoy Development Project at MTF had been signed by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Adm. T. R. Sargent, Acting Commandant of USCG, NASA announced. Agreement established basic operational support and reimbursement relations between NASA and USCG. Slidell, La., NASA computer facility also would be available to project. (NASA Release 70-114)
President Nixon submitted nominations to Senate: Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, as U.S. Representative to 14th Session of General Conference of International Atomic Energy Agency; Dwight J. Porter as Deputy U.S. Representative to IAEA; and Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, as alternate representative. President announced appointment of George M. Wolfe as an alternate U.S. representative on ICAO Council and accepted resignation of J.D. Braman as Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and Urban Systems, effective Oct. 1 (PD, 9/14/70, 1196,1197)	.
Between June 30,1970, and June 30,1971, there would be reduction of from 1000 to 2000 in number of aerospace contractor personnel at msc, NASA Deputy Administrator George M. Low said during meetings with press and staff at MSC. Civil service employees would be reduced by 49. (Maloney, HPost, 2/3/70)
Value of space program to national defense was discussed by samso Commander, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), before Executives’ Club in Chicago. Program had produced “greatly improved military communications, strategical and tactical; the ability to detect and monitor nuclear detonations anywhere in the world; new capabilities for precise navigation of fast-moving aircraft, ships, submarines or land vehicles; and a variety of capabilities for early warning and other defensive space systems.” First defense comsat system had been transmitting “substantial load of voice communications between Washington and Vietnam since 1967. It can also handle highspeed digital data such as tactical reconnaissance photographs. Improved adaptations of this 26-satellite initial system have been developed for the United Kingdom and NATO.” In year’s time “we will be launching a still further improved Phase II United States system with greater traffic handling capacity, higher reliability and longer life expectancy.” First experimental satellite had also been launched “in development of a new tactical communications capability that will enable troops. . .to communicate with each other in spite of intervening obstacles like mountain ranges or enemy forces. Another new defense capability was built into our vela satellites. . .launched in October of 1963 to monitor the nuclear test ban treaty.” Velas had become “oldest man-made functioning systems in space; they still respond to command, although their duties have largely been taken over now by more advanced versions.” Velas had performed scientific chores like “monitoring the level of solar radiation during manned space flights, to ensure against danger to the astronauts.” usaf navigation satellites under study would permit pinpoint accuracy in navigation of supersonic aircraft and surface and subsurface vehicles. They held promise for prevention of midair collisions. “We’re also doing extensive studies on a space shuttle system that would be. . .a reusable space booster capable of supporting both military and civilian space operations.” It could put satellites into orbit, service satellites operating in space, supply manned space station, or assist in rescue of astronauts in space emergencies. (Text)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, told Cleveland, Ohio, press conference LeRC would receive $22-million increase for FY 1971.	“We expect Lewis to play a very significant role in the space station-space base evolution. The challenge in electric power alone is one that will keep Lewis people going indefinitely.” Dr. Paine was visiting NASA centers to explain effects of FY 1971 budget cuts. (Lewis News, 2/13/70, 1)
New York Times editorial commented on substitution of Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., for Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II on Apollo 13 mission. “The decision adds a new note of tension and a new reason for worry in what will be—despite the brilliant success of the two earlier moon trips—an exceedingly dangerous venture whose maneuvers require the most precise possible coordination among all three crew members. In the entire history of the space program there can have been few if any more difficult or more hotly debated choices faced by the program’s top leaders.” {NYT, 4/11/ 70,30)
