Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, delivered commencement address at Cal Tech: “One of the paths we can take—the obvious one ■—is to help develop some new area of high technology that will serve to strengthen our Nation’s economic base, and thus indirectly, our whole culture. We don’t necessarily have to perform this task with productivity foremost in our minds . . . even though that’s really the way it works. “A second path—and the demand for this path will be growing rapidly, I believe—is to attack directly the social, economic, and other serious problems of our time that have a definite technological component. Problems of ecology . . . have technological solutions. Urban and interurban transportation have technological solutions. As soon as we determine the appropriate political system which will spend the time and money, we already know a good deal about how to solve problems like these, and what remaining technology needs to be developed will undoubtedly appear. Other problems such as rural and ghetto health, housing, hunger, and poverty, have only a partly technological solution; still others, with strong human and sociological components, are even harder to deal with, and it may be a long time before problem-solvers learn to deal with ‘people’ problems. . . . while it wasn’t easy to land men on the Moon—it was nevertheless a straightforward, engineering kind of problem. And as someone has said, there weren’t any people between here and there.” Third path—and he thought few persons “yet realize what a broad and important path it can be in years ahead”—was “to pursue long-range study and research on applications of problem-solving techniques to some of the more purely human problems.” (Text)
Dr. James C. Fletcher was sworn in as NASA Administrator by D.C. Superior Court Judge James A. Belson in White House ceremony attended by President Nixon, (nasa Off Admin; W Post, 4/28/71, A2)
Dr. James C. Fletcher was sworn in as nasa Administrator by District of Columbia Superior Court Judge James A. Belson as President Nixon, Mrs. Fletcher, and Dr. George AT, Low, Deputy Administrator {behind), watched in the Presidents office. director De E. Beeler, frc Deputy Director, was named Acting Director with Bikle acting as an adviser. (NASA Release 71—77)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on space funding: “If Congress wants to be truly responsible about our national priorities, it will avoid making further cuts which would damage the space program out of proportion to the savings involved.” In addition to “advancing the frontiers of knowledge about the origins of the earth and the nature of the universe,” space program promised “to pay off in much more concrete ways.” “We are already reaping huge benefits from weather and communications satellites, as well as from the development of compact, highspeed computers, new metals and fabrics, microminiature circuits and many other technological advances.” Space program also promised more efficient use of earth’s resources, help in global attack on environmental pollution, possible prediction of earthquakes, and hope for more productive agriculture by use of lunar soil ingredients. “The line between true and false economy is hard to draw. But the space program is one area where the time has come to draw it.” (LA Times, 1/31/71) During January: Creation of global resources management system was discussed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in guest editorial in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “Can we afford to create a global resources management system? I think we cannot afford not to develop it. As the richest nation in the world we have a moral obligation to bring our new technology to bear to help the helpless. But let us talk about our national security. On both well-fed sides of the Iron Curtain, an uncomfortable amount of raw thermonuclear power has been piled up in the name of ‘deterring the other side.’ In the meantime, the under-fed, over-populated part of the world, too poor to build thermonuclear bombs, has quietly developed a far more terrifying threat to the thermonuclear powers: the Population Bomb. Is is not just common sense to spend at least a small part of our tax money set aside for national security on the task of defusing that bomb? It is gratifying indeed to know that, by establishing a global Earth-resources survey and management system, we can combine a project bound to vastly enhance our national security with a noble contribution to the welfare of the world, a charity quite likely to save the lives of millions.” (A&A, 1/71, 24-5)
Soviet defectors—writer Leonid Vladimirov, who defected in 1966, and scientist Anatoly Fedoseyev [see June 19]—said at London press conference that Soviet space technology had lagged behind that of U.S. and had produced less scientific data. Fedoseyev, not present but responding by tape recorder to questions put to him previously, said he did not think Soviet space achievements would be scientifically impressive for some time because Soviet space program was short of funds and technology level was low. Fedoseyev was said to have been responsible for bringing down U-2 reconnaissance aircraft pilot Francis Gary Powers in May 1960, Reuters later reported. (Reuters, B Sun, 11/24/71, A4)
NASA announced award of $1.6-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Aerospace Corp. for studies of advanced space programs. Studies, which would advance work performed under previous contract, would include space shuttle mission and payload capture analysis, payload analysis for space shuttle applications, analysis of advanced program operations and logistics analysis, and advanced missions safety. (nasa Release 71—255) During December: U.S. manned lunar missions Apollo 14 and 15 were voted fifth most important news story of 1971 in AP poll of member newspapers. Communist China was voted number one newsmaker for admission to U.N., changed diplomatic relations with U.S., and emerging position in world affairs. (W Star, 12/27/71, C9)
Total new obligational authority for U.S. space program including all pertinent agencies in President Nixon’s proposed FY 1972 budget was $4,707 billion—down $73.6 million, or 1.1%, from FY 1971 space noa of $4,780 billion—Space Business Daily estimated. Total FY 1972 space expenditures would be $4,633 billion, down 5.2% from $4,888 billion in FY 1971. (SBD, 2/3/71, 148)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div. of Library of Congress’ Congressional Research Service, reviewed Soviet space program in A1AA Student Journal. Soviet program’s physical size and upward pace “suggests it exceeds in real terms the U.S. program at its previous maximum.” In contrast to U.S. program— which had been eroded as programs ended and technical manpower teams broke up—Soviet “application of resources to a broad program of space flight has continued fairly steadily upward toward an ultimate level which has not yet been publicly defined.” Soviet program began its space flights with adaptation of its first ICBM, SS-6 Sapwood. “This vehicle, with improved upper staging, is still the mainstay of the present program while our corresponding, but very small, Redstone and Vanguard first stages have long since disappeared into history.” Largest single element in total U.S.S.R. program was Cosmos reconnnaisance satellite, which stayed in low-circular orbit a few days and was then recovered and which represented “rather passive military support flights.” Other elements with direct weapon implications were special uses of SS—9 Scarp ballistic missile carrier with space versions F— 1-r carrying fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) and F-l-m carrying highly maneuverable payloads. Some payloads launched by F—1—m “seem almost certainly aimed at developing the techniques of rendezvous with uncooperative spacecraft to inspect them and, if need be, destroy them. In a series of flights . . . such inspectors have made close passes on other Soviet payloads and then have themselves been blown into clouds of debris. At least one, instead of being destroyed . . . was deliberately redirected to plunge into the atmosphere and ocean.” (AIAA Stu /, 12/71, 14-28)
GAO study had disclosed that cost overruns on 61 weapon systems had reached $33.4 billion, of which some $9.5 billion had taken place before production began, Washington Post reported. Report blamed “deliberate underestimating,” unanticipated development difficulties, faulty planning, poor management, bad estimating, inflation, and desire to exploit new technology. It said newer dod programs “are characterized by a slower development pace and more conservative procurement practices.” (Nossiler, W Post, 3/19/71, Al)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 docking in AP interview published by Chicago Tribune. Docking indicated U.S.S.R. was “more or less on schedule in their declared program for developing a major experimental station in space, at least two years ahead of us.” In answer to question Dr. Fletcher said prospect “frightens me only because I don’t know what they’re doing there. They may have some military purposes that we don’t know about.” On U.S.S.R.’s two vehicles en route to Mars he said that “we don’t know what these vehicles are going to do, but it’s conceivable that there will be attempts to land.” Dr. Fletcher said NASA had been “shocked and saddened” by loss of Soyuz 11 cosmo-/^2_ nauts but “we find no reason to make any major changes in our plans for manned missions.” (AP, C Trib, 7/11/71)	•
Dr. James C. Fletcher held first press conference as nasa Administrator. In response to questions Dr. Fletcher said strength of U.S. depended critically on development of new technology. “And this means new technology of all kinds—electronics, computers, materials, as well as military technology. And 1 think that’s . . . why NASA . . . programs should be vigorously pursued.” nasa had studied possibility of second Skylab and “many other manned missions in space, most of them somewhat cheaper than the second Skylab; and we intend to look at these very carefully to see what programs, if any, made sense after . . . the first Skylab is flown.” Dr. Fletcher thought NASA stol experimental aircraft program was “long overdue.” Asked his personal plans for NASA, Dr. Fletcher said, “I can’t say that I want to go in a new direction from the way nasa has been going, except maybe up instead of down.” He was interested in international cooperation in space and “whole business of commercial use of the things that nasa has been developing,” including “strides in the applications satellites area.” He was “great supporter of the shuttle,” and had been “for many years before coming to NASA.” With development of shuttle, or “a cheap transfer system to orbit . . . it’ll open up all kinds of new things you can do in space. Since the costs will be much less—the costs per launch will be so much less. That is, all kinds of new applications, all kinds of new science programs, new manned, near-earth programs, almost anything you can think of can be done much cheaper once you have the shuttle developed.” With sufficient funds, NASA would probably pursue space station. “But in my judgment, if you have to decide between the shuttle and the space station, you pick the shuttle first because you have to have that for the second.” (Transcript)
nasa’s structural analysis computer program (nastran), designed to analyze behavior of elastic structures in space program, was being used by Ford Motor Co. in predicting performance of 1973 light truck components, NASA announced. Ford had reported 60°/o improvement in predicting behavior of components under stress and time-saving of two thirds in calculations. Program also had been used in design of people-mover system to be used at transpo ’72 exhibit planned for spring 1972 at Dulles International Airport, Va. (nasa Release 71—221)
New York Times editorial commented on nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator: “Mr. Fletcher’s highest priority at nasa will undoubtedly be to try to restore morale, insofar as possible, in a program whose ranks have been decimated by the budget cuts of recent years, nasa’s new chief apparently takes the job with few illusions. This is suggested by his recent comments that budgetary problems will probably force a shift from manned to unmanned space exploration, especially beyond the moon.” Such realism should “serve Mr. Fletcher well in the difficult days ahead as he tries to lead NASA toward a new equilibrium with a Congress largely disillusioned about the worth of showy and ultra-expensive ventures in space.” (NYT, 3/4/71)
Space program for 1970s was outlined by Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in speech before Society of Sigma Xi at Daytona Beach, Fla. It would be “program of transition; a program in which the exploration and technical pioneering of the Sixties will begin to pay substantive dividends; it is the logical transition to the intensive and economic use of space in the 80’s and 90’s. Strong evidence will emerge . . . that will refute many of the arguments advanced against science and technology as embodied in the space program.” Program’s primary strength was “that it is balanced to meet the basic national needs.” Program “strikes a harmony among scientific exploration in space, the practical utilization of space, and the development of improved technologies for space.” (Text)
New York attorney Paul Sawyer was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator on nasa Public Affairs Program. Sawyer was member of law firm of Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim, and Ballou, (nasa Release 71—46)
NASA interest in “phased approach” to development of reusable space shutde system was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Contractor studies near completion indicated “preferred configuration” was “two-stage delta-wing reusable system in which the orbiter has external propellant tanks that can be jettisoned.” While studies to date had favored “concurrent approach” in which development and testing of orbiter and booster stages would proceed simultaneously, NASA also had studied feasibility of sequencing development, test, and verification of system’s features. “We now believe that a ‘phased approach’ is feasible and may offer significant advantages.” Additional studies in progress, plus those nearing completion, would enable NASA “to make a decision this fall on the technical and programmatic approach to be followed in the space shuttle program.” (NASA Release 71-107)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, held news conference during first visit to LeRC. He said LeRC would play major role in development of commercial engines geared toward reducing noise pollution by future jet aircraft. (Lewis News, 9/10/71, 1; LeRC pio)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as nasa Administrator. (CR, 3/11/71, S3088)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, former aec Chairman, as U.S. Representative to General Conference of International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, Sept. 21—27. Among nominees for alternate representatives was Dr. T. Keith Glen-nan, first NASA Administrator (1958-1961). (PD, 9/13/71,1250, 1261)
U.S. space program was “beyond the days of reacting to each major Soviet space event,” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in speech before Aviation/Space Writers Assn, meeting in Wichita, Kans. NASA’s FY 1972 request was typical of those to come for several years; “we have made no commitment to any new program beyond the 1972 budget.” In response to questions, Dr. Low said Soviet Salyut 1—Soyuz 10 mission was “not clearly successful or unsuccessful.” It was “inconceivable” that total planned mission was 48-hr flight to rendezvous and dock briefly. But U.S.S.R. had “strong program. They are concentrating very hard on a major space effort.” (Aero Daily, 5/10/71)
Technological intelligence concerning salt was reaching U.S. through Soviet scientist who had defected to West under pseudonym of Anatoly Fedoseyev [see May 26] but had been identified subsequently as Ignatiy A. Nikitrine, deputy director of Soviet space program ip charge of electronics and cybernetics, Don Cook of Los Angeles Times reported in Washington Post. Meanwhile, AP said, British officials insisted scientist’s real name was Fedoseyev and that he was expert in field of “powerful magnetrons” whose research had applications to Soviet space effort. (W Post, 7/8/71, Al; AP, W Post, 7/9/71)
Space Program Advisory Council, established by NASA to advise on space program goals and objectives and aid in reviewing plans for and work in progress on space programs and accomplishments, held first meeting. Council of prominent scientists would report to NASA Deputy Administrator on findings of four committees—Applications, Physical Sciences, Life Sciences, and Space Systems, (nasa Release 71-71)
Slackening of U.S. R&D was scored by Eberhardt Rechtin, Principal Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering in dod, in Astronautics & Aeronautics article: “The image of world technical leadership earned by our electronics and aerospace industries in the 1960s will predictably be eroded in the 1970s by our own lack of planned ‘firsts’ in contrast with the continuing achievements of the Soviet Union, France, and probably Germany and Japan.” Major source of future wealth “must be the special skills of our population— yet we are presently pricing ourselves out of the world markets, including our own. We are also disseminating our science, our inventions, our management expertise, and our manufacturing technologies around the world in a way which, though it raises the standards of living elsewhere, also diminishes the competitive advantages of our own people.” While U.S. had been world leader in R&D less than 25 yrs, “you hear discussions about reordering national priorities as if we could make unilateral decisions, independent of the international competition •—as if international interactions were not a significant, much less a driving, factor—concerning defense R&D, the NASA space program, tax incentives to industry, or a wage/price freeze.” (A&A, 12/71, 22-7)
President Nixon sent message to Congress transmitting Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Transmitted to the Congress January 1971: “The activities of our space program during the year are consistent with the recommendations I made in March for a balanced space program. Our goals are continued exploration, scientific knowledge and practical applications. The technology acquired through our space programs has many practical applications on earth ranging from communications, meteorology and navigation to agriculture, education and transportation.” Specific objectives were continued lunar exploration to increase scientific return on Apollo program investment, exploration of solar system and universe, reduction of space operation costs, expansion of knowledge of “man’s ability to perform productively in the hostile environment of space and to relate this knowledge to uses here on earth” and application of space technology to environmental problems. “We should also promote international cooperation in our space program by pursuing joint space ventures, exchanging scientific and technical knowledge, and assisting in the practical application of this knowledge. We are greatly encouraged by European interest in joining us in cooperative post-Apollo planning.” Year 1970 had produced “substantial contributions to continued U.S. pre-eminence in civil aviation, major improvements in aeronautical services, and impressive developments in a sound sst program.” New military aeronautics programs initiated in 1970 would “enhance our national security.” (Pres Rpt 71; PD, 2/8/71, 158)
JPL announced selection of Howard H. Haglund, former Surveyor project manager, to be project manager for dot’s People Mover transit system at Morgantown, W. Va. Dr. Albert R. Hibbs would be deputy project manager, jpl was initiating research and design of automated, computer-controlled system under $1353 000 dot contract, (jpl Release 570)
USN was concerned that F-14 fighter aircraft might go into potentially dangerous flat, fast spin, Capt. Lionel E. Ames, Jr. (usn), F—14 Project Manager, said in testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services. (Transcript)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences unanimously approved nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as nasa Administrator, following one-hour hearing. Dr. Fletcher told Committee U.S. had made “some small steps” toward cooperation with U.S.S.R. in space. “I think we can .make these even larger steps.” Asked if he thought nasa needed any change in direction Dr. Fletcher said, “No organization is perfect, and a new administration will always look at the program to see if it can make any changes and I intend to do that.” In response to question from Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), Dr. Fletcher said it was “not NASA’s mission” to act as technological wpa in aiding depressed areas through the channel of space contracts. (CR, 3/10/71, D144; O’Toole, W Post, 3/11/71)
Economic slump that hit Cape Kennedy and Brevard County, Fla., after space program cuts appeared to be bottoming out, New York Times reported. Three Chambers of Commerce and county economic development council were spending $260 000 annually, “compared with next to nothing three years ago,” to promote ksc tours find area’s natural assets. Decline in jobs since 1968 had leveled off and panic sale of homes at bargain prices had ended. (Janson, NYT, 3/8/71, 25)
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Dr. James C.	Fletcher as NASA Administrator [see Feb. 27]. (PD, 3/8/71, 437)
Former F-14 project manager Capt. Lionel E. Ames, Jr. (usn), said in interview that F-14 fighters would cost $16.6 million each—almost $4 million more than $12.7 million announced by dod Aug. 10. He said confusion over cost illustrated some of problems he had had as project manager before being replaced. (W Star, 9/2/71, All)
Soviet Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 cosmonauts were described by Dr. Vladimir Dupik in Sovietskaya Rossiya article as best-fed crew in history of space flights. Length of flight had necessitated diet of four hot meals daily including “first breakfast” of veal, bread, candy, and coffee; “second breakfast” of tongue, sausage, and curds; lunch of dried, salted fish, borscht, meat, bread, cake and black currant juice. Fourth meal was not described. Oven had been installed in spacecraft for first time in Soviet space program, spices had been added to meats to improve flavor, and 14 varieties of meat carried had “higher moisture content which makes them juicier and gives off a nice aroma.” (upi, W Star, 6/27/71, All)
NASA announced confirmation of text of agreement with Soviet Academy of Sciences on exchange of lunar samples and on procedures toward recommendations for joint consideration of objectives and results of space research [see Jan. 18—21J. Agreement had been confirmed by exchange of letters between Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy, (nasa Release 71-57)	'
Dr. Marvin J. Kelly, former President and Board Chairman of Bell Telephone Laboratories, died at age 77. After retiring from Bell in 1959 Dr. Kelly had been named adviser to NASA Administrator and consultant to IBM, Ingersoll-Rand Co., and Kennecott Copper Corp. (NYT, 3/20/71, 32)
Tenth anniversary of President Kennedy’s message to Congress urging that U.S. “commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) said on House floor: “As we attempt to plan for a significant and aggressive national space program for the 1970’s, it is well to remember that on this date in 1961 the late President John F. Kennedy made an equally difficult and challenging decision. It is time again that we seize the initiative and make a positive decision for a strong national space program.” (CR, 5/25/71, S7698, E5023)
President Nixon was expected to name Univ. of Utah President, Dr. James C. Fletcher, as nasa Administrator, Washington Post reported. Dr. Fletcher, a physicist, had been an aerospace executive and consultant to Naca, dod, and President’s Science Advisory Committee. (O’Toole, W Post, 2/19/71, Al)
Results of Harris survey of 1614 U.S. households on priority areas for cuts in Federal funding were published in Washington Post. Top three candidates for cuts were Vietnam war, foreign aid, and space program; 50% of those polled favored cut in space program; 13% would cut program least of Federal spending areas listed. Support for spending in education, urban aid, and environmental areas, Harris said, “appears to be on the rise.” (Harris, W Post, 8/5/71)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh told session of Soviet Party Congress that “we must to a large extent apply [space activities] to the solution of practical problems. Armed Forces Journal later observed that previously, U.S.S.R. had spoken mostly of furthering “scientific knowledge” as basis of its space program. (AFJ, 6/71, 54r-9)
President Nixon issued statement on Oct. 6 death of Rep. James G. Fulton. Rep. Fulton would be “especially remembered for his unfailing support of our space program.” (PD, 10/11/71, 1382; Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
USAF had announced that 130-member review team of specialists from usaf, Lockheed, and other aerospace companies would make year-long review of usaf C-5A program, Wall Street Journal reported. Object of review was to “recommend operational refinements or aircraft modifications where necessary.” (WSJ, 11/30/71, 3)
