Full-scale model of Boeing supersonic transport costing $10 million would be stored at Boeing facility near Seattle, Wash., another year for further “technical evaluation,” Washington Evening Star reported. Federal Aviation Administration had said technical benefits to be gained by retaining mockup would outweigh proceeds from its sale. (W Star, 4/30/72, C12)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, discussed cost of doing business in space in speech before Aerospace Industries Assn.’s 26th Williamsburg Conference at Williamsburg, Va. NASA was developing “steady flow of products in the space business.” With shuttle “we will have a real opportunity to do something about the high cost of doing business in space.” Formula was to identify areas with greatest potential payoff for cost improvement, determine standard requirements for systems with highest potential payoff for future spacecraft, develop these standard items with low cost and high reliability, and ensure that items were used. “Our work to improve the costs of the things we will do in space is an essential adjunct to the Shuttle—not only for our own projects, but to help pave the way for many more commercial uses of space.” (Text)
Federal Aviation Administration announced award of five-month 1414 226 contract to Xonics, Inc., for additional wake-turbulence studies leading to design of ground-based acoustic wake-turbulence detection system. Xonics would analyze results of previous studies and recommend design of system capable of providing wake-vortex surveillance along airport instrument-landing-sytern approach path, (faa Release 72-37)
President Nixon signed H.R. 15097, $8.393-billion Dept, of Transportation and related agencies appropriations act that contained $1,671-billion Federal Aviation Administration appropriation. Act became Public Law 92-398. {PD, 8/28/72, 1288; faa pio)
Release of first 24 in series of supersonic transport (sst) foliow-on technology reports was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. Reports covered noise reduction, supersonic inlets, flight controls, fuel tank sealants, and titanium structures, (faa Release 72-179)
Term “post-Apollo” had “outlived its usefulness,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in message to staff. “When plans for this decade were still uncertain it made sense to refer to them as post-Apollo plans. But today we are advanced with new programs which stand on their own merits.” Skylab, space shuttle, Viking, High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), and Pioneer and Mariner missions to planets drew heavily on technology of 1960s, “but they take this technology giant steps into the future.” Dr. Fletcher suggested names for future years: 1973 would be “Year of Skylab” and of Pioneer 10, 1975 would be year of Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, in 1976 Viking would land on Mars, and in 1978 first space shuttle orbital flight was scheduled. “Each of these events will make a memorable page in the story of human progress. Each of them will contribute importantly to mankind’s knowledge of our planetary environment.” (NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 244-5)
President Nixon accepted resignation, effective July 15, of Kenneth M. Smith as Deputy Administrator of Federal Aviation Administration. (PD, 5/12/72, 1008)
NASA and Federal Aviation Administration announced they would jointly sponsor major aeronautics exhibit at world’s first international transportation exhibition, transpo ’72, to be held at Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va., May 27 to June 4. Exhibit would illustrate how two agencies were working with aviation community to overcome problems of congestion, noise, pollution, and inadequate airport facilities, (faa Release 72-57)
NASA policy on autographs was outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in memo to officials of Hq. program and staff offices and field installations: “1. No autograph should be treated as a commercial commodity; nothing of value should be requested or accepted in exchange for an autograph. 2. Multiple autographs for the same individual or concern are discouraged; multiple autographs should not be provided when it is apparent that they will be. used commercially by the requesting individual or concern.” Policy applied to all NASA employees on and off duty but did not affect official signatures for official purposes or signing of autographs for noncommercial purposes. (Text)
Award of cost-sharing contracts totaling nearly $9 million to Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Co. to determine feasibility of retrofitting jet aircraft with noise-reduction devices was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. Cost of Boeing contract was $3 365 000, of which Government would provide $2 771 549. Cost of McDonnell Douglas contract was $5 600 000, with Government share $2 771 549. (faa Release 72-141)
Doomed civilization theory was disputed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in speech at Carnegie Institute Museum of Art in Pittsburgh. Speech was part of Man and Idea Series sponsored by museum’s Women’s Committee. “I think these views overlook the very center of civilization—man himself, his intellect and his capacity to learn and act, and thereby retain in some great measure control over his own destiny.” Goal of space program was to “place the tools of planetary management into the hands of man.” Rather than barrier or constraint, space had become to man “a natural extension of his sphere of activity. I do not see this as ephemeral or temporary; I believe that, both physically and intellectually, our operating environment has been permanently expanded. This is a real contribution to the human spirit.” Human spirit was difficult to define; “it is measured by attitudes and aspirations and mature expectations. Our space experience, in the fourteen years past, has given us all a different—and better—view of the future. In a very real sense, the future is already here; we must learn to recognize it and live in it responsibly.” (Text)
Federal Aviation Administration announced appointment of Robert F. Bacon as Director of Office of Aviation Policy. He had been Acting Deputy Director of System Planning Div. in faa’s Airports Service. (faa Release 72-200)
Federal Aviation Administration completed installation of automated flight-data processing system in all 20 of its contiguous air route traffic control centers, rendered 34 automated radar terminal systems (arts hi) operational, and installed 53 instrument landing systems, (dot Release 99-S-72)
House by vote of 356 to 32 passed H.R. 11021, to control emission of noise detrimental to human environment. House rejected amendment— after consultation with NASA Administrator, Secretary of Transportation, and Federal Aviation Administration—that would have authorized Environmental Protection Agency to provide for control and abatement of aircraft noise and sonic boom. (CR, 2/29/72, H1508-39)
Further space budget cuts were forecast by Senate Finance Committee Chairman, Sen. Russell B. Long (D-La.), during Lafayette, La., press conference. He said President was trying to pare Federal budget to “reasonable limits.” There was “a lot of appeal to making some reductions in the space program.” (Sen Long Off; upi, W Post, 12/7/72)
NASA announced formation of JT3D/JT8D Refan Program Office in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. New Office—to be managed and directed by James J. Kramer, Chief of Noise Pollution Reduction Branch in Aeronautical Propulsion Div.—would direct program to develop and demonstrate modifications to JT3D and JT8D engines produced by United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. Larger diameter, quieter, single-stage fans, together with suitable acoustic nacelles, would seek maximum practicable quieting at takeoff and landing approach. Refan program was part of joint effort by NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Federal Aviation Administration to define retrofit changes that would produce significant aircraft noise reduction. (nasa Release 72—96)
NASA notified staff of Civil Service Commission directive canceling special salary rates for engineers, scientists, accountants, mathematicians, and others. Approximately 500 NASA employees affected would be converted to General Schedule and placed on saved pay rates or in higher pay steps with longer waiting periods for step increments, effective Feb. 6. Persons hired to affected positions after Feb. 6 would be paid General Schedule rates, (nasa Hq WB, 1/10/72, 2)
Army Aviation Systems Command issuance of requests for proposals to 10 aerospace companies for prototype development of advanced armed helicopter was reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology. Helicopter would be equipped with advanced air-to-surface missiles. Airframe contractors were expected to b,e selected in June 1973. (Av Wk, 11/20/72, 19)
Federal Aviation Administration released aviation forecasts for FY 1972 through FY 1983: U.S. passenger emplanements would increase from 170 million in FY 1971 to 174.9 million in FY 1972 and 189.7 million in FY 1973—gain of about 3% in FY 1972 and almost 9% in FY 1973. By end of 1983, emplanements were expected to reach 475.5 million— almost three times FY 1971 level. Revenue passenger-miles recorded by U.S. airlines were expected to grow at annual rate of about 10.5%, to reach 445 billion in FY 1983, more than three times total of 132.4 billion in FY 1971. Total hours flown by general-aviation aircraft was expected to increase almost 4% in FY 1972 and 5% in FY 1973, to 28.8 million. By 1983, total hours were expected to reach 46.2 million. General-aviation fleet was expected to grow from 131407 aircraft in January 1971 to 212 000 in January 1983. (faa Release 72-67)	_	_
Plaque placed in auditorium of National Academy of Sciences bore inscription: “The National Academy of Sciences Auditorium is dedicated to all individuals who through the Academy have devoted their talents and knowledge to the service of the Nation and mankind. It perpetuates the memory of Hugh L. Dryden whose friends, by establishing the Dryden Memorial Fund, helped to make this auditorium possible.” Dr. Dryden was NASA Deputy Administrator 1958-1965, former Director of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca), and former Associate Director of National Bureau of Standards. (nas Pres Off; NASA Hist Off)
U.S. was “running out of blank spaces on the map” and needed last frontier of space “to keep the human spirit up,” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said in interview published by National Enquirer. “Huge tasks” set for computer industry by Apollo program had boosted that industry from $1-billion-per-year earnings in 1969 to $8 billion in 1972. “The aerospace industry itself is a $27 billion business. These and associated industries which the space program stimulates . . . produce the base for the taxes to support all programs. Let the tax base erode and you will very soon see that we won’t be able to afford the social programs.” (Adler, National Enquirer, 4/16/72)
NASA Equal Opportunity Council to review, advise, and recommend on implementation of NASA Equal Employment Opportunity Program was established by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. Membership of full-time NASA employees from key staff and program offices would serve two-year terms. Chairman, Bernard Moritz, would serve one-year term. (NASA Activities, 6/15/72, 119)
