The Federal Aviation Administration announced award of a $3 485 861 contract to Westinghouse Electric Co.’s Aerospace and Electronic Systems Center to design, fabricate, install, and test one prototype air-route-surveillance radar, designated ARSR-3. The radar would include the latest technology to improve coverage area and target detection and to reduce clutter, (faa Release 73-26)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved a favorable report on S.J.R. 37—to change the name of NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Tex., to Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center—after hearing testimony from Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. (CR, ‘1/1/13, D71)
President Nixon sent to the Senate the nomination of Dr. Gerald F. Tape to be the U.S. Representative to the International Atomic Energy Agency with the rank of Ambassador. Tape would succeed Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, who had resigned. The nomination was confirmed by the Senate June 7. (PD, 5/14/73, 658, 669; Tape Off)
NASA’s hydrogen injection program—to decrease automobile and aircraft engine pollution by injecting hydrogen gas into the gasoline and air mixture before combustion—was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in a speech before the Economic Club of Detroit. The program, being carried out by Jet Propulsion Laboratory with assistance from Lewis Research Center, was “an exciting experimental effort to bring old and new technology to bear on one of the major problems of modern society.” In Phase 1, begun in April for conclusion in December, small amounts of hydrogen gas were being injected into a lean gasoline and air mixture to be burned in a standard automobile engine, first in a laboratory and later in an operating automobile with bottled hydrogen carried in its trunk. Preliminary laboratory tests had shown “a significant reduction in pollution without an increase in fuel consumption. In fact, our preliminary figures indicate that hydrogen injection may even produce a fuel saving. This comes both from the direct effect of the hydrogen on the combustion process and from the better atomization of the fuel mixture.” Work was progressing at LeRC on a laboratory model of a generator in which the hydrogen would be produced from gasoline and water. Phase 2 would attempt to solve engineering problems in integrating the hydrogen injection system, generators, and fuel controls into a smooth-running automobile. (NASA Activities, 10/15/73, 183—4)
The Federal Aviation Administration and industry Area Navigation Task Force issued the report Application of Area Navigation in the National Airspace System. It recommended a 10-yr program to establish area navigation as the primary method of aircraft navigation in the U.S. The program called for a total overhaul of the airspace route structure above 5000 m (18 000 ft) and redesign of high- and medium-density terminal areas. Small airborne computers would enable pilots to fly designed courses by extrapolating signals from ground navigation aids, freeing them from the necessity of flying directly between ground stations and allowing greater flexibility in route selection, (faa Release 73-45)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, gave personal views on the existence of extraterrestrial life in a speech at the Univ. of Maryland: “There is no hope of finding intelligent life elsewhere in the solar system. As far as this particular corner of the universe is concerned, we are it.” Chances were that primitive life forms would be found on other planets or in their atmospheres, “and this will still be one of the great discoveries of all time. This discovery will shed light on how life arose on Earth. It will strengthen our conviction that intelligent life must exist on the planets of millions, or even billions, of other star systems in the universe.” Dr. Fletcher doubted that any other civilizations would exchange visits with the earth because of the great distances. “We could not begin to build the kind of spaceship that would be needed. But who can say what new technologies, what new understandings of the physical laws of the universe, future generations will develop ■—or hear about on the inter-galactic radio network?” He was “very optimistic” about long-range chances of communicating with very advanced civilizations in the Milky Way or other galaxies: “When you think how many stars there are which could have planets like Earth, and how long they have been in existence, it is quite easy to believe that there must be many advanced civilizations broadcasting in our direction. And I am sure we have the technology needed to intercept such signals and eventually answer them.” (Text)
The “deeper meaning” of Apollo 17 (Dec. 7-19, 1972), the last manned lunar landing mission in the NASA program, was discussed by author William I. Thompson in a New York Times article: The mission had represented a “sunset” of rocket technology. “Apollo 17 turned the night into day, but elsewhere smaller lights were going on as men began to discover relationships between consciousness and the growth of plants . . . , between enzyme change and faith healing . . . , and between mind and matter in psychokinesis. . . . The space program was an important scaffolding, but now that the building of the new human culture is up, we no longer need the scaffolding.” To spend a fortune on rockets now “would be the same as spending a fortune on dirigibles in 1916. There are other forms of space travel to be invented, and these forms are more likely to spring from the new paradigms emerging in science than from the hardware of the old technology. The era of the rocket has climaxed in Apollo 17; if we push on and ignore the sense of an ending, we shall find only the bitterness and disappointment of the anticlimax.” (NYT, 1/1/73, 3:13) January 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, expressed gratification in his monthly letter to the staff “with NASA’s excellent performance in 1972, and with the successful transition . . . from the completed programs of the Sixties to the new programs and new challenges of the Seventies. In 1972, Phase I of the national space effort of the United States was completed and Phase II well begun.” NASA’s first year with all launches and missions successful underlined that it was NASA’s custom “to do the unprecedented and then quickly make it routine.” Zero failures could now be the goal year after year. Dr. Fletcher also noted that of 18 space launches in 1972 half had been for other organizations or countries, with 8 being reimbursed. On another “important front,” the NASA-wide payload cost-reduction campaign begun in 1972 had gone well, with valuable suggestions from Centers and contractors. The effort “was not a routine cutback exercise and not a threat to anyone’s security. It is, instead, a creative effort to expand our usefulness even though funds are limited. And you can be sure it has a lot to do with NASA’s long-range survival as the instrument of the U.S. Government to handle most kinds of space and aeronautical r&d and other related assignments.” (NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 2-3)
A Baltimore Sun editorial commented on NASA’s problems with the Office of Management and Budget: omb had promised NASA about $3.4 billion annually, but omb impoundment of funds had cut NASA’s FY 1974 budget to about $3 billion and “it appears OMB will hold the space agency to about $3,235 billion in fiscal 1975.” Inflation had aggravated nasa’s problems and $85 million had been cut from the FY 1974 shuttle development budget. “But now NASA is suggesting what some aerospace contractors are stating explicitly: That if the OMB squeeze stays on, then NASA will have to cut back on new starts in scientific programs. This is an odd irony, indeed, since the very purpose of the shuttle is to serve these new programs.” The Sun felt “that if NASA accountants are told to sharpen their pencils they can keep the shuttle alive as well as provide for initiation of the new scientific programs. The Nixon OMB consistently has given science short shrift, however, and it would be sad indeed if the space program were hobbled at the very time it is beginning to show immense scientific promise.” (B Sun, 9/10/73, All)
Dr. Philip Handler, President of the National Academy of Sciences, told newsmen in Moscow that he had informed President Mstislav V. Keldysh of the Soviet Academy of Sciences that there would be a time when the U.S. would need “more definitive information” about the Soviet space program. Dr. Handler had referred to the 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Concluding a two-week tour of Soviet scientific establishments as head of an NAS delegation, Dr. Handler said U.S. science was “a cut ahead” of Soviet science but the distance between the countries was “not very great.” (Reuters, W Post, 7/4/73, A24)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data through 1972 and a Forward Look. The report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—was the latest in an annual review series and first to use the metric system in all quantitative measurements to conform to nasa and Soviet practice. The U.S. expected to have spent $70 billion by June 30 on combined civilian and military space programs. Physical evidence of Soviet space activity indicated the U.S.S.R. had committed a similar amount. There had been no manned Soviet launches in 1972. Moscow had been “filled with rumors” in late July of an impending “more ambitious Salyut-Soyuz manned mission,” but press reports had indicated later that tracking ships which usually supported such missions were returning to port. NASA employment—peaked at 400 000 in 1966—had dropped to 150 000. Soviet space employment might be close to 600 000 because the “effort today seems to be at least equal to our 1966 peak” of a total 600 000 space employees in the U.S. The state of the Soviet effort toward a space shuttle was unknown but the “Soviet effort to maintain a position of leadership in space, and the continued high level of Soviet flight activity of more than double that of the United States” in(Heated the U.S.S.R. “may have even more compelling reasons to develop a reusable shuttle as a cost saving device.” (Text)
Rep. Thaddeus J. Dulski (D-N.Y.) introduced H.R. 4927 to amend Title 5 of the U.S. Code to make Level V of the Executive Schedule applicable to three additional NASA positions. The action was taken following receipt by the House Speaker of a letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, requesting legislation to double the number of NASA Level V positions. Dr. Fletcher requested authority to establish titles of Associate Administrators “in a manner consistent with evolving functional responsibilities as they may develop and be altered . . . ; and to add three such positions to provide salary equality among all Associate Administrators having comparable responsibilities and authorities. Legislation was required because reorganization of NASA offices had created six offices headed by Associate Administrators, rather than three. (CR. 2/28/73, H1244)	'
The Federal Aviation Administration released Aviation Forecasts, Fiscal Years 1973—1984. Airline passenger traffic was expected to increase 10% annually, passing the 500 million mark in 1984. The number of hours flown by general-aviation aircraft would increase from 27.7 million in FY 1973 to 46.6 million in FY 1984 and the general-aviation fleet from 136 000 to 217 000 aircraft. U.S. airline passenger enplanements would increase from 200.4 million to 524 million in FY 1984, with international passengers increasing from 21.3 million to 62.8 million and domestic from 179.1 million to 461.2 million. Revenue passenger-miles recorded by U.S. air carriers were expected to reflect a continuing long-term trend of increased average passenger trip length; the FY 1984 total of 500.5 billion was expected to more than triple the FY 1973 figure of 162.1 billion. The air carrier fleet would increase by 1000 additional aircraft, bringing the total fleet to 3600, of which 60% would be wide-body aircraft accounting for 80% of available seat-miles. Operations at airport control towers were expected to rise from 56.8 million to 112.5 million. Annual production of U.S. civil aircraft would jump from 10 005 in FY 1973 to 24 465 in FY 1984, with general aviation accounting for most of the gain. Annual air carrier aircraft production would increase from 205 to 265, while the general-aviation figure would soar from 9800 to 24 200. (faa Release 73-60)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, announced that future spacecraft technical requirements would permit a phasedown beginning in mid-1974 of a Deep Space Network (dsn) facility and a Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) facility—NASA’s two major tracking and data-acquisition facilities near Johannesburg, South Africa. The 64-m (210-ft) antenna facilities at Goldstone, Calif., and the new large-dish facilities in Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, with smaller 26-m (85-ft) antennas at these stations, would be used for the new planetary spacecraft probing further into the solar system and beyond after June 1974. (nasa Release 73-128)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, dismissed Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity. In a Nov. 2 memorandum to NASA employees he said: “Mrs. Harris has made public a paper she wrote me criticizing NASA’s Employment Opportunity Program and recommending the reassignment of the Assistant Administrator.” Dr. Fletcher was “deeply and personally committed to the goal of equal employment opportunity for members of minority groups and women” and “was not satisfied with NASA’s performance in this field.” He said NASA would consider Mrs. Harris’ recommendations and suggestions and “will adopt those we feel will be helpful.” He appreciated her effort and respected her “for having expressed her opinions.” But, “because Mrs. Harris has not demonstrated the degree of administrative and management skill required of her position, because she has been unwilling to share the broader problems of management with her peers, and because she became a seriously disruptive force within her own office, I concluded that she should not continue to serve. ... In so concluding, I also concluded that Dr. [Dudley G.] McConnell [Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity] can successfully do the job he has been assigned provided he has the good will and working support of all nasa employees.” Dr. McConnell, a former civil rights activist, had said most of Mrs. Harris’ report had been on public record already “but the time they spent preparing it should have been devoted to more positive kinds of things,” the Baltimore Sun reported. (O’Brien, W Post, 10/29/73, A5; Text, B Sun, 10/29/73, A3)
Federal Aviation Administration award of a six-month $125 082 contract to Boeing Co. to develop data to identify aircraft noise patterns in airport vicinities was announced by Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar. Boeing would collect and analyze noise and performance data on its four in-service commercial aircraft—Boeing 707, 727, 737, and 747. (faa Release 73—55)
The Senate agreed by a vote of 82 to 10 to S. Res. 71 to seek agreement with other governments to prohibit the use of environmental or geophysical modification activity as a weapon of war. (CR, 7/11/73, S13101-02) July 12:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, outlined potential uses of space age technology before the Western Assn, of State Game and Fish Commissioners in Salt Lake City, Utah. He said earth surveying could find hidden resources, such as formations likely to have petroleum beneath them. (Evans, Desert News, 7/12/73)
Australian Prime Minister E. G. Whitlam and Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, officially opened the largest space-tracking antenna erected in Australia for NASA. The 64-m-dia (210-ft-dia) antenna at the Tidbinbilla Deep Space Communications Complex near Canberra would be part of NASA’s global Deep Space Network (dsn) of three stations. The first station was built at Goldstone, Calif., in 1966 and the third was nearing completion in Madrid, Spain, (nasa Release 73-69; NASA pao)
The Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1972 was presented in Washington, D.C., by the National Aeronautic Assn, to the 7th and 8th Air Forces and Task Force 77 of the Navy for their “demonstrated expert and precisely integrated use of advance [d] aerospace technology” in the conduct of Operation Line Backer II, the 11-day air campaign in December 1972 that “led to the return of the United States prisoners of war” in Southeast Asia. Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, received the trophy on behalf of the servicemen at a luncheon hosted by the National Aviation Club and the National Aeronautic Assn. Guests included Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator. (Invitation; nac Off)
Dr. Alexander Hocker, European Space Research Organization (esro) Director General, sent a message to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, on NASA’s 15th anniversary: “The resourcefulness, courage and remarkable achievements of NASA personnel have been an inspiration to us in Europe and ESRO is proud to be associated with some of nasa’s most stimulating endeavours.” (ESRO Newsletter, 10/73, 3)
The Senate confirmed Alexander P. Butterfield as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration. (CR, 3/12/73, D214)
The appointment of Frederick A. Meister, Jr., as Deputy Associate Administrator of Plans for the Federal Aviation Administration was announced by faa Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield. Meister would succeed Ronald W. Pulling, who had retired, (faa Release 73—68)
Award of a $33 982 080 contract to Rockwell International Corp. for lease or purchase of 11 75A Sabreliner aircraft with electronic systems, to flight-test more than 7000 ground navigational aids, was announced by the Federal Aviation Administration. The contract was part of an faa program to replace 47 DC-3s and T-29s with 21 modern, light, twin-turbine-powered aircraft for flight inspection, (faa Release 73-78)
A Federal Aviation Administration rule protecting the public from sonic booms generated by civil supersonic aircraft was announced by Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar. The rule, prohibiting civil aircraft from exceeding mach 1 when flying over land mass or territorial waters of U.S., would become effective April 27, 1973. (faa Release 73-57)
Sen. Pete V. Domenici (R—N. Mex.) introduced S. 2755, a bill to require the NASA Administrator to study the feasibility of entering into international cooperative programs using space technology and applications. The nasa Administrator would work with the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and the National Science Foundation Director to study the desirability of international cooperation and cost sharing to develop a solar energy collection and conversion system. (CR, 11/29/73, S21370) November 30:	The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 613 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 274-km (170.3-mi) apogee, 188-km (116.8-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Western observers identified the spacecraft as an unmanned Soyuz. It was brought down by parachute near Karaganda Jan. 30, 1974, after orbiting the earth 60 days, a record length of flight for any Soviet spacecraft recovered intact. Cosmos 613 flew the same orbital track as other manned Soviet spacecraft but at a higher altitude, leading to speculation that the purpose of the mission was to test the ability of Soyuz spacecraft to fly higher and the durability of its systems as a prerequisite to a possible two-month manned mission, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; 1/31/74; SBD, 12/3/13, 164; O’Toole, W Post, 12/16/73, A25; 2/10/74, A27; Av Wk, 2/11/74, 32)
The National Space Club held its Awards Luncheon in Washington, D.C. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award of $500—named for the U.S. rocket pioneer—was presented to Barton C. Hacker of Iowa State Univ. for his essay “From Space Station to Orbital Operations in Space Travel Thought, 1895-1951.”' The Dr. Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship award of $2000, presented annually to an “individual . . . pursuing the challenges of research, exploration, and administration in astronautics, so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space” for the U.S., was given to Dr. Palmer Dyal of NASA Ames Research Center Electrodynamics Branch. The award was named for the first NASA Deputy Administrator, who died in 1965. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Scholarship of $2000 was presented to David 0. Starr of Catholic Univ. (Program; nsc News Letter, 2/22/73)
Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management since Oct. 1, 1970, had resigned effective Dec. 12, NASA announced. In accepting the resignation, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said: “He brought much to NASA in managerial knowhow from his former capacity as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Shell Oil Company. ... He made NASA a better organization—in our dealing with industry and in our handling of internal affairs.” (NASA Ann)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, issued a management instruction continuing in existence, and setting forth the charter for the NASA Space Program Advisory Council and its related standing committees under the Federal Advisory Committee Act of Oct. 6, 1972 (P.L. 92-463). The nasa Administrator had determined Jan. 4, 1973, that the Council and committees were in the public interest in the performance of duties imposed upon NASA by law, “and they are therefore continued for the period ending June 30, 1974.” Council functions were to consult with and advise NASA, through the Deputy Administrator, on plans for, work in progress on, and accomplishments of NASA’s programs. (NASA nmi 1156.20C)
The Federal Aviation Administration put into effect Phase II of the tightened airport security measures announced Dec. 5, 1972. An armed guard would be stationed at every departure gate of every U.S. air carrier airport; every passenger would be screened before boarding aircraft; and all baggage would be inspected before being carried aboard, (dot Release)
The Federal Aviation Administration released Census of U.S. Civil Aircraft for 1970 and 1971. Civil aircraft at the end of 1971 totaled 166 785, of which 131 870 were listed as “active.” End-of-1969 figures had shown 190 749 aircraft, of which 133 814 were listed as “eligible to fly.” (faa Release 73—197)
