A NASA plan for energy conservation and management, effective immediately, was outlined in a memo from Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, to heads of all program and staff offices and Center Directors. NASA expected to exceed by a wide margin the nationwide goal of a 5% reduction in energy consumption for the following 12-mo period as established in a 29 June 1973 Presidential Memorandum. Management actions included scheduling all energy resources, using fewer cars and aircraft, encouraging employee carpools, and examining alternative power sources in large energy consumers such as wind tunnels. NASA would also play a key role in the research, development, and technological application for the longer term solution of energy requirements and efficiencies. A Special Task Force on Energy Conservation, activated 10 Dec. 1973, would review and recommend . policies and guidelines on energy conservation, consider NASA’s response to external energy directives, develop suggestions for conserving energy, and review NASA’s progress in conservation. (Text)
A Turkish Airlines, Inc., DC—10 jumbo jet airliner carrying 335 passengers and 11 crew members crashed in the Forest of Ermenonville 42 km northeast of Paris, France, killing all aboard in the worst air disaster in history. The crash—the second by a jumbo jet—occurred shortly after takeoff for London from the Paris Orly Airport. Aviation experts from the Federal Aviation Administration, National Transportation Safety Board, manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp., ana Turkish government were sent to the scene to help French officials determine the cause. Eyewitness reports were conflicting but initial evidence pointed to a mid-air explosion; six bodies and one section of seats were found 10 km from the main point of impact. Later findings indicated that the rear cargo door had flown off. The sudden loss of pressure in the cargo hold had collapsed the cabin floor, severing the aircraft control cables, and sucked out the six passengers before the plane plunged steeply earthward. (Robertson, NYT, 4 March 74,1; 6 March 74, 5; AP, B Sun, 7 March 74, A2; Randal, W Post, 4 March 74, A1)
Robert .Hotz, in an Aviation Week editorial, praised the “stabilizing and peace-keeping functions” of the large U.S. military space program. Scoring the “official government hypocrisy about our non-military space program,” Hotz argued the Eisenhower Administration’s attempt to separate civilian and military roles in space had “persisted to this day and badly impaired and obscured the truly peaceful role played by military space vehicles.” Air Force boosters and military-trained astronauts and managers had played key roles in NASA programs. Military reconnaissance satellites and early warning satellites added up to “one of the biggest forces in deterring major aggression and keeping as much peace as there is left in the world.” In contrast, claimed Hotz, the Soviet Union “never made any pretense of separating its military and scientific space activities” and had gone beyond reconnaissance satellites into “offensive space weapons.” (Av Wk, 7 Oct 74,11)
Maj. Alexander P. de Seversky (U.S. Army Air Corps), aviation pioneer, died of a respiratory ailment in New York at the age of 80. Maj. de Seversky had begun his career as a pilot in the Czarist air force in Russia during World War I. After coming to the U.S. in 1918 he contributed to military and commercial aviation, helping to develop the first fully automatic synchronous bombsight, gyroscopically stabilized flight instruments, inflight fueling techniques, and a variety of landing gear for seaplanes and aircraft. He also led the effort to design, huild, and test an all-metal fighter aircraft, the P—35, the first aircraft to fly faster than 480 km per hr. In 1931 he founded the Seversky Aircraft Corp., the forerunner of Republic Aircraft Corp. During World War II de Seversky became one of the country’s leading advocates of strategic air power, saying that the U.S. could not win a “limited war fought with traditional forces.” He argued that “the whole military philosophy must be changed or we shall forever trail the rest of the world not only in conventional aircraft, but in intercontinental ballistic missiles and even in man-made earth satellite development.” (Fraser, NYT, 26 Aug 74, 32; AP, Orlando, Florida, Sentinal Star, 26 Aug 74, B4) Tass reported 28 Aug. that on the second working day the cosmonauts felt well and had made “experiments to perfect the technique of piloting the ship in different flight regimes.” During maneuvering Soyuz 15 approached the Salyut 3 space station many times, the cosmonauts controlling spaceship functions, observing the approach, and inspecting the station. Tass then reported the crew was “concluding the flight and . . . preparing the spacecraft for the return to the earth.” After a 48-hr 12-min mission, Soyuz 15 sofflanded safely at 1:10 am 29 Aug. Baykonur time (4:10 pm edt 28 Aug.)—the first Soviet night landing—48 km southwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan despite a “difficult meteorological situation.” On-the-spot medical examinations showed the cosmonauts to be in “good health.” Early press reports quoted Western experts as saying the flight probably ended early because of a failure in the docking mechanism of the spacecraft, damage to or failure of the spacecraft during the attempted linkup, or a serious deterioration of the Salyut orbital station. In'response to questions about the impact of the Soyuz 15 mission on the planned July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a 29 Aug. statement, “nasa personnel engaged in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. . . were informed in advance by Soviet personnel of the ‘Soyuz 15’ flight and its approximate timing.” Dr. Fletcher said that neither Soyuz 14 (launched 3 July) nor Soyuz 15 “carried the astp docking mechanism. We have no reason to douht this information.” At a 9 Sept, press briefing at Johnson Space Center, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, Soviet chief of cosmonaut training, confirmed through his translator that a hard dock had been one objective of the Soyuz 15 mission and that there were problems with the docking system. “In our previous flights ... we had worked out the automatic rendezvous and docking, but it worked only up to 150 meters. . . . From that point, it was purely manual.” At an 11 Sept, jsc press briefing, Shatalov said that during the Soyy,x 15 flight the automatic system “worked well” up to 30 to 50 m. “But when going beyond 50-40, the range rate exceeded the necessary or the intended parameters.” He also said the approaches had been repeated “a number of times and each time the automatic system worked up to 30-40 meters. ... At no time in these approaches was it intended to use manual docking.” He emphasized that they were satisfied with the automatic system to the point it had worked. He also said the second major objective of the mission was “to perfect this night landing.” Soyuz 15 was the second spacecraft to visit Salyut 3, the Soviet’s third orbiting station. A two-man crew, launched 3 July aboard Soyuz 14, had spent nearly 16 days aboard the station performing scientific experiments. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 27-29 Aug 74, Ul; NASA Release 74—242; Wren, NYT, 29 Aug 74, 1; W Post, 30 Aug 74, A32; SF, Dec 74, 470; Transcripts, 9,11 Sept 74)
President Ford accepted a segment of crystal grown in the orbiting Skylab Workshop during January, from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology Chairman Howard W. Johnson. Johnson said the indium-antimonide crystal, produced in an MIT experiment, was the purest crystal with the longest life yet produced by man. Using it to carry power current, a computer could be the size of a postage stamp. (NASA Activities, 15 Nov 74, 17; PD, 11 Nov 74,1428; UPI, W Post, 5 Nov 74,1)
Air traffic activity during 1973 had increased 6% over 1972 activity at Federal Aviation Administration airport control towers, air route traffic control centers, and flight service stations, the FAA reported. The increase was the largest recorded by towers since 1968 and followed three years of declining activity. Takeoffs and landings at the 386 FAA-operated control towers during 1973 totaled 56 533 953, up from 53 255 919 in 1972. (faa Release 74-86)
Japan and the People’s Republic of China signed a civil aviation agreement in Peking setting up commercial flights between the two countries. Japan Air Lines Co., Ltd., would be able to fly to Peking and Shanghai. Civil Aviation Administration of China flights to Tokyo would be the P.R.C.’s first service to a non-Communist country. The P.R.C. had purchased 10 Boeing 707s for its expanded international service, including possible future service to Canada, the U..S., and Latin America. In addition to ratification by Japan’s Diet, technical details would have to be worked out before regular service could begin. Within hours after the agreement was announced the Foreign Minister of the Republic of China (Nationalist) announced termination of service by jal and Taiwan’s China Air Lines between Taiwan and Japan and a ban on jal flights over Taiwan. (Mackenzie, W Post, 21 April 74, Al; Butterfield, NYT, 21 April 74,1)
The Federal Aviation Administration issued an airworthiness directive ordering all DC-10 jumbo jet aircraft operators to make certain that cargo holds were locked and pressurized before the aircraft left the ground. Evidence had increased speculation that the 3 March crash of a DC—10 Turkish airliner had been caused by a faulty rear cargo door. In addition, operators were required to observe normal pressurization of aircraft during the initial flight period. If pressurization problems did occur, the aircraft was to be depressurized and brought down at the nearest suitable airport. (AP, B Sun, 7 March 74, A2)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ Subcommittee on Aviation held hearings to determine whether the Federal Aviation Administration and McDonnell Douglas Corp. had dealt adequately with cargo door problems on the DC-10 aircraft. Experts believed that the door had caused a 12 June 1972 near crash in Canada and the 3 March 1974 crash outside Paris that killed all 346 persons aboard. Documents had revealed that, following the Canadian incident, the FAA had drafted an airworthiness directive requiring three improvements in the suspect rear cargo door. McDonnell Douglas appealed to the FAA, which then agreed to let the company issue voluntary service bulletins. An inspection of all 134 in-service DC—10s after the Paris crash had showed that two aircraft, including the Turkish airliner, had not been modified despite McDonnell Douglas records to the contrary. Seven months after the Canadian incident the FAA, at the suggestion of the National Transportation Safety Board, had asked the company to consider a redesign of the vital systems, reinforcement of the passenger cabin floor, and more pressure vents. In a 25 Feb. 1974 letter to the FAA, McDonnell Douglas said that they did not “have the manpower available at this time to undertake the study, nor are we in a position to accept this burden alone.” (Egan, W Post, 23 March 74, A4; 27 March 74, A2; Wilkin, NYT, 21 March 74,1; 26 March 74,1)
NASA’s equal employment opportunity program was reviewed during a hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said that during the 1970s NASA faced the challenge of catching up in a most important area of human need. The challenge would be difficult because the NASA work force had decreased by nearly one third. In addition, 47% of the NASA work force were scientists and engineers. Of these, 3.4% were minorities, while the nationwide percentage of minorities in this category was 3.5%, and these persons were in high demand in private industry, where starting salaries were $1200 to $1700 per year higher. Dr. Dudley G. McConnell, NASA Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, said NASA would during 1974 achieve a minority complement of 6.1% of the total permanent work force, hiring 80 minority members and 80 women into professional positions. In addition NASA would help increase the availability of technically trained women and minority members by NASA’s cooperative education program and by initiating an aerospace fellowship program. Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, former NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, testified that NASA had turned away qualified women and minority applicants. She said NASA ranked 22 out of 26 agencies in percentage of female attorneys. Also, although NASA had a 47% scientific and engineering work force, in the 53% nonscientific and technical category NASA had a 3.7% minority participation, not significantly better than the 3.6% in the scientific and engineering category. (Transcript)
The fact that fewer and fewer young people are entering the field of aeronautics” was endangering the U.S. aeronautical position, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a speech before the NASA-University Conference on Aeronautics at the Univ. of Kansas. The number of college students in junior classes in aerospace engineering had dropped 75% during 1968-1973, although civil aeronautics export business had increased fivefold in the past 10 yrs. Total civil and military aerospace exports were expected to reach $7 billion in 1974, with a “self-evident” importance to the U.S. balance of payments. U.S.-designed and -produced transport aircraft formed 80% of the non-Communist world’s transport fleets. Because of the increasing system complexity, costs, foreign competition, and complex environmental and economic problems, it was “clear that the support of the research and technology critical to the future health of civil aeronautics will depend on heavier government involvement.” NASA was “prepared to support a stronger aeronautics research and technology effort” and had organized a long-range study group to evaluate the “Outlook for Aeronautics” in the 1980-2000 period. A report was due in the summer of 1975. Among possible technology goals, Dr. Fletcher was convinced that aircraft fuel savings of 50% within the next 20 yrs could be reached, through weight reductions by composite structures and fly-by-wire and active controls and through supercritical aerodynamics, advanced engine techniques, and operational methods. NASA would also give special attention to technology for alternative fuels, such as hydrogen. (Text)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate James E. Dow to be Deputy Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, succeeding Kenneth M. Smith, who had resigned. Dow had been Associate Administrator of FAA since August 1972. The nomination was submitted to the Senate 22 July and confirmed 8 Aug. (PD, 22 July 74, 817; 29 July 74,995; FonF, 7 Sept 74)
Radioactive material like that which had leaked from an improperly shielded container on two 5 and 6 April Delta Air Lines, Inc., flights, and germs, bacteria, and nerve gas were shipped routinely on commercial aircraft, the Washington Post reported. The Post quoted an Atomic Energy Commission investigation as saying that 1 million shipments of radioactive material had been made during 1973. Medical isotopes had accounted for 95% of the total. On 20 March the Air Line Pilots Association had asked the Federal Aviation Administration to ban the shipment of radioactive material by air temporarily. (Conlan, W Post, 15 April 74, A6)
Edwin C. Kilgore had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Center Operations, NASA announced. He had assisted Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator and Acting Associate Administrator for Center Operations, in organizing and managing the new office since its establishment 15 March. Before March, Kilgore had served as Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, (nasa Ann, 20 May 74) _
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Housing and Urban Development Secretary James T. Lynn signed and sent to the President and Congress their agencies’ joint plan for implementing the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974. Under the Act, signed 3 Sept., NASA was responsible for development and procurement of solar equipment. HUD would coordinate the demonstration, including installation of solar equipment in residential structures, and collecting and disseminating information about solar energy, (msfc Release 7dr-246)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced a proposed new regulation requiring fuel tanks and fuel venting spaces on turbine-powered transports over 5670 kg to be equipped with explosion-prevention systems. Under the proposal, aircraft operators and manufacturers could use a system that maintained a continuous nonflammable atmosphere, such as nitrogen, or a system that arrested a fire or explosion once initiated. All turbine aircraft manufactured two years after the effective date of the final rule would be required to be fitted with this equipment within three years, (faa Release 74-4,7)
The papers of Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator from 1958 until his death in 1965, were opened to the public in ceremonies at Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, Md. The papers would be housed in the university’s Milton S. Eisenhower Library. (NASA Release 74-120; NASA Hist Off)
The Federal Aviation Administration proposed a new safety regulation that would require all shipments of radioactive material on passenger and cargo aircraft to be inspected for leakage and scanned with radiation monitoring instruments before flight. On passenger flights, radiation monitors would check the cabin floor above the cargo hold before departure and the cargo compartment after the aircraft had landed. The FAA proposal had been prompted by incidents of improper packaging that had exposed passengers and crew members to higher-than-normal radiation levels [see 9-10 April]. (faa Release 74-59)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Alexander Hocker, European Space Research Organization Director General, held a Spacelab program review in Paris to assess the proposed esro design, appraise an esro presentation of contractor evaluation and findings, and discuss follow-on production. The review indicated that size, "volume, subsystems, transportability, and operational turnaround met or exceeded design requirements. The design payload weight had been reduced from phase B results. An esro team with NASA support would further assess the weight, and the common payload support equipment and instrument pointing system would be studied for nine months. NASA would give a letter of commitment to buy one flight unit with follow-on production commitment scheduled after critical design review, (nasa Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 June 74; NASA Spacelab Newsletter 74-5; 3 July 74)
