A recommendation by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to transfer Skylab backup hardware to the Smithsonian Institution was agreed to by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.), Chairman of the House Science and Astronautics Committee. In a letter to Dr. Fletcher, Teague said he understood the transfer would “in no way affect the status of the Saturn launch vehicles and Apollo spacecraft being retained for possible use.” Teague said he shared a “belief that to display the Skylab hardware to the public will foster a better appreciation and increasing support for our national space program.” Other equipment was being stored to permit restoration if additional space missions should become desirable [see 9 Apr.]. (Letter, Teague to Fletcher, 21 July 75)
Mariner 10 made its last and closest flyby of Mercury at a distance of327 km at 6:39 pm EDT. To prepare for the flyby, the trajectory had been corrected on 30 Oct. 1974 and 13 Feb. 1975. An additional correction 7 March was to reduce the probability of Mariner 10’s impacting the surface of Mercury from 30% to 1%, targeting Mariner 10 to approach the planet from the sunlit side, then loop around behind it. One last-minute problem was navigational difficulty in locking onto the star Canopus so that the spacecraft would point in the proper direction for data collection. Because a commanded roll search for Canopus would expend all remaining attitude-control gas, Mariner 10 had to be maneuvered using solar-radiation pressure on the solar panels and high-gain antenna. The problem was intensified because of the tandem demands of Helios 1 and Mariner 10 on the antennas of NASA’s deep-space tracking network. However, the primary users— West German scientists tracking Helios 1—gave receiving time to the Mariner 10 flight controllers, who obtained Canopus lock in time for the encounter. Major objective of the third encounter was to determine whether Mercury had an intrinsic or induced magnetic field. In a press briefing 17 March, Dr. Norman F. Ness, principal investigator of the magnetic fields experiment, said that Mercury did have an intrinsic magnetic field, encountered on the incoming trajectory at precisely the time predicted from the first Mercury pass. Mariner 10 had measured the field to be a maximum of400 gamma. Plasma science experiment data supported the presence of the field; Dr. Ness observed that the interface between the solar wind and Mercury’s magnetic field appeared to be a scaled-down version of the interaction between the solar wind and the magnetic field of earth. The spacecraft returned about 300 TV pictures of the planet’s surface between 12 and 17 March, with best resolution at 100 m obtained from quarter-frame near-encounter pictures. All photos were transmitted in real time and at 22 kilobits per sec, instead of the planned 117, because of overheating of the spacecraft. (NASAMORs, 10 March 75, 7 April 75; NASA Releases 75—58, 75—59; NASA Activities, April 75, 12—13; Av Wk, 24 March 75, 24- 25)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Commercial Airplane Co. of Seattle for negotiations leading to award of a $9.8-million contract to develop a computer software system that could substantially reduce design time and costs of aircraft and space vehicle design and ensure improved vehicle performance. The system, called IPAD (integrated programs for aerospace-vehicle design), would process installation of engineering information on computers at major U.S. aerospace companies, acting as the key communications and calculations integrator for many designers and increasing their effectiveness by speeding up computations and data management required in design. It would serve large engineering staffs from the design concept through detailed design, and would help to organize and assemble design data in support of manufacturing processes. (NASA Release 75—312)
NASA announced signing of an agreement with the Federal Aviation Administration to act as a third party for the purpose of receiving, processing, and analyzing safety reports filed under FAA’s Aviation Safety Reporting Program. The third-party arrangement would stimulate the free and unrestricted flow of information, by assuring users that FAA’s objective in the program was to provide the safest possible aviation system by identifying and correcting unsafe conditions before accidents occur. The agreement provided for specific procedures to protect the identity of persons involved in the reports submitted to NASA, except in criminal cases or accidents. NASA would set up an aviation safety reporting working group under its Research and Technology Advisory Council to advise NASA on the reporting system, to evaluate and review the program once it is under way, and to ensure the anonymity of those submitting reports. The group would include aviation and consumer groups and others involved in operational aspects of the national aviation system. (NASA Release 75—273)
The U.S. space program was an adventure whose potential benefits were undefinable and incalculable, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher told the National Academy of Engineering. Speaking on the “Outlook for the Space Program,” Dr. Fletcher noted that the public and the Congress were “now” oriented, and that concentration on immediate benefits might jeopardize “the vast potential” of the national space program. Admitting that “NASA’s present actions seem to speak louder than its words,” in that its money had been spent on current needs rather than on tomorrow’s goals, Dr. Fletcher said this did not result from lack of vision but from “accommodation with current constraints.” Projects to be considered for NASA’s future should include satellite systems to beam solar energy to earth; a permanent manned space station in orbit, as a forerunner of the space colony that had been proposed; exploration of the planets expanded to interstellar missions; and making contact with another intelligent race—“the most significant achievement of this millennium.” (Text; NASA Release 75—294)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that the combined efforts of government and industry could reduce fuel consumption of civil air transport by 40 to 50% without degrading the environment or reducing aircraft safety. The conclusion was based on a study by NASA, Federal Aviation Administration, DOD, and industry at the request of the committee. Need for a vigorous fuel-conservation program had been underscored by estimates from the Federal Energy Administration and Air Transport Association of America that U.S. outlays for imported oil had increased from $3 billion in 1970 to $24 billion in 1974, and could reach $32 billion by 1977. Jet fuel costs had risen from 12 cents a gallon (4.4 cents per liter) in 1973 to 29 cents (10.5 cents) in 1975. NASA studies had shown that, by the year 2005, the U.S. could save one million barrels of refined aircraft fuel per day by use of new technology in civil air transport. NASA’s proposed fuel-efficiency plan would include six major programs of research on engine components, engine efficiency, aircraft design, turboprop performance, laminar flow control and drag reduction, and increased use of composite materials for aircraft parts. (Transcript, NASA Release 75—252)
NASA had begun a demonstration of hydrogen-injection technology, a technique that could help reduce fuel consumption in large aircraft engines by 20 to 25% and lower emissions of pollutants from general-aviation engines. Working with the Federal Aviation Administration and industry, NASA was studying minor engine modifications that would reduce characteristic engine emissions. A separate NASA-industry program was investigating emission reduction and fuel efficiency by means of more extensive changes in the basic design of aircraft engines. In a third program, NASA was investigating both the noise and the emission characteristics of small general-aviation engines. (NASA Release 75-198)
NASA was inviting scientists to propose experiments for a 1979 mission that would fly by Jupiter in 1981 and then travel to a mid-1985 encounter with Uranus. Although the mission was not yet approved, NASA officials wanted to select flight investigations early to initiate necessary science planning and development. (NASA Release 75 —127)
