NASA’s aviation safety reporting system (ASRS) received nearly 1500 reports in its first 3-mo operating period, which ended in mid-July, NASA announced. As a result of information in the reports, NASA forwarded 130 alert bulletins to the Federal Aviation Administration. Pilots and aircrew members submitted 62% of the reports, and air traffic control personnel 34%, indicating broad support for the program within the aviation community. About 99% of the reports included reporter identification that would permit NASA to follow up on the data if necessary; follow-up was used in more than 150 cases. Twelve of the reports concerned aircraft accidents and were forwarded to the Natl. Transportation Safety Board and the FAA as required; none of the reports contained information relating to a criminal offense. All other reports had the reporters’ names removed, as specified in the agreement between NASA and the FAA, before the information was forwarded. Review of the information so far had revealed some “less obvious problems” with the national aviation system, NASA said, and analysis would proceed shortly: problems included equipment malfunction, communications breakdown, flight operations, and personnel workloads. (NASA Release 76-177)
Congress’s Joint Committee on Defense Production, inquiring into government-contractor activities involving hospitality or gratuities toward federal employees, revealed that Rockwell International Corp. had entertained Eugene A. Cernan and Ronald E. Evans, NASA astronauts, at a facility on Bimini in the Bahamas, in addition to 11 other NASA employees who had enjoyed hospitality at a hunting lodge in Md. Both Rockwell and Northrop Corp., another NASA contractor, ran hunting lodges on the eastern shore of Md. where 13 NASA employees and one former employee had acknowledged acceptance of entertainment. The DOD had announced it would reprimand its chief of research, Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, and dock his pay, for accepting a similar weekend from Rockwell. (W Star, 19 Mar 76, A-l; WSJ, 17 Mar 76, 17)
An enormous explosion in central Siberia that shook the world 68 yr ago might have been caused by the crash of a nuclear-powered spaceship from an alien planet, according to the Soviet news agency Tass, reported in the Washington Star. Tass quoted scientist Aleksey Zolotov, who had just returned from a survey of a remote river valley at Tunguska. On 30 June 1908, a blast estimated as up to 2000 times more powerful than the first atomic bomb had shaken measuring devices all over the world and had been heard nearly 1200 km away from Tunguska. Trees had been uprooted as far as 50 km from the site, and ground tremors had thrown to the ground horses that were pulling plows as far away as 380 km. Most scientists had attributed the explosion to the impact of a meteorite or comet with a mass of 10 million tons and measuring mor' than 90 meters across. Zolotov told Tass that his survey team had found higher than normal radioactivity in remnants of trees near the site; also taken were samples of permafrost soil. “Our investigation . . . seems to confirm our assumption that what took place in the Tungus taiga was a nuclear explosion,” Zolotov said. “It is from this point of view that we are exploring the possibility of the artificial origin of the Tungus cosmic body.” Tass did not give figures for the radiation study, nor did it identify Zolotov beyond saying he was a “noted Soviet scientist . . . who has been studying the Tungus mystery for years.” (WStar, 15 Oct 76, A-4) 17 October: Two recently published hooks on “the worst disaster in aviation history—the crash of a Turkish Airlines DC-10 outside Paris that killed at least 346 people in March, 1974—” alleged that the disaster was not only preventable but was predicted in detail years before it happened, the Washington Post reported. Destination Disaster, by an investigating team from the London Sunday Times, aimed at inspiring another congressional investigation into “corporate and governmental interworkings that contributed to the disaster,” the Post said; The Last Nine Minutes, by Moira Johnston, was a more subjective and personal account of the same crash. Senate and House hearings in the summer of 1974 had revealed that a technically similar accident in June 1972 had exposed an error in the design of the DC-10: a faulty locking system for the door of the large cargo compartment. The 1972 mishap had resulted in a “gentlemen’s agreement” between the administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and the president of the Douglas Division, McDonnell Douglas, that the lock would be fixed but that FAA would not issue a public and legally binding “airworthiness directive” mandating the repair. After the agreement was reached, the director of product engineering for the Convair Division of General Dynamics, subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas for the fuselage (including the door), wrote a long memorandum expressing concern about the door. Neither this memo nor another Convair memo on the question of liability for the cost of modifications ever reached McDonnell Douglas, the authors said, although evidence existed that McDonnell Douglas was fully aware of the problem nevertheless. Turkish Airlines, which was responsible for maintenance after the DC-10 was delivered, was sharing in liability settlements with McDonnell Douglas, General Dynamics, and the FAA, according to attorneys, who said total liability from the crash would probably set a single-accident record. The Post noted that FAA had issued 147 airworthiness directives in 1973; in 1974, year of the crash, the number was 299; in 1975, the number rose to 445. Private consultant Charles 0. Miller, former chief of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board’s bureau of aviation safety, who had gone to Paris to assist in investigation of the Turkish Airlines crash, said in a recent interview that the Convair memoranda and other documentation that provided background to the technical decisions had been turned up by the liability lawyers rather than by the crash investigators or by congressional investigators. (W Post, 17 Oct 76, A-l, A-12)
Three NASA employees were among 16 career federal employees selected as winners of the Natl. Civil Service League’s 1976 career service awards. In ceremonies at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., those honored included former astronaut Michael Collins, third U.S. man to walk in space, selected for his work with the Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum, of which he had been director since April 1971; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC; and Charles F. Hall, Pioneer project manager at ARC, where he had worked since 1942 beginning with NACA. (WStar, 23 Oct 76, C-8; WPost, 19 Oct 76, C2)
Rear Admiral Stuart J. Evans had been named NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Procurement, effective 1 June, NASA announced. Adm. Evans, the Deputy Chief of Naval Procurement, would assume his new post after retiring from the Navy 31 May 1976. He would succeed Rear Admiral Kenneth L. Woodfin (Ret.), present Assistant Administrator for Procurement, who had announced his plans to leave NASA after a year’s service to join a private firm. Adm. Woodfin had been Deputy Chief of Naval Material (Procurement and Production) before coming to NASA. (NASA Releases 76-68, 76-78)
NASA announced it would cosponsor a conference 21 Sept, at the Univ. of Conn, on transfer of biomedical instrument technology. The conference, also sponsored by the New England Research Applications Center, the Conn. Dept of Commerce, the Conn. Product Development Corp., and the Univ. of Conn. Health Center, would display technology developed by NASA for the manned space program to manufacturers and show how the technology could be applied to develop improved medical equipment and techniques. Hundreds of improvements based on NASA technology were already in use by the medical community, ranging from bio-isolation garments to a rechargeable cardiac pacemaker. At the conference, medical experts from NASA Hq, JSC, and NASA’s biomedical and technology applications teams would describe the types of technology available to industry and the medical community, and the role NASA could play in helping to commercialize new products. NASA’s program of licensing patents would also be explained. (NASA Release 76-144)
Officials of U.S. airlines told Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman, Jr., in an all-day hearing that lack of government help in financing the costs of government-imposed rules for quieting planes could lead to severe setbacks in service, such as wholesale groundings, diminished competition, fuel waste, less relief from noise, and possible loss of the national lead in aircraft technology. The airlines had suggested a plan last spring to set aside a fourth of the 8% ticket tax for replacement or refitting of planes that exceeded the new noise limits. Opposed to this plan was James C. Miller 3d, assistant director of the administration’s council on wage and price stability, who said that he would favor a “pollution tax,” imposed on planes inversely to the amount of noise suppression achieved, rather than “a subsidy from the public purse.” Secy. Coleman said he would make a recommendation to the outgoing Ford administration by the end of Dec. New noise rides promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration, DOT, were to take effect on 1 Jan., setting up a 4- to 8-yr timetable for replacing or refitting aircraft that did not comply with stringent limits on noise. (NYT, 2 Dec 76, 21)
Detente, to be meaningful to U.S. scientists, must include progress toward more intercommunication and openness, said Dr. Bruce Murray of CalTech and Merton E. Davies of RAND Corp. in an article in Science magazine. Noting that for nearly 2 decades the space program of the U.S. and the USSR were bound together through rivalry, competition, and— most recently—cooperation, the authors found it appropriate upon completion of the Apollo-Soyuz mission to review relationships between the 2 countries and focus on areas of possible common interest. The interrelationship with the Soviet space effort had stimulated both societies and had influenced the character of individual programs, the authors said. Future joint activities could take three forms: data exchange, cooperative experiments, and joint operations. Examples cited were exchanges of weather-satellite pictures, lunar soil and rock samples, and limited data on Mars obtained during simultaneous missions in 1971; the U.S. biological experiments carried on Cosmos 782, launched and returned to earth in 1975; and the joint operation of Apollo-Soyuz, which demonstrated the practicality of such missions despite differences in language, institutions, technology, and style. Joint scientiflc progress in space would depend on broader social objectives and activity, supported by popular enthusiasm for intellectual and generally human adventure, the authors said. (Science, 11 June 76, 1067)
The Dept, of Transportation announced that the Federal Aviation Administration had awarded a $125 363 contract to York Univ., Ontario, Canada, for a program to measure ozone and the oxides of nitrogen present in all aircraft-engine emissions in the stratosphere. The program, to begin in the spring of 1977 in cooperation with NOAA’s Aeronomy Laboratory in Boulder, Colo., would use detection instruments lifted by balloons to an altitude of more than 35 km for the first simultaneous measurement of three types of nitrogen oxides and ozone; determining the high-altitude level of nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, and dinitrogen pentoxide would be an important step in finding the role of these oxides in maintaining the ozone balance. The contract would support the High Altitude Pollution Program, started in 1975 as part of DOT’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program; York Univ., which participated in CIAP, had in 1972 provided the first data on the stratospheric density of nitric oxide under the direction of Prof. Harold Schiff, a pioneer in the field. (DOT Release 76-122)
“No useful data” appeared in photographs taken during the artificial-eclipse experiment on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine, quoting U.S. scientists who examined the photographs. This view contrasted with earlier Soviet statements. The experiment consisted of Apollo’s blocking out the solar disk while pictures of the corona were made from the Soyuz. According to the magazine, many NASA officials and U.S. scientists “believed privately before the flight that the Soviet experiment would produce only marginal results.” (Av Wk, 26 Apr 76, 11)
Two NASA laboratories had spearheaded “the most ambitious effort so far to detect radio emissions from distant civilizations,” Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. The project, known as SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), would use a specially constructed device called a multichannel spectral analyzer with various radio telescopes to scan simultaneously a million different frequency bands within a range known to scientists as the “waterhole.” This part of the spectrum lies between the frequencies emitted by hydrogen atoms adrift in space (1420 mhz) and those from hydroxyl, composed of one hydrogen and one oxygen atom (1662 mhz), which combines with hydrogen to form water; the frequency range had been chosen as “a logical rendezvous for intelligent creatures trying to make contact for the first time.” Ames Research Center would have primary responsibility for program management and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use its worldwide network of antennas besides providing instruments for the multichannel system, including a data processor capable of handling 6 million channels. NASA officials noted that the search would not depend on deliberate efforts at communication by other civilizations, citing the detectable radio energy emitted by the earth in normal space operations, television transmissions, and so forth. (NYT, 2 Nov 76, 16)
