Calif. Gov. Edmund G. Brown, Jr., hailed the advent of the space age at a Space Day gala in Los Angeles sponsored by 11 aerospace companies and the United Bank of Calif. More than a thousand persons attended the exhibit, prelude to the Shuttle orbiter free flight Aug. 12 over the Mojave desert. The program included two space movies, as well as speeches by Carl Sagan on planetary exploration, Gerard K. O’Neill on space colonies, and Jacques Yves Cousteau on spaceflight and the oceans of the world. [WPost, Aug 12/77, A-9)
JSC reported that NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had approved development of a teleoperator retrieval system to be flown no later than Feb. 1980 as a Skylab-revisit mission. JSC would be responsible for integrating the TRS into the Shuttle and for planning and operations. Harold E. Gartrell, assistant manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development office at JSC, would manage JSC activities for the Skylab revisit and would work with the Shuttle program office on integrating that mission with the Shuttle orbital-flight test planners. His office would be responsible for interfaces outside JSC in preparing and conducting the mission. (JSC Roundup, Dec 23/77, 1) •
WFC announced it would officially open a new management education center Sept. 30 with Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, presiding. A unit of the Hq office of professional development, the center would offer short-term residential programs (3-day seminars to 2-wk courses) designed to train future agency leaders. (WFC Release 77-12; NASA Release 77-202)
NASA announced that LaRC had undertaken a program called CLASS (cargo logistics airlift-systems study) to see whether tailoring an advanced air freighter design to an integrated transportation system could mean air-cargo growth and higher carrier profits. NASA had negotiated twin study contracts with Lockheed-Georgia Co. and with Douglas Aircraft Co. to survey air-cargo operations at major airports; to estimate present and future air-cargo demand, based on shipper response to reduced cost and improved service; and to study the need for improved efficiency in air-cargo operations, and for research and technology to support the design of future cargo aircraft. The studies had begun June 1 and would continue for 1 lmo. LaRC would exchange information in the study with government and industry organizations including the Dept, of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Dept, of Defense, and private companies such as airframe manufacturers, air shippers, commercial airlines, and freight forwarders. (NASA Release 77-122; LaRC Release 77-26)
NASA announced the E.S. (Todd) Groo, associate administrator for center operations since 1974, would leave the agency July 23. Ray Kline would succeed him, remaining assistant administrator for institutional management. Deputy NASA Administrator Alan W. Lovelace said Groo had benefited the agency by clarifying the missions of the field centers and instituting training for future managers. (NASA Release 77-134; NASA anno June 29/77)
The Dept, of Transportation reported that the Federal Aviation Administration would demonstrate an advanced all-weather microwave landing system Dec. 5-9 at JFK International Airport using a NASA Boeing 737 to fly a series of curved approaches and automatic landings like those recently flown at other locations, most recently Buenos Aires. The Inti. Civil Aviation Organization had recently tested the equipment as a replacement for 40-yr-old instrument-landing systems. Beginning Feb. 22, the British government would demonstrate a different MLS on the same runway to obtain comparative data on the two systems; similar comparisons would proceed at other locations abroad. In March 1977 the ICAO all-weather operations panel had endorsed the MLS design proposed by the U.S. and Australia, to be considered by the full membership of ICAO meeting in 1978. (DOT Release FAA-118-77)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, reported on a nationwide poll of its members asking what three problems aviation faced today: the government rated first, then fuel costs and air traffic control, including the quality of weather information at airports. Inconsistent policies and the need for regulatory reform were the main complaints. U.S. efforts to control business arrangements for foreign military sales displeased 71%, who said the effort harmed U.S. aircraft manufacturers. Members wanted the U.S. to build an SST and open its airports to the Concorde (by an 84% vote); on subcontracting construction of some aircraft to European nations, to standardize and render interchangeable NATO’s military equipment, the members split 52 to 48% in favor of keeping the business at home. (NAA newsletter Nov 30/77) During November: The USAF reported completion of 40mo of tests in a joint U.S.-Canadian project using an XC-8A Buffalo military cargo plane from Canada with a huge air-filled rubber doughnut for landing gear, to prove the feasibility of an air cushion landing system for large transport aircraft. Tests mostly at Wright Patterson AFB consisted of 84 flights, 34 of them air cushion takeoffs and 39 landings on grass, snow, and hard surfaces, with 25mi of taxiing over the same surfaces and over obstacles. Wallace Buzzard, program manager for the USAF flight-dynamics laboratory, said that besides being able to operate on difficult surfaces the air-cushioned plane “also taxied smoothly over a 30ft-long ramp with a 9in dropoff, crafters 6ft in diameter, and ditches 2ft wide. An aircraft with a conventional landing gear simply can’t do those things; it would be seriously damaged if not wrecked.” The tests included numerous inflight inflations and deflations of the air cushion, and tests of flying quality: the pilot found he could control the aircraft in crosswinds as high as 20mph, letting the pressure assist him in moving it to a particular point although taxiing sideways. Whereas most planes would descend for a soft landing at about 3ft per sec, the air cushion plane could soft-land at a rate of 8ft per sec with a 6° nose angle. The XC-8A weighed 33,0001b during the tests without cargo; Buzzard said it could have tested the same fully loaded, probably becoming more efficient with increased weight. “Outfitting an aircraft weighing more than a million lb with conventional landing gear will be extremely difficult,” he said. “An ACLS could handle aircraft as heavy as 3 million lb and be competitive in weight with conventional landing systems.” (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 77, 1)
The USSR had increased its military use of space, AvWk reported. Killer-satellite systems tested during 1976 appeared operational. The Soviets in 1976 had launched 33 reconnaissance missions (the core of their military space program) and apparently had added to their military comsat system as well. (AvWk, Mar 14/77, 63)
Candidates for the post of NASA administrator, according to the WPost, included Christopher C. Kraft, director of JSC; A1 Kelly and Rocco Petrone, former NASA officials; and Frank Moss, former chairman of the Senate Space Committee and an early Carter supporter. (W Post, Mar 21/77, A3)
Aviation Week reported that President Carter had nominated Langhorne M. Bond, state secretary of transportation for Illinois, to head the Federal Aviation Administration, and Quentin Taylor, FAA director in New England, as deputy administrator. (AvWk, Apr 4/77, 23)
NASA announced that Bradford Johnston, associate administrator for the Office of Applications since June 1976, would resign effective Sept. 30. Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, said that Johnston’s contributions to useful applications of space techniques had made the program more responsive to national needs. (NASA anno Aug 5/77; NASA Release 77-166)
LaRC reported that its plans for a trash-burning steam plant called Project RECOUP [see Oct. 6] had hit a snag when the center opened construction bids Dec. 7. All four bids were higher than expected, the lowest being about $1.4 million more than the government’s estimate, which was about $8 million. Funds available to the center for the plant, including contingencies, totaled no more than $8.4 million. Leo Daspit, LaRC project manager, said he would have to meet with his counterparts in the city of Hampton and at Langley AFB to “explore our options.” (Langley Researcher, Dec 23/77, 3) •
NASA announced that its aviation safety reporting system begun in 1976 for the Federal Aviation Administration had been a success, as evaluated by a NASA Advisory Council subcommittee established in Feb. 1977. During the system’s first year, pilots, air traffic controllers, and others working in national aviation had voluntarily submitted about 5500 safety-problem reports that had been fed into a computer to note trends and monitor corrections. Next evaluation would be in June 1979. (NASA Release 77-137)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher gave the agency’s distinguished public service medal to United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, at a ceremony at the Natl. Air and Space Museum. Dr. Waldheim received the award for outstanding leadership as chairman of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space from 1965 to 1968 and from 1970 to 1971, and for “enduring contributions to the development of a constructive international consensus, during the critical formative years, on the challenging issues presented by man’s first uses of outer space.” (Text of presentation)
