Preliminary results of a yr-long energy-conservation study at LaRC had indicated that a family could save money and energy using new technical systems developed in the space program, NASA announced. A family of four that volunteered to live in a conventional house equipped with unconventional technical systems designed to save energy and water, had achieved the following results: total energy used for all purposes, including heating and cooling, was a little less than half the amount used by a conventional all-electric home under the same conditions. Total dollar savings from use of less energy and water had amounted to more than $1200 for the yr, an average of more than $100 a mo. The Technology Utilization House (called Tech House) was a contemporary-style home built at LaRC to test equipment available or to be shortly available. The family of Dr. Charles Swain, professor at Florida State Univ. in Tallahassee, had volunteered to live in the house for a year to test the technical systems under normal living conditions. Swain, his wife, daughter of 18, and son of 13 had moved into the house in August 1977 to live as normally as possible, while many of their actions were monitored, sensed, measured, and turned into computer printouts of data numbers. Early research results had indicated that all the systems incorporated in the Tech House had been put to use. Although some systems worked better than predicted, and others did not work as well, the technical information collected would be useful in redesigning or modifying some of the systems to make them more efficient. Analysis of the experiment data would tell engineers much more about how to customize systems to fit particular kinds of houses, to suit areas of the country with different geographical and climate conditions, or to meet special needs of individuals. One possible “sleeper” system incorporated in the Tech House—the water recycling equipment—might greatly benefit future homeowners if the U.S. continued to experience periodic water shortages. Preliminary performance data from some of the major systems indicated that thermal-design features such as improved insulation and double-door entries had accounted for about 60% of energy savings. Solar collectors on the roof and a solar-supplemented heat-pump system had supplied more than 50% of the energy required to heat the house, amounting to about $300 in energy-cost savings. The Tech House, funded by NASA’s Office of Technology Utilization, had been completed in June 1976 and opened to the public for a yr before the Swains moved in. (NASA Release 78-135)
A Canadian Air Force transport searching for radioactive contamination from a Soviet satellite that disintegrated over northwest Canada had reported a “highly probable” radiation contact, the W. Star reported, first to be discovered since Jan. 24 when the crippled Cosmos 954 satellite powered by a nuclear reactor containing 1001b of highly radioactive uranium 235 had reentered earth’s atmosphere. The occurrence had sparked controversy over hazards of radioactive space debris; the U.S. space program had used radioisotope power systems, but had launched only one fission reactor, that on the Snap 10A test vehicle. Fission reactors such as that on Cosmos 954 would create strontium, cesium, and cerium byproducts potentially lethal if radiation dosages were high or prolonged. The USSR had launched at least 10 reactors on spacecraft like Cosmos 954, 16 with the same operating parameters having flown since Dec. 27, 1967; it had put all the reactor craft except Cosmos 954 in safe high orbit. The Soviet and U.S. governments had kept close contact during the incident. National Security Affairs Assistant Zbigniew Brzezinski, quoted by TASS, said, “I would like to point out two things: first that this incident which, to my mind, is nothing out of the ordinary in the space age, is fully controlled so we believe there is no danger. . . . Second, that the governments of the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other governments concerned cooperated intensively concerning this matter.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 25/78, Jan 28/78; W Star, Jan 26/78, A-l; AvWk, Jan 30/78, 33; Economist, Jan 28/78, 75)
Former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal at a ceremony at NASA Hq on Jan. 30, 1978. Dr. Frank Press, President Carter’s science adviser, made the presentation in recognition of Dr. Fletcher’s “distinguished leadership . . . outstanding scientific and administrative abilities . . . and contribution to the nation’s significant achievements in the exploration of space and utilization of space to manage the earth’s resources.” Dr. Press noted, “His decision to proceed with the development of the Shuttle orbiter exemplified the perceptive leadership which foresaw space as a giant laboratory where men will work to improve the future of all mankind.” Dr. Fletcher, who was NASA administrator from April 27, 1971 until May 1, 1977, was a consulting engineer and vice president of the National Space Institute in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 78-18, Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 1)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch announced that, upon signature by the President of the Inspector General Bill (or on October 1, 1978, whichever was later), NASA would establish an Office of Inspector General consisting of the present NASA management audit office and the NASA office of inspections and security. Pending nomination by the President and confirmation by the Senate of a NASA inspector general, Robert Allnutt would act in that position. (NASA anno Sept 29/78)	,
JPL Universe reported NASA Administrator Robert Frosch had characterized the Pioneer Venus mission as “a superb success” in a message congratulating personnel at NASA centers and in the industrial and scientific communities. Frosch had added: “The precise execution of the multiprobe encounters December 9 and the continuing excellent performance of the orbiter could have resulted only from a well planned and competently executed program . . .” The orbiter would continue its scientific measurements for 243da after Venus encounter; however, three small probes and a larger sounder had plunged into the Venusian atmosphere with destruction expected immediately upon impact. To the surprise of Pioneer Venus scientists, one probe had survived for 67min after impact, sending back information that would help confirm probe findings (particularly a wind experiment) before the 900° Venus temperatures silenced it. (JPL Universe, Dec 21/78, 1)
Av Wk reported the Federal Aviation Administration prediction of an increase in the general aviation fleet from 186 600 active civilian aircraft in 1978 to 310 800 in 1990. Preliminary data indicated that hrs flown in general aviation aircraft reached 38.6 million in FY78, up 5.2% from 36.7 million ih FY77. The FAA also predicted that by 1990 general aviation aircraft would be flying 67.4 million hr, increasing 4.8% yearly to 74.6% over the 1978 total. The lower increase of annual hrs flown resulted from the current emphasis on conservation of resources, FAA said. Operating costs, expected to rise more rapidly than inflation, would affect private flying for pleasure. (AvWk, Dec 11/78, 70)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan Lovelace announced the convening of a review board to determine the cause of the SeaSat failure [see Oct. 11]. Lovelace named Dr. Bruce Lundin, recently retired director of LeRC, to head the review board, with other members to be named shortly. In 1973, Dr. Lundin had chaired the board that had investigated failure of Skylab 7’s solar panels to deploy in orbit. (NASA Release 78-160)
ESA reported results of an attempt to quantify economic returns from its expenditures on space research, by cataloging and quantifying the positive benefits to industrial firms participating in the European space program and by identifying economic spinoffs outside the space effort generated in European industry from ESA contracts. ESA wanted to know what benefits its payments had procured for European firms and what amounts they represented in financial terms. It had asked the Theoretical and Applied Economics Department of Louis Pasteur Univ., Strasbourg, France, to conduct the study. Information collected from ESA contractors had identified and quantified 171 specific cases of benefit: for example, sales of new products, increased sales, maintenance of a production team, reduction of production and R&D costs, and amortization of equipment. The study classified the benefits under four major headings: technology, commerce, organization and methods, and work force efficiency. Benefits obtained outside ESA-member states accounted for 28% of the total, and 68% of the total benefit related to nonspace activities. Analysis showed the benefit/contracts ratio for each country was fairly uniform: for example, Germany 3.2, United Kingdom 2.9, Italy 2.6, France 2.5, and other member states, 2.2.	' This study of secondary economic effects generated by ESA contracts confirmed the agency’s success in promoting European industry worldwide. Moreover, the showing of economic benefits to individual countries demonstrated that they exceeded the amounts governments had invested in space research. A second phase of the study would produce a more precise analysis of the benefits by including economic factors not previously taken into account. (ESA Release Nov 23/78)
The Federal Aviation Administration would demonstrate in Europe and Africa in early 1978 a family of advanced all-weather landing systems, Administrator Langhorne Bond announced. The FAA would airlift three versions of the time-reference scanning-beam microwave landing system (TRSB/MLS) developed by the U.S. and Australia to four overseas sites in Jan. and Feb. to demonstrate the new approach-and-landing aid at various airport environments. TRSB/MLS versions designed for small community airports would be demonstrated Jan. 23 and 24 at Kristiansand’s Kjevik Airport in Norway, and in Feb. at Dakar’s Yoff Airport in Senegal; at the Nairobi, Kenya, airport; and at Gosselies Airport outside Brussels, Belgium. FAA would demonstrate an expanded TRSB/MLS system Feb. 1-3 at the Brussels airport. The U.S. and Australia had proposed TRSB/MLS to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) as the new worldwide standard allweather approach-and-landing guidance system. (FAA Release 3-78)
Av Wk reported that President Carter had signed a policy directive establishing a unified policy for all U.S. military and civilian space programs that would broaden the civilian role in both military and civilian areas. Civilian space programs had not previously benefited from military R&D because of security restrictions; the new policy would reduce restrictions on technology transfer from the military to the civilian sector. Civilian space projects and users of civilian space technology (such as the Dept, of Agriculture) that had not had access to data from military programs (such as imagery from U.S. photoreconnaissance spacecraft) would be able to use in the civilian sector data gathered by military spacecraft. Space programs on weather and climate, land use, and earth resources could now use military data where applicable. The directive had named presidential science adviser Frank Press to head a U.S. space program coordinating committee of users and suppliers of space data. The committee would oversee development and coordination of both military and civilian programs. The policy also attempted to identify and reduce stresses among the four major U.S. space programs: intelligence-community programs using spacecraft such as Lockheed’s “Big Bird” high-resolution reconnaissance satellite; DOD space programs using spacecraft such as the defense satellite communications system (Dscs) vehicles; civilian/government space programs using vehicles such as those flown by NASA and NOAA; and civilian/private-program spacecraft users such as commercial communications-satellite operators, and possibly future commercial remote-sensing companies. (AvWk, May 29/78, 23)
NASA announced two promotions: James Morrison to the position of European representative, and Louis Lushina to director of the information systems division, Office of Management Operations. For the past 3.5yr Morrison had managed the earth resources survey program in NASA’s Office of Applications; before that, he had served for 12yr in NASA’s Office of International Affairs. He had been an F-86 and F-100 pilot and served as a flight commander, operations officer, and squadron commander. As European representative, Morrison would be liaison between NASA and European space agencies. In his new position, Lushina would be responsible for managing agencywide information-systems efforts and ADP resources. He had come to NASA in 1968 from the Army Materiel Command and had served since then as deputy of financial management in the Office of the Comptroller. Previously he was deputy comptroller of the U.S. Army Communications Zone in Europe and of the U.S. Army Supply and Maintenance Command, and assistant comptroller of the U.S. Army Ordnance Corps. He held the NASA exceptional service medal and the Army’s meritorious civilian service medal. (NASA Release 78-23; NASA anno Feb 14/78, Feb 15/78)
Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, announced a reorganization at NASA Hq to significantly restructure organization elements such as Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space and Terrestrial Applications, External Relations, and Management Operations, with lesser changes in the Equal Opportunity, Procurement, and Audit organizations. Frosch’s Feb. 22 approval of the new organization structures had authorized office heads to proceed with final placement of people. In explaining the reorganization, Alan Lovelace, deputy administrator, said: “In keeping with the announced policy of President Carter, each Headquarters employee affected by the reorganization will be made a good-faith offer of a position and to the extent possible the offer will be made at the employee’s current grade level. As I announced previously, there will be no involuntary reduction in force at NASA Headquarters. . . . The classification survey of Headquarters positions has been completed. Based on tentative aggregate findings in the survey thus far, plus the potential impact of the reorganization, Dr. Frosch has asked the Civil Service Commission for authority to delay any demotions for people in the General Schedule resulting from survey results and the impact of the reorganization. NASA was granted such authority on Feb. 22. . . . As to future classification activity, it is important that we maintain a rigorous system for the accurate classification and grading of all Headquarters positions. ... I would like to assure you that we are taking all of the steps possible to provide appropriate job opportunities for all Headquarters employees and, to the extent we can, we shall do our best to avoid adverse impacts.” (NASA special anno Feb 27/78)
