The New York Times said President Carter planned to meet with NASA officials to review Shuttle management and funding. The report said NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch would ask for more money to prevent further serious delays in Shuttle production and testing. Estimated Shuttle spending for FY81 would be $1 billion. NASA’s original estimate of Shuttle cost was $5.15 billion in 1971 dollars, to include delivery of two of four of the planned spacecraft; current estimate was $6.1 billion in 1971 dollars, a 20% increase. Rockwell International had delivered only one flight vehicle, now at KSC for preflight checks and installation of insulating tiles. (NY Times, Nov 5/79, A-l)
NASA reported delivery of a second experimental turbofan engine produced by AVCO Corporation for a program called QCGAT (quiet clean general-aviation turbofan) to LeRC for testing. The program aimed at decreasing noise and exhaust emissions while maintaining or reducing fuel consumption, compared with present general-aviation turbofans. The first engine in the program arrived at LeRC last winter from its designer/builder Garrett AiResearch; results of tests on that engine showed noise reduction of about 10 decibels and emission reduction of 54% for carbon monoxide and 76% for unburned hydrocarbons. Preliminary AVCO results showed noise-level reduction of at least 14 decibels compared to the quietest business jet now in service, and emission levels even lower than those of the first engine. Noise reduction in the AVCO engine resulted from improved design of internal engine parts (using soundabsorbing materials to muffle noise from fan, compressor, and turbine) and reduced engine-exhaust velocity. LeRC project manager G. Kenneth Sievers said test results from both engines showed “noise need not be a major constraint” on use of turbofan-powered aircraft for general aviation. (NASA Release 79-137)
MSFC announced that it had issued requests for proposals to design a 25-kilowatt power system to provide supplemental solar power for long-duration Shuttle missions or support free-flying payloads. In early spring of 1980 NASA would award two or more parallel contracts at $1 million each for studies to be completed within 12 months. Development would begin in 1982; the system would fly its first mission in 1984-1985 attached to a Shuttle orbiter carrying a Spacelab, to provide additional power and attitude and heat control. The power system on this mission would carry an experiments pallet and would be left in space (after the orbiter completed its mission) to power the long-duration experiments riding on the pallet. Luther E. Powell, MSFC project manager, said the power system would be forerunner of future large systems in space, such as service platforms and other unmanned large space structures. (MSFC Release 79-103)
