Insulation that separated from the Space Shuttle’s huge external fuel tank would delay the long-awaited launch to a time “no earlier than the week of April 5,” NASA announced. Columbia’s maiden flight was already more than two years behind its original schedule because of technical probable causing a series of postponents. The new difficulty was discovered in preflight tests at Cape Canaveral in which over a half-million gallons of supercold liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen were pumped into the fuel tank for the first time. The new delay was “the first substantial” problem encountered since July 1980 and was not related to earlier problems with the Shuttle’s ceramic-tile insulation. During tanking tests, two areas on the external tank—one about 7x8 feet, the other about 4x4 feet—became debonded. The loose insulation would have to be rebonded before launch. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Jan 28/81; NASA Releases 81-15, 81-25; W Post, Feb 3/81, A-7; W Star, Feb 3/81, A-8)
LaRC said that it was conducting, under contract with McDonnell Douglas Corporation, a test program on widebody commercial DC-10 aircraft to measure the effect on fuel efficiency of winglets, small structures attached to the tips of airplane wings perpendicular to the wing surfaces. Winglets would reduce fuel-consuming drag by lessening the effect of vortices, turbulent air swirls forming during flight at tips of all aircraft wings. Developed by aeronautical designer Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, recently retired from LaRC, the concept had been tested on several types of small aircraft but not on a plane as large as the DC-10. Winglets were already in use on the Gates Learjet 55 and Grumman’s Gulfstream III. Wind-tunnel tests showed a drop of about 3% in fuel use, which would mean an annual saving per plane of about 250,000 gallons of fuel, now priced at more than Si a gallon. LaRC said that it was also working on the prevention of stall and spin in light aircraft by using the canard, a miniature wing sprouting from an aircraft’s nose area, first used by the Wright brothers at the turn of the century but neglected since then because of patent and flight-handling considerations. LaRC found that home-built airplane kits that used the canard to increase fuel efficiency also had impressive records of stall-spin safety. Tests of a model in LaRC’s spin tunnel showed that with proper loading the plane was “virtually impossible to spin.” Current tests would document the plane’s aerodynamic efficiency without trying to improve it. Although the canard did reduce a pilot’s area of vision in takeoff and landing, the tunnel data should show whether it could be relocated without sacrificing its safety features. NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program was seeking ways to reduce fuel consumption and improve safety. Four NASA centers were focused on aeronautical research: LaRC, LeRC, ARC, and DFRC. (NASA Releases 81-145, 81-155; LaRC Releases 81-68, 81-75)
NASA Headquarters released an official report on the investigation of the March 19, 1981, accident at KSC that killed two employees of Rockwell International, who went into the Shuttle’s aft compartment while it was filled with gaseous nitrogen. It had been determined that an all-clear signal was given too soon. Primary findings by an investigative board headed by Charles D. Gay, KSC director of expendable-vehicle operations, were that test procedures lacked adequate steps to clear a vehicle or pad for hazardous operations, or to partially or completely reopen the vehicle or pad for resumption of normal work; also, that a breakdown occurred in the operational command/coordination process. The report of more than 400 pages included 19 pages of findings, observations, and recommendations to prevent similar accidents in future. (NASA Release 81-85; W Post, June 20/81, A-5)
