A four-engine Boeing jetliner in a radio-controlled test of an aircraft fuel mixture called “antimisting kerosene” crashed on Rogers Dry Lake, California. A huge fireball engulfed three-fourths of the plane immediately after it crashed. The fireball lasted about six seconds and was followed by an outpouring of black smoke that often accompanies landing crashes. Flames from what officials called a “secondary fire” were visible through the smoke. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and NASA sponsored the $11.8 million crash primiarly to test the new fuel mixture, which was designed to prevent an explosive burst of flames in case of an accident. Safety specialists emphasized that it would take a long time to reconstruct precisely the sequence of events that left the Boeing 720 a much more devastated wreck than had been expected. An initial examination of the plane showed that the interior had been totally gutted by the fire that the crash produced. Despite the outcome, government and industry officials appeared willing to continue efforts to produce a practical way to minimize the fire risk from fuel spilled in accidents. (WPost, Dec 2/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 3/84, A-21; Time, Dec 10/84, 32; WTimes, Dec 3/84, 3A)
President Reagan established a National Commission on Space, to be composed of 15 members appointed or designated by the president; not more than 9 advisory, nonvoting members representing federal departments and agencies; 2 advisory, nonvoting members appointed by the president of the Senate Trom among the members of the Senate; and 2 advisory, nonvoting members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among mnembers of that body. The commission was directed to study existing and proposed U;S. space activities; formulate an agenda for the U.S. civilian space program; and identify long-range goals, opportunties, and policy options for civilian space activity for the next 20 years. It was to submit its plan and any recommendations for proposed legislation to the president and Congress within 12 months. (WH anno, Oct 13/84)
