Former NASA administrator James Beggs, General Dynamics, and three executives of the company today pleaded not guilty to charges of plotting to hide cost overruns during development of a prototype of the DIVAD antiaircraft gun [see NASA/Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], the Washington Post reported. "I plead not guilty to each count," Beggs, a former company executive, told U.S. District Court Judge Ferdinand Fernandez. Fernandez scheduled a trial to begin April 8, 1986, although prosecutor Randy Bellows said the case was too complex to be heard so quickly. Bellows said the government had 2.7 million documents to review. Thomas Sullivan, attorney for General Dynamics, told Fernandez that the defendants wanted the trial to begin in the spring because a government suspension of most contracts with the company until the case was resolved had put the defense contractor "in a real serious bind . . . This company could be literally . . . put out of business by this suspension," Sullivan said. Attorneys estimated the trial could take more than 12 weeks, with Bellows saying he would call at least 70 witnesses. (W Post, Dec 17/85, A13)
NASA announced that effective today it permanently established the office of NASA productivity programs to direct, initiate, coordinate, monitor, and evaluate agencywide productivity improvement and quality enhancement initiatives. David Braunstein would continue as the office's director and would report to the NASA administrator. The office was established to ensure NASA's leadership in the development and application of advanced technology and management practices that contributed to significant increases in agency and national productivity. In making the announcement, NASA Administrator James Beggs said that NASA would provide a participative and challenging environment for all employees, and it would develop a team approach with its contractors to achieve the highest levels of productivity. (NASA announcement, May 15/85)
Speaking to a standing-room-only crowd at NASA Headquarters and all NASA centers via closed-circuit TV, former administrator James Beggs said today that federal fraud charges against him were "baseless" [see NASA/Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], that he expected to be cleared, and expressed thanks for an "outpouring" of support, the Washington Post reported. "These charges relate to things that happened in General Dynamics six and seven years ago," Beggs noted and said that he had reviewed the charges and believed, "we acted in an entirely ethical, legal and moral sense." "The charges, therefore, are baseless . . . They are outrageous, ridiculous and I feel confident that once this is brought to trial that I'll be completely exonerated of the charges." Beggs also noted that the suits against defense firms were creating a climate that would blight the work of NASA and of the defense community. "The very adversarial relationship that is being created by the suits against the contractors, the very bad kind of statements that are being made in the press, and elsewhere, is going to make our job in the future much more difficult," he said. "Not just here, but in the Defense Department as well." Earlier, the NY Times reported that all top 27 administrators at NASA and field installations had sent a statement to Congress and the White House endorsing Beggs as "an individual with the highest standards of integrity which have earned him the esteem and respect of his colleagues." The statement said he had revitalized the space program and regretted "the untimely interruption of his work," calling him a man of the "highest integrity, totally dedicated to NASA, an extremely able executive." (W Post, Dec 6/85, A16; NYT, Dec 6/85, A5)
NASA Administrator James Beggs announced that 21 teams submitted proposals to establish centers for the commercial development of space, the objective of which would be to stimulate high-technology research in the microgravity environment of space. NASA expected this research to lead eventually to development of new products that either had commercial potential or would contribute to possible commercial ventures. The research areas proposed by the teams included semiconductor crystal growth, remote sensing, communications technology, and biotechnology. A panel of technical, managerial, and financial experts would review over the next 45 to 60 days the proposals to identify winning proposals. NASA would fund, beginning around mid-September 1985, between three and six of the centers for up to $1 million per year each for a period not to exceed five years. (NASA Release 85-98)
As the lead center for Spacelab 2, MSFC hosted the two-day conference in which numerous science teams shared early data from the mission. The teams represented the science disciplines of solar physics, atmospheric physics, plasma physics, life sciences, technology research, infrared astronomy, and high-energy astrophysics. Among those attending the conference were many of the principal and co-investigators for the 13 experiments, all the payload and mission specialists, some invited members from NASA Headquarters who supported mission work, and a number of MSFC science and engineering team members. Some results thus far, according to Urban, confirmed what scientists had earlier predicted but could not measure, while other results yielded some surprises. For example, the superfluid helium experiment confirmed theoretical predictions of wave behavior of very thin films of super-cooled helium in microgravity. But the infrared telescope surprised researchers when it indicated that the "Shuttle glow" phenomenon observed on past flights was weak in the short infrared wavelength region, where the researchers expected it to be strong. The solar physics experiment also gathered much data, according to Urban. He cited in particular the experiment called SOUP, the Solar Optical Universal POlarimeter, which studied the visible surface of the sun. "We were able to obtain long sequences of high-resolution photos of the solar surface," he said. "We now have the means to study the growth and fading of various solar features like sunspots over long periods of time." An example of the special qualities of Spacelab 2 was the Vehicle Charging and Potential Experiment, VCAP, in which a beam of charged particles from an electron generator passed from the arbiter's payload bay through the ionosphere. "For the first time," Urban pointed out, "we had an interactive experiment with the VCAP in which we could observe the experiment remotely—from the Plasma Diagnostics Package, another experiment we allowed to free-fly and sense environmental conditions. Together the diagnostics package and VCAP found some highly interesting correlations between the man-made electron beam simulations of the ionosphere and naturally occuring auroras. The information will help us understand better how such auroras are formed from beams of charged particles from the sun." (Marshall Star, Nov 20/85, 1)
In a speech today before the National Space Club, President Reagan urged a greater U.S. effort in the commercial development of space and announced establishment of a 14-member National Space Commission, which he said would "devise an aggressive space agenda to carry America into the 21 st century," the NY Times reported. He said Thomas Paine, head of a consulting company on high-technology enterprises and former NASA administrator and president and chief operating office of the Northrup Corp., would lead the commission. Other commission members were Laurel Wilkening, NASA scientist who would be vice chairman; Jeanne Kirkpatrick, former U.S. ambassador to the U.N.; Brig. Gen. Charles Yeager, retired; Neil Armstrong, former astronaut who headed Computer Technology Aviation; Kathryn Sullivan, first American woman to walk in space; Luis Alvarez, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory physicist; Paul Coleman, Space Research Association president and professor of geophysics and space at the University of California, Los Angeles; George Field, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory senior physicist; Lt. Gen. William Fitch, retired, former Marine Corp. deputy chief of staff for aviation; Charles Herzfeld, vice president and director of research and technology at ITT; J. L. Kerrebrock, head of the department of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Gerard O'Neill, president of Geostar Corp.; and David Wfebb, a consultant for space development. President Reagan said the commission would develop long-term goals for civilian space enterprises, but he did not elaborate on the type of commercial space ventures he had in mind. He said only that, "Before the end of the century, many billions of dollars of commercial activity will be taking place in and because of space" and that the U.S. must use the incentives of individual freedom and the profit motive to encourage these commercial uses. (NYT, Mar 30/85, 1 A)
Responding to a suggestion made by President Reagan at a June 19 press conference that the U.S. expand its sky marshal force for use on international flights, Thomas Pyle, speaking for the International Air Transport Association, said security experts found little merit in the suggestion, the NY Times reported. "We're not happy about anybody having guns up in the air," he said. "There's a distinct danger to passenger^ and a bigger danger of damage to the aircraft." Pyle did acknowledge that there might be special occasions, including cases of known threats to particular flights, when marshals would be needed. Richard Lally, security chief for the association representing U.S. airlines and for the Federal Aviation Administration from 1974 to 1982, agreed with Pyle's assessment. "It is not an answer to the problem and introduces an impression that it is. It provides for a very dangerous situation." The views expressed by Pyle and Lally reflected the consensus of security experts that the best place to head off hijackings was on the ground. (NY Times, June 20/85, A20)
Fourteen-year-old Todd Holmes of Fort Smith, Arkansas, unofficially became the youngest person to solo in a glider, the Washington Times reported. According to Federal Aviation Administration regulations, a pilot had to be 14 before he or she could solo in any kind of aircraft and 16 to be licensed in a passenger-carrying glider or to fly a powered aircraft. The agency did not keep statistics on who might have been the youngest person ever to solo. Todd, who got his glider license on his 14th birthday, said, "I could've done it two weeks ago, but I had to wait until I was 14." (W Times, Aug 1/85, 4B)
Air safety experts, flight attendants, and some members of Congress were complaining that the emergency evacuation tests run by airlines had little resemblance to a real accident, the Washington Post reported. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations required that all jetliners pass an evacuation test that showed a planeful of passengers could be evacuated in 90 seconds. Such tests determined how many seats a plan must have in relations to the number of exits. However, flight attendants typically rehearsed several days for the tests in which there was no smoke, no fire, no elderly participants, or children. Federal regulations didn't prohibit manufacturers from using their own employees for the tests, although no "passenger" could rehearse for the evacuation. Although regulations required a certain percentage of elderly persons or children for the tests, FAA officials said they often waived the requirement because of concerns that they might be injured. Rep. James Oberstar (D-Minn.), whose U.S. House public works and transportation subcommittee on investigations and oversight monitored the FAA, said that changes in the FAA's handling of evacuation requirements were long overdue. "We've got . . . no uniformity, just sort of a haphazard approach to rule making and safety, and lives of people are at stake," he said. Rep. Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) of the same subcommittee called the approach to evacuation taken by the FAA and industry "just totally out of touch with the real world." The controversy over the adequacy of evacuation requirements had simmered for months since the FAA permitted the Boeing Co. to eliminate two of ten exit doors on its 747 jumbo jet. Boeing officials convinced the FAA to allow elimination of the two over-wing emergency doors on the plane, because federal regulations required two doors for every 110 seats and none of the 747s with sealed doors would carry more than 440 seats. The FAA's Seattle office, which handled certification of large commercial aircraft, approved the change without a test to see whether passengers actually could evacuate the plane within 90 seconds and instead relied on a mathematical calculation using old evacuation tests. Critics complained that those tests were themselves flawed. (WPost, Sept 6/85, A21)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced it had proposed a regulation requiring that all new transponders installed in aircraft after January 1, 1992, be compatible with the new Mode S, ground-based radar beacon system to give controllers more accurate aircraft position and identification information. In October 1984, the FAA ordered 137 Mode S ground stations from joint manufacturers Westinghouse/SDC-Burroughs and scheduled the first Mode S for delivery in the spring of 1987 to the FAA Technical Center in Atlantic City, In addition to position and identification information, the Mode S had a "selective" address capability, which gave the system its name and provided a channel for automatically transmitting weather and other data between air-traffic control facilities and aircraft in flight. The FAA already required that airplanes operating above 12,500 feet or in designated airport terminal control areas be equipped with a less sophisticated transponder. When triggered by the sweep of ground radar, this equipment sent back a signal that gave controllers a clean and enhanced target on their radar displays and also told them the aircraft's identity and altitude. A limitation of the current radar beacon system, which Mode S would replace, was that ground equipment interrogated simultaneously all aircraft in a given area, often resulting in overlapping and garbled signals on radar displays. Mode S eliminated this problem by addressing each aircraft on an individual or selective basis. The purpose of the proposed rule was to promote early installation of Mode S transponders, although existing transponders would not be obsolete; pilots could continue to fly with that equipment after January 1, 1992, until it needed replacement. (FAA Release 48-85)
NASA announced it signed with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Department of Defense (DOD) a memorandum of agreement to conduct a two-year study of the possible benefits to the nation of the continued development of tilt-rotor aircraft. In particular, the study would assess the broader implications of V-22 aircraft development, including the potential for other versions and sizes, both civil and military; civil certification issues; civil production impact on the defense industrial base; and any indirect technology spin-offs. Tilt-rotor aircraft combined the vertical take-off-and-landing ability of the helicopter with the relatively higher cruising speed and longer range of fixed-wing aircraft. A small proof-of-concept aircraft, the XV-15, was tested successfully, leading to a larger tilt-rotor aircraft, the V-22 Osprey, which DOD was developing. DOD expected the V-22 to bring the tilt-rotor configuration closer to maturity, enabling lower risk development of other versions and sizes, for both military and civilian use. The FAA would certify any civil versions of a U.S. tilt-rotor aircraft and would assess its impact on the national airspace system, airport and heliport development, and other air service needs. NASA acquired a high level of expertise in tilt-rotor technology during development and flight testing of the XV-15, and the agency also had a charter to study use of NASA-developed technology and to assess future research needs. (NASA Release 85-144)
The investigation into the August 12 crash in a remote mountain area of a Japan Air Lines Boeing 747-100SR after it lost most of its vertical stabilizer and rudders focused on damage in the aft pressure bulkhead of the aircraft, Aviation Week reported. Japan's Aircraft Accident Investigation Committee said it was attempting to determine whether the bulkhead damage was caused by a crack or cracks that existed in the bulkhead, by explosive decompression in the cabin, or by the crash impact. The Boeing Co. said inspections as of August 19 of the aft pressure shell of 43 Boeing 747 aircraft showed no evidence of cracks. In addition to cracks in the bulkhead, lower ends of 5 of 18 triangular panels, or gores, were buckled toward the rear. Boeing Co. had replaced 9 of the 18 panels after the aircraft was involved in a hard landing June 2, 1978. Further optional or mandated inspections of the wide-body transport fleet stalled the previous week due to lack of information on damage to the JAL aircraft. Information from Japan was sparse, partly because of restrictions placed on access to the wreckage and because of damage done to some of the vital evidence by members of the rescue team. Rescuers had cut the bulkhead into pieces and removed them to clear the way for rescue. Boeing's accident investigation team had not been able to make a close inspection of the bulkhead by the previous week. One of the few pieces of evidence—damage to the vertical fin—led Boeing to suggest that Boeing 747 operators inspect the fin and rudder structure. And reports that a depressurization occurred prompted the company to suggest inspection of the external and aft portion of the pressure shell structure. The Federal Aviation Administration declined to take action pending receipt of more information. (AvWk, Aug 26/85, 28)
Construction was proceeding at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) toward the October completion of the Shuttle Processing Contract (SPC) logistics facility to house approximately 190,000 items of Space Shuttle program stock, including orbiter fuel cells, various electrical components, tires, brakes, windows, nuts, bolts, and washers then stored in three KSC warehouses and four areas of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, the Spaceport News reported. NASA would consolidate seven Lockheed Logistics Directorate departments and its own Launch Support Services Directorate at the facility, with 500 Lockheed and NASA employees working in 75,000 sq. ft. (about a quarter of the total) set aside for office space. The Lockheed-managed facility would be KSC's first automated logistics warehouse for storage of flight hardware and SPC ground-support equipment. An automated inventory system would interface with the Shuttle Inventory Management System (SIMS) and a manual system. Retrieval procedures would require four roboticized forklifts to find and fetch items, an automatic conveyor, and a manned, three-story high forklift. As part of the SPC agreement, Lockheed selected Austin Co. as the facility's architectural and engineering firm and builder at a basic design and construction cost of about $16 million. (Spaceport News, Mar 1/85, 1)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced rules to permit new two-engine jetliners to fly lengthy remote routes that had required three- or four-engine planes, but each airline would have to prove its aircraft and flight crews met FAA standards. The FAA took the action because of the reliability of modern jet engines and because military and business jets with two engines had flown across the North Atlantic safely for several years. The rules also addressed special provisions for airframe reliability, backup electrical and hydraulic systems, maintenance, cargo-compartment fire protection, and crew training. Under current rules, a two-engine plane could be no farther from an airport than 60-minute flying time on one engine; the FAA proposal would extend that to two-hours flying time on one engine. When the rules became final, they would allow Boeing's two-engine 767 jumbo jet to fly the most fuel-efficient North Atlantic routes, which would take flights far from airports in Greenland and Iceland. Boeing had pushed hard for the rule change, the Washington Post reported, to expand the sales potential of its 767. (FAA Release 5-85; W Post, Feb 7/85, A7)
NASA announced that Thomas DeCair was appointed effective July 3 associate administrator for external relations. In this position, DeCair would be responsible for policy level management, direction, and coordination of the agency's relationships with public and private organizations both domestic and international. This included the news media, other federal agencies, state and local governments, industry, and private individuals. He would also serve as the principal advisor to the NASA administrator and other senior officials on matters pertaining to NASA's external relations activities. DeCair came to NASA from the U.S. Department of Justice where he served since February 1981 as director of public affairs and special assistant to the Attorney General. DeCair was staff assistant in the White House Press Office and then assistant press secretary to Presidents Nixon and Ford after he graduated from Hope College, Holland, Michigan, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa as a junior and received his B.A. degree magna cum laude. (NASA Release 85-102) Review Boards
In remarks at a meeting marking the 25th anniversary of the Gagarin Space Training Centre, Gen. Georgiy Beregovoy, center commander, said that it had become an international space academy where 58 USSR cosmonauts and participants in international space programs from the socialist countries and from France and India trained, FBIS, Tass in English reported. Beregovoy also said results of space research were used in virtually every sector of the national economy, with more than 800 USSR institutions and organizations using the research results. He said that during missions, cosmonauts were concerned with problems of agriculture; radio and electronics engineering; metallurgy; welding; studies of sea currents, offshore areas, and bottom sedimentation in river estuaries; and compiling maps of shoals and coastal areas. In other remarks at the meeting, Leonid Kizim, a participant in the longest space mission, which had lasted 237 days, said that during its 25 years the training center had become a major research institution capable of resolving most of the USSR's complex scientific and technical problems. (FBIS, Tass in English, Apr 9/85)
NASA Administrator James Beggs met with planetary science experts to discuss a plan to develop a spacecraft capable of flying in formation with a comet known as Wild-2 and dropping a probe down onto its surface in hopes of bringing back samples, the Washington Times reported. Space scientists said NASA wanted to launch the $400 million mission in the early 1990s. NASA hoped to get about $30 million in start-up money earmarked for the project in the agency's FY 87 budget. The mission would be an important space first, because none of the previous spacecraft launched toward Halley's Comet would fly alongside that comet, launch a probe, or return to earth after rendezvous. (W Times, Aug 2/ 85, 10 A)
NASA was accelerating design of an unmanned U.S. space mission that would rendezvous with a comet and possibly drop a penetrator to return data directly from the comet's surface, Av Wk reported. NASA officials believed that this first U.S. comet-rendezvous mission using the new Mariner Mk. 2 spacecraft would be a high-priority item in the FY 87 budget. NASA planners would probably select the Comet Kopff or Comet Wild-2 as mission target; FY 87 new-start funding could make a 1991 launch possible. Unlike Halley's Comet flybys, the U.S. spacecraft in a rendezvous mission would spend many months flying in formation with a comet. Mission concept proposed rendezvous well before closest approach to the sun, so the spacecraft could observe the comet while it was in its asteroidal stage and before solar wind would blow large amounts of dust off its surface. The spacecraft would remain in formation during the comet's active phase and possibly the post-solar-encounter phase. GSFC and ARC were examining comet-penetrator concept systems that would return compositional data using a gamma-ray spectrometer. (AvWk, Jan 7/85, 18)
NASA announced its graphics and visual communications system had won the Presidential Design Award, presented January 30 by President Reagan. The National Endowment for the Arts sponsored the award to recognize excellence in federal design and had selected the NASA project, along with 12 others, from among 91 Federal Design Achievement Award winners. The Presidential Design Awards jury chairman, architect I.M. Pei, said in his jury report, ". . . Especially noteworthy is the visual-communications system developed by NASA whose posters, publications, and logotype generally maintain a high standard of design, which truly captures the spirit and vitality of the space program." (NASA Release 85-16) During January: NASA announced it had conferred its Space Act Awards on four Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory personnel for the invention of a medical device based on space and aeronautics technology. The invention, a programmable implantable medication system (PIMS), was a computerized pump intended for implanting in the human body to dispense medicine automatically to treat disease such as diabetes, cancer, and cardiovascular problems. A nonhypodermic device introduced medication to a reservoir located in the PIMS device so that its tiny battery-powered pump could send the medicine into the body via a tube in minute doses precisely timed by one of two clocks within the PIMS. A small computer in the PIMS analyzed its performance and operated an alarm if the device was malfunctioning or about to run out of fluid. NASA technologies employed in the PIMS development were space microcircuitry, titanium welding, and the pump and fluid-handling systems used on the Viking spacecraft and space-program techniques of quality control. Award recipients were Robert Fischell, Wade Radford, Albert Sadilek, and Arthur Hogrefe. (NASA anno Jan 85, 14)
NASA Administrator James Beggs approved the addition of an asteroid 28 Amphitrite-flyby option to the Galileo mission, permitting a December 1986 final flyby decision and changing the Jupiter arrival date from August to December 1988, the JSC Roundup reported. Approval had followed a two-year study by scientific groups, mission designers, and program officials, in which the National Academy of Sciences and NASA's Solar System Exploration Committee identified asteroids investigations as an essential element of a balanced planetary exploration program. The asteroid flyby could not compromise or risk mission objectives. NASA would make the final decision for a flyby after launch based on analysis of spacecraft health, particularly the attitude-control and mission-operations systems. Amphitrite, about 200 km in diameter and one of the larger of the minor asteroids, was in a near-circular solar orbit in the middle of the asteroid belt at 2.5 Astronomical Units (AU) from the sun (the earth's distance was 1 AU or about 150,000,000 km). A specially convened hazards workshop had concluded that, at a 10,000-to 20,000-km flyby distance, hazard to the spacecraft was no greater than flying through the asteroid belt as 2 Pioneer and 2 Voyager spacecraft had done, and measurements analysis and Doppler-tracking data could achieve significant scientific objectives. As Amphitrite had a rotation period of about 5.39 hours, Galileo's mapping spectrometer could photograph and scan most of its surface. Data analysis would reveal size, shape, mass, density, exact rotation rate, pole orientation, detailed surface morphology, and mineral composition, thus indicating whether Amphitrite was a primitive accumulation of solar nebulae condensates or an evolved body that was a fragment or perhaps a core of a broken-up minor planet. With this data, scientists could possibly confirm or refute a hypothesis that asteroids were sources of many of the meteorites that had fallen on earth. NASA had developed a new trajectory containing both Amphitrite and Jupiter, constrained by launch-vehicle energy and the existing launch window, that would result in a Jupiter arrival date delay from August 29, 1988 to December 10, 1988. Since the flyby would require early added-propellant expenditure, NASA would decrease the number of Jupiter-tour orbits from 11 to 10 and lengthen the tour from 20 to 22 months, permitting achievement of all major 11-orbit tour objectives. The delayed arrival and increased tour time would add five months and about $20-25 million in costs to the mission. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 1)
