NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration signed a memorandum of agreement for a fiveyear, $24 million research project to study wind shear detection and avoidance that would cover technology assessment, present position sensor integration, hazard characterization, pilot factors in wind shear, and effects of heavy rain. For pilot training, an environment was created that could mirror wind shear in a flight situation, thus'=0*providing a safe simulation for training. Microburst is the most dangerous type of wind shear for study. It is a small, intense downdraft, often accompanied by heavy rain, which, upon striking the ground, spreads out into a circular vortex radiating an all directions and leaving little time for reaction by a pilot. Between 1965 and 1985, there were at least 26 accidents and 3 incidents involving 626 fatalities and 235 injuries where wind shear was a direct cause or contributing factor. (NASA Release 86143)
For the first time since the January 28 accident, the Space Shuttle's main engine underwent a 11/2 second test for ignition. It was an uneventful and successful run, and NASA officials offered it as a signal that the program was gearing up for a targeted July 1987 mission. (B Sun, Jun 27/86; C Trib, Jun
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that the Nation was in need on a fifth orbiter, the funding for which would need to come from private financing. The claim by NASA's advisory council that the United States was approaching secondclass status in space, he acknowledged, was "on track." Fletcher'70*made a formal request on September 9, the same day that President Ronald Reagan petitioned Congress for the initial $272 million needed to begin work on a fourth Shuttle. (USA Today, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 9/86; B Sun, Sep 10/86)
Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer was appointed Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Office of Commercial Programs, where he would be responsible for advancing the interests and participation of the private sector in the U.S. Space Program. He previously had cofounded businesses in the private sector and had served at the White House. (NASA Release 8679)
NASA officials concluded, and reported to the President's Commission, that the orings in Challenger's right solidrocket motor were indeed the cause of the January 28 accident. They were still unable to cite a reason for failure of the seals, but hoped that tests over the next 10 days would give some clue. NASA also noted that the putty used to protect these seals might shed some light. (WSJ, Mar 24/86; CSM, Mar 24/86)
