A localized electrical fire occurred on board the Magellan spacecraft during a power systems check at the Kennedy Space Center's (KSC) Spacecraft Encapsulation Facility (SAEF2). The fire, which occurred while a technician worked within the spacecraft, was quickly extinguished without injuries and with only minor damage to Magellan. The KSC fire department also responded but was not required to enter the SAEF2 clean room environment. The incident was being investigated by NASA. (NASA Releases 88141 and 88153).
This date marked 5 years since the Pioneer 10 spacecraft had left the solar system on its trajectory toward interstellar space. Pioneer 10the most distant humanmade object in existencewas now 4,175,500,000 miles from the Sun, almost 450*times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Radio signals, moving at the speed of light, took 12 hours and 26 minutes to travel from Earth to spacecraft and back, the longest time of any radio communication in history. The spacecraft, launched in 1972, continued to operate extremely well as it collected and transmitted data back to Earth. Its primary mission, originally scheduled for 21 months, was to assess the feasibility of passage through the Asteroid Belt and provide the first closeup examination of Jupiter and its moons. Pioneer 10 accomplished all of its original goals by December 1973. At that point, the mission was indefinitely extended. Scientists reprogrammed the probe to explore the Sun's atmosphere and to look for a tenth planet and gravity waves in the far outer solar system and beyond. Recent improvements in the NASA ground stations were expected to allow communications with Pioneer 10 to continue until the range approached six billion miles, more than twice the prelaunch estimates. Project Manager Richard O. Fimmel expected that NASA would be able to track Pioneer 10 until the power source limited communications, which was expected to occur toward the end of the Both Pioneer 10 and its sister spacecraft, Pioneer 11, carried an easily interpreted graphic message in the event that they encountered any intelligent life forms on their journey. Scientists believed Pioneer 10 and 11 would travel among the stars virtually forever because the vacuum of interstellar space is so empty that the risk of any type of collision would be negligible. (ARC Release
An experimental jetliner being developed by McDonnell Douglas Corporation debuted in a 1hour flight from the Douglas Aircraft Facility in Long Beach, California. The aircraft, with one unducted fan (UDF) engine and one ordinary jet engine, was a forerunner of the planned MD91 and MD92 passenger jets that McDonnell Douglas was actively marketing to airlines. The UDF engine, developed by GE, had demonstrated significant reductions in fuel consumption over conventional jet engines. McDonnell Douglas' MD91 and MD92 airliners were being developed to meet the expected demand among airlines for alternative, fuelefficient aircraft during the latter 1990s. "This is as big a jump in technology as going from propellers to jets," said Walt Orlowski, program manager for the experimental aircraft. "We are at the forefront of aviation technology." (LA Times, Feb 3/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. Fletcher appointed Kenneth S. Pedersen to be Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective immediately. Pedersen would be responsible for congressional, intergovernmental, international, and industry relations, educational activities and relations with educational institutions, and the NASA History Office. (NASA Release 88160)
