NASA announced that Pennsylvania State University's Center for Cell Research, State College, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had begun a new space program to enable U.S. industry to enhance the purification and processing of cells, subcellular particles, proteins, growth factors, and other biological products. (NASA Release 91-172)
The General Accounting Office (GAO) report on NASA indicated it needed to improve contract oversight to reduce cost overruns and schedule delays. According to the GAO, one in every three NASA contracts experienced cost overruns and two in five experienced delays. The conclusion was based on audits at Marshall, Kennedy, Goddard, and Johnson field centers based on a statistical sample of 317 active or administratively closed-out contracts between 1984 and 1989. (Htsavl Tms, Dec 23/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with senior NASA officials in Washington to discuss Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson's interim viewpoints on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices. Thompson's final recommendations and a proposed implementation plan were to follow in early November. (NASA Release 91-169)
NASA announced the resignation for personal reasons of Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson Jr., an internationally recognized propulsion expert, who served more than 25 years in NASA. (NASA Release 91-149; AP, Sep 17/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; Decatur Daily, Sep 18/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 18/91; Birmingham News, Sep 18/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Sep 19/91; AvWk, Sep 23/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released an internal agency report on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices, prepared by former Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson. Thompson focused on three thrusts: building on NASA field organizations as Centers of Excellence in specific areas of science, technology, and development; a reminder to "stick to basics" in engineering disciplines, and program management and realignments of certain NASA Headquarters office responsibilities to achieve more efficient program execution. (NASA Release 91-190; AP, Nov 15/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly and Secretary of Energy James D. Watkins signed an interagency agreement on cooperation in areas relating to space isotope power. The agreement updated an earlier 1965 pact and delineated authorities of NASA and DOE on research, technology development, design, production, delivery, spacecraft integration, and launch support for radioisotope power systems. (NASA Release 91-119)
A feature article dealt with NASA's management overhaul, which it described as nearly complete and based on recommendations of Congress, the Augustine panel, and the most recent report of former Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson. (W Post, Nov 25/91)
NASA officials George Rodney, the agency's top safety official, and Robert Crippen, head of the Shuttle program, said a special investigating team would spend the summer reviewing the way NASA approved Shuttle components for flight. (W Post, May 31/91)
A Christian Science Monitor editorial commended NASA's work with regard to the Magellan spacecraft's survey of the surface of Venus. However, the editorial deplored the indecision and delays in the U.S. space program resulting from Congressional ambivalence and stressed the need for the administration to achieve a sustainable program. (CSM, Jun 6/91)
AP reported, as quoted in the Washington Times, that the Soviet cosmonauts were waiting to return home, puzzled by home conditions. Their return was postponed after the republic of Kazakhstan claimed ownership of the territory on which they were supposed to land. Furthermore, the Soviet space program was experiencing financial and administrative difficulties. (AP, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter from Norman R. Augustine, former chairman of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, assessing NASA's efforts over the preceding nine months to implement the committee's recommendations. The letter recognized that NASA took "many significant actions" but "much is yet to be accomplished." (NASA Editors' Note N91-60; UPI, Sep 16/91)
NASA announced that a 15-member delegation of Soviet space officials, headed by Oleg N. Shishkin, Minister of General Machine Building, would be visiting NASA headquarters and space centers July 9-16. (NASA Release 91-105)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly presented the Minority Contractor of the Year Award to Consolidated Industries, Inc., of Huntsville, Alabama, and the Minority Subcontractor of the Year Award to Network Solutions, Inc., of Herndon, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-157)
The New York Times reported that Soviet space officials told the White House that the Soviet civilian space program might collapse unless it made large sales to the West. Soviet economic problems were the major cause as well as parliamentary attacks on the space program as wasteful. (NY Times, Sep 3/91; UPI, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 4/91; Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
The wire services reported that NASA managers reaffirmed their previous decision to resume routine Florida Shuttle landings. This occurred prior to the start of a two-day review to clear Atlantis for blastoff around July 23. (UPI, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 12/91)
NASA announced that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel would present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly on March 22. (NASA editors' note N91-19)
NASA also announced that President George Bush would join NASA Administrator Richard Truly in a back-to-school special program for elementary students on NASA Select Television. (NASA Release 91-146)
The House of Representatives rejected President Bush's proposed budget, allowing only a 4.2 percent increase in the space program to keep pace with inflation, instead of the recommended 12 percent increase. (UPI, Apr 18/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Ray J. Arnold as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs. He replaced Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer, who became Deputy Assistant Administrator for Policy and Interagency Coordination. (NASA Release 91-39)
The media quoted Aviation Week and Space Journal magazine as saying that a $70 million cost overrun had doubled the price of two NASA spacecraft being developed to study the interaction between the Earth and the sun. The craft were being built for use in the 17-nation International Solar Terrestrial Physics Program. NASA officials reportedly confirmed the cost increases. (AP, Nov 10/91; W Times, Nov 11/91; Fla Today, Nov 11/91; B Sun, Nov 11/91)
The media covered the unveiling of the Shuttle Endeavour at some length, including its new features outlined by NASA Administrator Richard Truly: "The latest avionics navigation equipment, the finest mechanical systems, a new drag chute, and equipment for longer duration flights." Endeavour has more fuel cells, which generate electricity, allowing it to stay in orbit as long as 28 days. (P Inq, Apr 26/91; W Times, Apr 26/91; NY Times, Apr 26/91; W Post, Apr 26/91; USA Today, Apr 26/91; WSJ, Apr 26/91; B Sun, Apr 26/91; Daily News, Apr 26/91; H Chron, Apr 26/91; AP, Apr 26/91; UPI, Apr 26/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the planned creation of the Office of Management Systems and Facilities. Benita A. Cooper was to be the Associate Administrator for this office which was to enhance total quality management. (NASA Release 91-160)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced two key appointments: Arnold D. Aldrich to be Associate Administrator for the new Office of Space Systems Development and Richard H. Petersen to become Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 91-161; AP, Oct 3/91; Daily Press, Oct 4/91; W Post, Oct 10/91)
An editorial deplored efforts of the Virginia congressional delegation to block NASA's possible closing of its Reston, Virginia, office. The editorial stated that to cut space program costs, which suffer from a bloated management structure, streamlining must occur and the Reston office was a good place to begin. (Space News, Jan 7-20/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of 26 Space Grant State Consortia as a result of Phase II competition. Recipients receive four-year, $150,000-per-year grants to initiate new programs. States receiving such grants were Alaska, Delaware, District of Columbia, Indiana, Kansas, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oregon, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin. Twelve states with limited aerospace activity would receive similar grants to enhance aerospace research and infrastructure. They were Arkansas, Connecticut, Idaho, Louisiana, Maine, Montana, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, South Carolina, and West Virginia. Both grants require partial matching nonfederal funds and would be used in part to sponsor fellowship programs for undergraduate and graduate students. (NASA Release 91-19)
James C. Fletcher, who twice served as NASA Administrator (April 1971 - May 1977, May 1986 - April 1989), died of cancer. (AP, Dec 23/91; W Post, Dec 24/91; NY Times, Dec 24/91; W Times, Dec 24/91)
Pamela Clark, a former NASA employee who teaches chemistry, wrote an article criticizing the lack of support from upper management of the space program. She urged Congress to adequately finance a civilian space program that would recognize America's position of world leadership. (H Chron, Mar 19/91)
NASA announced that the Aviation Safety Reporting System ASRS), which it manages for the Federal Aviation Administration, had prevented many air accidents and saved lives over the past 15 years. ASRS also identified safety issues for the aviation community and released research papers on aviation safety. FAA and NASA celebrated the 15-year anniversary of the program. (NASA Release 91-112; Inside DOT, Jul 25/91)
NASA managers were described as divided over whether Discovery could be safely launched on March 9 or needed to be taken off the launch pad and repaired. (UPI, Feb 27/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the creation of a new Systems Analysis and Concepts Office at NASA Headquarters, in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. James D. Bain, who served as executive secretary of that committee, was appointed Director of the new office. (NASA Release 91-74; SP News, May 20-26/91)
NASA announced crew assignments for the International Microgravity flight, scheduled for February 1992 and the Spacelab D-2 mission, the second German Spacelab flight, scheduled for February 1993. Lt. Col. David C. Hilmers was to be mission specialist on the microgravity flight and Lt. Col. Jerry L. Ross was to serve as Payload Commander on the spacelab flight. (NASA Release 91-57)
