NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of key personnel in the Office of Public Affairs and the Office of Equal Opportunity Programs. Bill Livingstone was appointed Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Sue Mathis Richard was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Lewin S. Warren was appointed Acting Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs; and Oceola S. Hall was designated Acting Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs. (NASA Release 92-94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the expansion of the National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program to include all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The Space Grant Program offers states the opportunity to receive grants to further projects in aeronautics, space, and related fields. (NASA Release 92-112)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced new minority contract goals and the formation of a NASA Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee. He also announced that the Minority Contractor of the Year was Jackson & Tull, Chartered Engineers, of Seabrook, Maryland; B & W Services, Inc., Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 92-158)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Charles J. Pellerin, Jr., to the position of Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Quality. Pellerin was also to serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator for long-range planning. (NASA Release 92-59)
NASA officials said that the last scheduled U.S. shuttle flght this year, a military mission by Discovery, probably would be delayed because of a faulty component in the orbital maneuvering system. A December 2 launch date was subsequently planned. (AP, Oct 15/92; NY Times, Oct 16/92; W Times, Oct 16/92; AP, Nov 2/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Chief of Staff. The Chief of Staff facilitates communications between the Administrator's office and senior staff members, as well as with private sector executives and international visitors. In addition, the Chief of Staff focuses on internal NASA Headquarters management and operations, aiming to increase the efficiency of the organization. (NASA Release 92-58)
A new 5,000-mile-wide radio telescope designed to probe the edge of the universe was near completion in the United States, according to Peter Napier, project manager for the Very Long Baseline Array project. The federally funded project, actually a series of 10 dish-shaped antennas, was expected to begin high-resolution imaging work by December. (W Times, Sept 20/92)
The National Association of Small Disadvantaged Business presented NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin with its Meritorious Award. It was the second time Goldin had received the award. (NASA Release 92-162)
A study conducted for the Federal Aviation Administration by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments concluded that the Washington area could support flights of "tiltrotor" aircraft to New York and Boston. Tiltrotors would be competitive with commercial aircraft within a range of about 350 nautical miles from Washington. To date, tiltrotor aircraft had been developed and flown by the military, which hoped to use the craft for transporting troops. (W Post, Jul 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin endorsed the creation of a Space Agency Forum to coordinate activities among the leades of the world's space agencies to prevent duplication and overlap. (NASA Release 92-143)
The U. S. National Research Council urged NASA to expand study of advanced subsonic aircraft in order to keep U. S. aerospace companies competitive in the face of growing advances made by foreign industry. A council report said NASA should focus on improving aircraft performance and operating efficiency and coordinate the work with industry and academia. (AvWk, Oct 12/92; National Research Council News Report, Fall Report)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of procurement reforms to make NASA the model of excellence for the Federal Government. Goldin said reforms in NASA's procurement process were necessary because 90 percent of the agency's budget is spent through contracts. Major changes in procurement will include the award of new contracts to companies that have demonstrated accountability by delivering quality systems that meet cost, schedule, and technical requirements. (NASA Release 92-123)
The National Research Council said NASA should increase its budget for civil airliner and air traffic control research, even if it means a cutback in NASA's military and space programs. The council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, said the United States status as the world leader in aircraft manufacturing would continue to erode if NASA did not enter into a major cooperative program with industry, universities, and other government agencies to develop a new generation of airliners. (W Post, Oct 1/92)
Astronomers resumed the search for evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) today with simultaneous commands to computers and radio telescopes at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and in the Mojave Desert of California. Although there have been previous limited projects, NASA officials, who are financing and directing the new project, said the planned 10-year, $100 million search would be the most comprehensive and ambitious one ever undertaken to search for signals of life beyond Earth's galaxy. Later, more radio telescopes around the world were to join the search, which NASA has renamed the High Resolution Microwave Survey. The latest SETI project was timed to begin on the 500th anniversary of Columbus' discovery of land in the Americas. (NY Times, Oct 6/92, Oct 13/92; W Post, Oct 5/92; LA Times, Oct 7/92; The Sun, Oct 8/92; Newsweek, Oct 12/92; AP, Oct 10/92, Oct 12/92; UPI, Oct 13/92; C Trib, Oct 10/92; P Inq, Oct 10/92; 13/92; NASA Release 92-160)
NASA started the first flight test in Denver of a laser-based sensor to provide airline pilots with advance warning of "microbursts" that can harbor potentially dangerous windshears. The Federal Aviation Administration has mandated that airlines must select and install an approved microburst detection system on their aircraft by the end of 1995. (NASA Release 92-108)
Deidre Lee was appointed deputy assistant administrator for procurement at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 92-146; Space News, Sept 21-27/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and National Space Council Executive Secretary Brian Dailey left with an interagency delegation to visit the European Space Operations Center in Germany. The delegation planned to proceed on to Moscow to gain a first-hand understanding of Russia's space program. (NASA Release 92-106)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable in Washington, D. C,, that the U.S. government should spin off more new technology to help boost the economy. He also said that the space business sector must move beyond its attempts to sell goods and services to the government to become a real commercial industry. Goldin said NASA's newly created Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology would be given broad authority to pursue innovative ideas, seek out new technologies, and accelerate transfer of the agency's own breakthroughs to industry. (Space News, Nov 16-22/92; AvWk, Nov 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Bill Livingstone as Special Assistant to the Administrator for Communications. (NASA Release 92-71)
Outgoing NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced his support for using space to enhance education and his recommendation to administrator-nominee Daniel S. Golding that NASA fly Barbara Morgan, who was a backup to Christa McAuliffe. (NASA Release 92-40)
In a speech to the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers in Los Angeles, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA was committed to building a culturally diverse workforce as it pursued the exploration of space. (NASA Release 92-170)
The Associated Press reported that two ex-Soviet cosmonauts circling the Earth went on television to reassure the public that they were safe and working hard, despite the many difficulties caused by the turmoil back home. The demise of the Soviet government and independence of the former republics had thrown the space program into disarray, delaying the cosmonaut's return for months. (AP, Feb 15/92)
In the last of a week-long series of talks in California at California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA, its partners, and its contractors, were suffering from a bureaucratic "sickness" and political infighting that had sapped the U. S. civilian space program's will to take risks or to admit mistakes. "We need a complete resurgence of our space program to be bold, to take risks, and accept failure," Goldin said during a lively, two-hour discussion and debate with Carl Sagan, astronomer and founding president of the Planetary Society, based in Pasadena. Sagan agreed that NASA had lost its "sense of direction" and said that the key questions facing NASA were what would be its role in the post-Cold War era and what could it accomplish that was in the national interest in a time of pressing economic problems. (Space News, Dec 14-20/92)
NASA announced that Laurie A. Broedling had been appointed as Associate Administrator for Continuous Improvement. She would report directly to the Administrator and serve as NASA's primary facilitator of Total Quality Management. "This appointment is an important step in bringing a world-class TQM program to NASA," Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-72)
In a broad-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he expected to deal with declining agency budgets by prioritizing and focusing NASA projects. He estimated that a substantial cut had been made in the agency's costs during a review of the last few months--perhaps one-third to one-half of a needed $17 billion in savings--and that new programs would not be multi-billion-dollar projects but would cost in the range of tens to hundreds of millions of dollars. (Aerospace America, Nov 92)
A high-powered panel of space experts appointed by U.S. Vice-President Dan Quayle was scheduled to begin deliberations on October 1 that were intended to lay the groundwork for a revamped U.S. space program. The 11-person panel was to advise on ways to change the space effort in light of the Cold War's end, tight budgets, and rapid technological advancements. (Space News, Sept 28-Oct 4/92)
NASA officials said that tomatoes grown by students and teachers from seeds that had been in space for nearly six years show little or no difference from the fruit of seed that never left the Earth. The tomatoes from a batch of 12.5 million space-borne seed were as healthy as their earthly counterparts, though "findings suggest that the space-exposed seeds germinated slightly faster" and "seedlings had a faster initial growth rate," the officials said. (W Times, Apr 19/92; W Post, Apr 20/92; NASA Release 92-49)
NASA managers said last week that they would refashion the way the space agency conducts its programs, drawing on the results of internal NASA studies now under way and the advice of outside groups. The proposed reforms would serve as a test of whether Administrator Daniel Goldin's vision of faster and cheaper space projects could work in practice. (NASA Release 92-154; Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that his agency had started an intense examination of itself and its programs aimed at setting goals for the nation's civilian space program and controlling costs in the future. Goldin said he had named two teams to undertake an agency-wide analysis of what NASA should be doing and what it could do within the constraints of a limited budget. The self-analysis was organized, Goldin said, after he examined the NASA budgets for the coming years and realized that the agency was committed to programs that could not be funded in an era of tight federal spending. (AP, May 26/92)
The fifth meeting of the Space Agency Forum on the International Space Year (SAFISY) opened in Washington, D. C. The forum is composed of 29 members (national and multi-national space agencies), including NASA, and 10 affiliate members (international, space-related organizations). The meeting was called to review progress of the various SAFISY-sponsored international space year projects and to discuss options for post-1992 cooperation. (NASA Note to Editors N92-76)
