NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that NASA would stop work on the Polar spacecraft and would continue with pre-launch activities on the Wind spacecraft. Work on Polar was to resume only after the Wind spacecraft had operated successfully on-orbit and after a reevaluation of resources needed to complete the program within budgetary limits. (NASA Release 94-75; SP News, May 16-22/94)
In September a conference on space debris was scheduled to be held at Kent University's Unit for Space Sciences in Canterbury, England. Experts from space agencies around the world were to attend the three-day conference. Kent University had become a center of expertise in the study of space debris, having mounted experiments on the subject on several spacecraft. (Times of London, Aug 21/94)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) was pushing ahead with certification of predictive wind shear systems. Robert Passman, FAA associate program manager for airborne wind shear research, said he believed airborne predictive systems worked, based on observing one on a NASA aircraft in Orlando, Florida, in 1993. He noted that the alarms from such a system correlated well with ground-based Terminal Doppler Weather Radar detection of microbursts. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave the commencement address at Tullahoma to 22 University of Tennessee Space Institute graduates. He said Congress had been supportive but the nation needed to decide where it was going. America used to have a vision and be willing to take risks, but it had lost confidence in itself and was willing to settle for mediocrity. He pointed out that the cost of the entire space program "was only a quarter of a percent of the gross national product" so canceling one program would not solve the nation's problems. (Htsvl Tms, May 13/94; Independent, May 14/94)
A study by Loren Thompson, Deputy Director of Georgetown University's National Security Studies Program, was one of several major sources examining the U.S. space industry's growing challenge from competition and domination by foreign governments' expanding space programs and their successes with smaller but cheaper launch vehicles.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced a report by the General Aviation Task Force of NASA's Aeronautics Advisory Committee. The report of the industry-led task force called on NASA to revitalize its general aviation program, make its wind tunnels, laboratories and simulators more accessible to the general aviation community, and better balance its technology program to meet general aviation needs. The four areas on which the report called on NASA to concentrate were: propulsion, noise, and emissions work; aeronautical systems research; structure and materials development; and aerodynamics research. (NASA Release 94-29; Wichita Eagle, Feb 26/94)
While visiting the University of Tennessee, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA had to share responsibility for the failure of the canceled Commercial Experimental Transporter (Comet) spacecraft program. The University of Tennessee Space Institute (UTSI) managed the project, which involved other universities and private contractors. The goal was to provide a lower cost alternative for ferrying private industrial experiments into orbit. Goldin said UTSI was not to blame for the cost overruns that nearly doubled the project's price; in retrospect, NASA should have been more active and offered help to UTSI. (AP, May 13/94)
Drucella Andersen, who served as head of public affairs for aeronautics at NASA, moved to the Federal Aviation Administration as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. (W Post, Aug 19/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was the scheduled keynote speaker for an October 27-28 conference at Auburn University on the past, present, and future of the U.S. space program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 17/94)
NASA announced that in cooperation with the Civil Air Patrol and the Federal Aviation Administration it was hosting a national conference for educators on "Aviation and Space Education: America's Leading Edge" in Norfolk, Virginia, April 6-9. (NASA Release 94-46)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number of management appointments and organization structural changes at NASA Headquarters and various field centers. The changes will affect NASA science, technology, research facilities and major programs, as well as the agency's Advisory Committee structure.
NASA announced the creation of an Office of Policy and Plans at NASA headquarters, with Alan Ladwig as Associate Administrator. Previously, Ladwig had been a senior space policy analyst in private industry. (NASA Release 94-181)
NASA announced that 100 girls, ages nine to 15, were to join the NASA Headquarters workforce on April 28. (NASA Release 94-60; AP, Apr 20/94)
Former CBS news anchor Walter Cronkite was quoted as saying that in view of the lack of a guarantee that money saved from the space program would be used for urgent needs such as health, housing, education, and crime, the United States could not afford not to continue going into outer space. (LA Times, Jun 21/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Brigadier General Elmer T. Brooks, USAF (Retired), as Deputy Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Communications (OSC) at NASA Headquarters. Charles Force, Associate Administrator for Space Communications, commented on the problems facing NASA's use of telecommunications technologies with reduced funding. OSC was responsible for planning, development, and operation of NASA's worldwide communications, telemetry, and data acquisition activities. (NASA Release 94-9)
NASA announced that two companies had been recognized as minority contractor and subcontractor of the year for their outstanding contributions to the space program. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named ERC, Inc., Tullahoma, Tennessee, as Minority Contractor of the Year and BST Systems, Inc., Plainfield, Connecticut, as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 94-163)
An audit report by NASA's inspector general, which was still in draft, noted that NASA could have saved almost $6 million in business travel costs in 1993 by flying available commercial flights instead of using NASA aircraft. As a result, NASA planned to rewrite rules for the use of its planes, according to Laurie Boeder, associate NASA administrator for public affairs. Jack Anderson's column contained a critical account of NASA travel concentrating on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's use of NASA aircraft in the six-month period from October 1, 1992 through March 31, 1993, which reportedly cost taxpayers $514,000 more than if he had flown a commercial airline. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; W Post, Dec 19/94)
A biographic account of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stressed his enthusiasm for sending humans into space combined with a tremendous work ethic. As an administrator at aerospace manufacturer TRW, he developed strong ideas about what was wrong with the space program and how to fix it. Space advisers to President George Bush found NASA unresponsive to change and decided to offer the NASA Administrator's job to Goldin. Among his management tools, Goldin said, was the creative use of chaos. (W Post, Jul 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin paid a 90-minute visit to Rocketdyne's main factory in Canoga Park. He said the company had made some progress in correcting quality control problems that caused two shuttle launches to be aborted seconds before liftoff and two other scheduled flights to be postponed. (LA Times, Apr 1/94)
The pressure on California's space firms to adapt to a new mission, survival, in view of congressional budgetcutting and constant funding problems was highlighted. The role of commercial firms in the space industry as opposed to NASA was raised as was the fact that the space program no longer revolved around competition with the Soviet Union. (LA Times, Jul 6/94)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced their joint sponsorship of a general aviation design competition for students at U.S. aeronautical and engineering universities. Teams of graduate and undergraduate students, working with faculty advisers, were to develop a multidisciplinary design for a general aviation aircraft. (NASA Release 94-102)
Another article in the same newspaper commended NASA for having learned the secret to getting along with Congress: humility equaled stability. NASA had done its homework prior to submitting its budget request and got almost everything it asked for. The writer gave most of the credit to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin whose mantra of "cheaper, better, faster" had forced NASA staff to wake up to reality. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)
In a written statement, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said the Department of Energy had told his office that NASA was "involved in the sponsorship or co-sponsorship of some human experiments to determine the effects of radiation" during the 1960s and 1970s. Goldin did not say what experiments had taken place. He promised a full public accounting. "There is no place in this agency for human medical experimentation conducted in secrecy or without full respect for human dignity of each and every participant," the statement said.
NASA announced the appointment of Robert E. Whitehead as Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release 94-23)
NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Services Inc., Vienna, Virginia, to provide Information Resources Management Support at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release C94-gg; Federal Computer Week, Oct 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had an extensive interview with US Black Engineer (USBE) Magazine on his past and current experience, commitment, and achievements in promoting minority advancement in the aerospace field. He detailed how in his long career in rising through the field he had worked for minority progress.
NASA, together with the U.S. Department of Energy, the U.S. Department of Defense Information Systems Agency, AT&T, and Foxworth & Dinkins, a Washington, D.C.-based marketing firm, sponsored a three-day conference at Clark-Atlanta University November 7-9 that brought representatives of the 117 historically black colleges and universities to explore the opportunities for minority students in science and mathematics. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was one of the conference speakers. (Atlanta Business Chronicle, Nov 11-17/94)
