Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell, at NASA’s JPL, announced the resumption of the spacecraft’s observations. Cassini had operated without any problems, since scientists had reactivated its reaction-wheel system on 21 December.(Associated Press, “NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter,” 28 December 2000; NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Cassini Passes Through Asteroid Belt,” news release, 28 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=4 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
NASA named award-winning broadcast journalist Bob Jacobs as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters. Before joining NASA, Jacobs had served for four years as Projects Manager for the Washington-based Broadcast Technology Division of the Associated Press, where he helped to develop and implement newsroom management technology. Clients had included the British Broadcasting Corporation, ESPN, National Public Radio, and CBS News. Jacobs had won an Emmy award and other regional honors for excellence in journalism.(NASA, “News Chief Named at NASA Headquarters,” news release 00-150, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-150.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, 1976 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physiology and Medicine, as Senior Advisor to the Administrator, effective immediately. While continuing in his position as Director of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute, Blumberg would also provide guidance to NASA’s newly created Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR), an interdisciplinary effort combining research in biology, physics, chemistry, and engineering. Goldin also announced that NASA would begin a search, headed by Blumberg and NASA Chief Scientist Kathie L. Olsen, to fill the position of Associate Administrator for the new OBPR and other key positions. Olsen would serve as Acting Associate Administrator until NASA had filled the position.(NASA, “Nobel Prize Laureate Appointed as Senior NASA Advisor,” news release 00-164, 16 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-164.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would merge the Office of the Chief Technologist and the Office of Aero-Space Technology, to better facilitate NASA’s technological advancements. According to Goldin, placing a range of issues, from IT operation to technology-based research, under the domain of a single leader would promote IT compatibility. Goldin appointed Chief Technologist Samuel L. Venneri to head the new Office, giving Venneri the responsibility of developing a long-term strategy to keep NASA at the forefront of technological development. Goldin also tasked Venneri with forging new relationships with companies using technologies similar to the type that NASA developed and used. Venneri had been NASA’s Chief Technologist since 1996.(NASA, “Goldin Names Venneri To Head Merged Technology, Aero-Space Office; New Chief Engineer Appointed,” news release 00-21, 7 February 2000.)
Shuttle Endeavour returned safely to Earth after a successful 11-day voyage. The scientific community and the public greeted the Shuttle’s return with even more fanfare than usual, because the crew had obtained stunning images of Earth. Endeavour’s six-person crew had worked nearly around the clock, keeping radar antennas running to compile the data for three- dimensional digital maps of Earth’s surface. The crew had gathered more than 300 digital tapes of radar data during the mission, which NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called “one of the most challenging, difficult missions we ever undertook.” The mission had successfully mapped 43.5 million square miles (113 million square kilometers) of Earth’s terrain. NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency expected that transferring the data into readable maps would take between one and two years. NASA had obtained the images primarily for the U.S. Department of Defense, to improve the accuracy of missiles and to assist in navigation for military planes and troops.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Returns with Dazzling Images of the Home Planet,” 22 February 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Astronauts End Earth-Mapping Work,” 22 February 2000; Chicago Tribune, “Mission: Map the Earth,” 22 February 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recognized members of the Space Shuttle’s ice and debris inspection team for their work on 10 October, leading to the discovery of a stray 4-inch (10- centimeter) pin near the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, hours before the scheduled launch of STS- 92. In response to the find, NASA had delayed the launch for 24 hours to allow the team to retrieve the pin, thereby preventing the damage that would have ensued if the pin had been sucked into the Shuttle’s thermal protection system or into a main engine. Goldin awarded employees Gregory N. Katnik and Jorge E. Rivera NASA’s Exceptional Achievement Medal, an honor recognizing significant contributions to the mission of NASA through substantial and significant improvements in operations, efficiency, service, financial savings, science, or technology. United Space Alliance employees Michael Barber, John B. Blue, and Thomas F. Ford received NASA’s Public Service Medal, an award given to individuals who are not government employees but make exceptional contributions to NASA’s mission.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Inspection Team Rewarded for Its ‘Eagle Eyes’,” news release 00-165, 18 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-165.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin began an official visit to Morocco to discuss space cooperation. He planned to meet with several Moroccan officials, particularly in the fields of scientific research and advanced technology, and to visit facilities in Morocco capable of launching Space Shuttles.(BBC, “Morocco: NASA Official Visits for Talks on Space Cooperation,” RTM TV (Rabat, Morocco), 9 August 2000.)
The National Partnership for Reinventing Government (NPR) released the results of a survey indicating that NASA employees had the highest level of job satisfaction among federal government employees. NASA employees rated very favorably in the categories of employee job satisfaction, customer orientation, making reinvention a priority, management communication, and employee participation in cross-functional teams. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the survey’s findings, stating, “I am incredibly proud of these results. They represent a strong statement of the top-to-bottom excellence of the NASA team.” NPR and the Office of Personnel Management administered the survey to understand employees’ perspectives on “reinvention and workplace issues.” When informed of NASA’s outstanding score, Keith Cowing, the editor of Nasawatch.com remarked, “I’m not at all surprised. I used to work there. I loved my job.”(NASA, “Survey Shows NASA Employees Among Most Satisfied Federal Workers,” news release 00-52, 31 March 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and H. Fisk Johnson, President of the Wisconsin-based private venture-capital company Fisk Ventures Inc. (FVI), signed an agreement to “explore a new frontier in biotechnology.” Johnson had approached NASA regarding its efforts to commercialize space activities, suggesting a partnership. NASA and FVI agreed to use NASA’s bioreactor to develop commercial medical products. The bioreactor technology creates a near- weightless environment enabling cells to grow three-dimensionally. When raised in a traditional Petri dish, growing cells are flat. FVI had formed a joint venture with In Vitro Technologies Inc., called StelSys LLC, to focus on commercializing microgravity research in areas related to biological systems. StelSys paid NASA a US$100,000 licensing fee and a royalty of 5 percent of the company’s profits, capped at US$2 million, for the rights to 13 patents for the bioreactor technology for five years. NASA planned to use the bioreactor on the ISS, and StelSys intended to use it to research infectious diseases and to develop a liver-assist device for patients in need of transplant surgery. Goldin remarked that the agreement was “a symbol of the success that can be achieved when government, private industry, and academia work together on the exploration of new frontiers for scientific, technological, and economic growth.”(NASA, “Landmark Commercial Agreement Gives Biotechnology Research a New Dimension,” news release 00- 143, 14 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-143.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Laura Heinauer, “NASA Signs First Major Contract for Private Biotech Development,” Wall Street Journal, 14 September 2000.)
