ESA’s Science Programme Committee approved a proposal to extend the operation of the Ulysses spacecraft―a joint project of ESA and NASA―until March 2008. NASA had already approved continuing the spacecraft’s operations. The two space agencies had designed the spacecraft to study the heliosphere, a region of space influenced by the Sun and its magnetic field. Scientists of the agencies hoped that the continued operations of Ulysses would help them better understand the Sun. Since the 1990 launch of Ulysses, ESA and NASA both had launched additional fleet of solar and heliospheric spacecraft: NASA’s Cassini, ESA’s four Cluster satellites, and another collaborative project between ESA and NASA, the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO).(ESA, “Ulysses Mission Home: Ulysses Mission Extended,” http://sci.esa.int/science- e/www/object/index.cfm?fobjectid=34647 (accessed 4 February 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe submitted his resignation in a handwritten letter to President George W. Bush. In his resignation, O’Keefe stated that he would continue serving as Administrator until Bush had named a successor, but that he would prefer to leave by February 2005. O’Keefe cited family commitments and his interest in pursuing better economic opportunities as the reasons for his resignation. Major media speculated about candidates to replace O’Keefe, but the White House provided no details about its choice for a successor. Before becoming NASA’s Administrator in December 2001, O’Keefe had worked for the OMB.(Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Chief Formally Steps Down,” Washington Post, 14 December 2004; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Leader Cites Finances and Submits His Resignation,” New York Times, 14 December 2004.)
NASA’s Genesis space capsule returned to Earth but experienced a problematic landing, which NASA officials feared might have damaged the capsule’s scientific cargo. NASA had launched Genesis in August 2001 to collect particle samples from solar winds, samples that scientists hoped would provide information about the solar system’s chemical composition during its formation stages. To return Genesis to Earth, NASA had designed the capsule to release a rectangular parachute, which helicopters would grab, gently lowering the spacecraft to Earth. However, the parachute failed to deploy, and Genesis crashed into a desert area of Utah at nearly 200 miles per hour (322 kilometers per hour). Although NASA officials were uncertain about the extent of damage to the spacecraft’s cargo, their initial prognosis was that researchers could still use some of the samples in scientific analyses.(Guy Gugliotta, “Spacecraft Crashes with Solar Data,” Washington Post, 9 September 2004; NASA JPL, “Genesis: Mission History―Launch,” 23 June 2008, http://genesismission.jpl.nasa.gov/gm2/mission/launch.htm (accessed 7 May 2009).)
