The National Research Council Space Studies Board released its study, An Assessment of Balance in NASA’s Science Programs, concluding that NASA “does not have the necessary resources to carry out the tasks of completing the ISS, returning humans to the Moon, maintaining vigorous space and Earth science and microgravity life and physical sciences programs, and sustaining capabilities in aeronautical research.” Study chair Lennard A. Fisk, University of Michigan space scientist and former NASA Associate Administrator, stated that the study committee was “particularly concerned that the shortfall in funding for science has fallen disproportionately on small missions and on funding for basic research and technology. These actions run the risk of disrupting the pipeline of human capital and technology that is essential for the future success of the space program.” The conference report (H. Rep. No.108- 792), which accompanied H.R. 4818 (Pub. L. No.108-447), the bill appropriating FY 2005 funds for NASA, had mandated the study.(Guy Gugliotta, “ NASA Underfunded, Panel Reports,” Washington Post, 5 May 2006; National Academy of Sciences, Office of News and Public Information, “NASA Lacks Resources To Sustain Vigorous Science Program,” news release, 4 May 2006, http://www8.nationalacademies.org/ onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=11644 (accessed 16 March 2010); National Research Council, Space Studies Board, An Assessment of Balance in NASA’s Science Programs (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), 29, http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php? record_id=11644 (accessed 16 March 2010).)
The National Research Council (NRC) released a study of civil aeronautics research and technology priorities that NASA and other government agencies should pursue in the coming decade. The U.S. Congress and NASA had requested the NRC to produce a report identifying aeronautics technologies that would support and improve the U.S. air transportation system. In its report, the NRC stated that NASA and other agencies should pursue aeronautics research and technology that advances the U.S. air system’s capacity, safety, reliability, efficiency, and performance, and reduces the system’s energy consumption and environmental impact. The report also suggested that civil aeronautics R&T should support the U.S. space program and take advantage of synergies with defense. In addition, the NRC outlined five areas of high-priority aeronautics R&T, areas that researchers at NASA and other U.S. agencies should pursue to attain the identified strategic objectives. Those areas included 1) aerodynamics and aeroacoustics; 2) propulsion and power; 3) materials and structures; 4) dynamics, navigation and control, and avionics; and 5) intelligent and autonomous systems, operations and decision making, human integrated systems, and networking and communications.(National Research Council, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006).)
