NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale and Canadian Space Agency (CSA) President and Chief Executive Officer Laurier J. Boisvert signed the official agreement defining the terms of cooperation on the JWST, an international cooperative effort among NASA, CSA, and ESA. As the successor to NASA’s HST, the JWST would investigate the origin and evolution of galaxies, stars, and planetary systems. Under the agreement, NASA would build the spacecraft, the telescope, and the platform hosting the instruments. NASA would also be responsible for the overall management and operations of the mission. CSA would provide the fine-guidance-sensor instrument, which would give the JWST the stability needed for capturing sharp images.(NASA, “NASA and Canada Sign Agreement for Future Cooperation,” news release 07-155, 16 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07155_jwst_csa_mou.html (accessed 9 June 2010).)
The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) published a final rule, effective 5 June 2007, governing experimental permits for launching reusable suborbital rockets for space tourism. Under the rules, which the U.S. Congress had mandated in the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492), a single experimental permit would cover multiple vehicles of a particular design and allow an unlimited number of launches. The FAA would identify the type of design changes that it would permit the licensed launch company to make without invalidating the permit; renew the one-year permit after conducting a review; prohibit companies conducting test flights covered by an experimental permit to carry passengers for compensation or hire; establish criteria for the physical area in which a company could operate a vehicle with an experimental permit; and require a vehicle developer applying for a 47 permit to provide a program description, flight-test plan, and operational-safety documentation.
Boeing completed a developmental heat shield for NASA’s Orion CEV. In 2006 NASA’s ARC had awarded Boeing Advanced Systems a contract to develop a demonstration Thermal Protection System (TPS) Manufacturing Demonstration Unit (MDU) for the Orion capsule. Thomas Andrews, Boeing TPS Program Manager, stated that the TPS MDU had met NASA’s risk-reduction objectives “to move the Orion heat shield program toward full-scale development in preparation for CEV missions.” Boeing had fabricated the TPS MDU from Phenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) material. With PICA’s proven performance on NASA’s Stardust spacecraft heat shield, NASA was considering the material for Orion’s heat shield. Boeing’s integrated concept for the TPS MDU used multiple PICA components, with each piece sized significantly larger than the typical Space Shuttle tiles, greatly reducing the number of the shield’s parts, as well as its complexity.(Boeing Company, “Boeing Completes Prototype Heat Shield for NASA Orion Spacecraft,” news release, 13 November 2007, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2007/q4/071113a_nr.html (accessed 12 November 2010). 169 William Harwood, “Harmony Module Detached in Critical Relocation Operation,” CBS Space Place, 14 November 2007; Patrick Peterson, “Live in Orbit: 16 Bolts Driven, Mating Permanent,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 November 2007.)
likely broken into pieces too small to detect. Thomas C. Duxbury, EPOXI Project Manager,
STS-118 Mission Specialist Richard A. Mastracchio and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson undertook the third EVA of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours and 28 minutes, the pair relocated the S-band antenna subassembly from the P6 truss to the P1 truss, installed a new transponder on P1, and retrieved the P6 transponder. The spacewalk ended early when Mastracchio’s spacesuit was damaged. The suit had a cut in the left thumb of the glove. Mission Control instructed Mastracchio to return to the ISS airlock as a precaution against further damage that could potentially allow air to rush out of the suit. Anderson quickly finished the task he had been working on and followed Mastracchio to the airlock.
