After the SST entered standby mode at 3:11 p.m. (PDT), NASA announced the end of its primary mission and the start of its “warm” mission. NASA had designed SST to conduct a two- and-a-half-year mission to detect infrared light from cool cosmic objects, a mission that required maintaining the telescope’s three instruments at -456°F (-271°C), the coldest temperature theoretically attainable. SST’s liquid helium, used as cryogen, had lasted twice as long as projected—more than five-and-a-half years—but Spitzer’s supply of the coolant had finally depleted. The telescope would remain cold, at -404°F (-242°C), but that temperature would be too warm to allow Spitzer’s infrared spectrograph and its longer wavelength, multiband imaging photometer to detect cool objects in space. SST Project Manager Robert K. Wilson at NASA’s JPL remarked that, with its coolant depleted, Spitzer would be “reborn,” with a mission to tackle new scientific pursuits. During its so-called warm mission, Spitzer would continue to see through the dust that permeates our galaxy, blocking visible-light views, and two channels of one of its instruments would continue to operate at full capacity. Spitzer’s two infrared-array camera detectors with short wavelengths would continue to function as designed, picking up the glow from a range of objects, such as asteroids, dusty stars, planet-forming discs, gas-giant planets, and distant galaxies. Spitzer’s new projects would include refining estimates of Hubble’s constant; searching for galaxies at the edge of the universe; assessing how often potentially hazardous asteroids might impact Earth; and characterizing the atmospheres of gas-giant planets that astronomers expected NASA’s Kepler mission would discover.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Telescope Warms Up to New Career,” news release 09-099, 6 May 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-099_Spitzer_Warms_Up.html (accessed 20 June 2011); NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Spitzer Space Telescope Mission Status,” JPL news release 15 May 2009, http://www.jpl. nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-086 (accessed 30 June 2011).)
NASA announced the restructure of its Advisory Council (NAC). During the NAC’s 29 October 2009 meeting at NASA’s ARC, NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. had added four new committees to the council: the Commercial Space, the Education and Public Outreach, the Information Technology Infrastructure, and the Technology Innovation. Bolden stated that these four new committees reflected NASA’s evolving mission under the Barack H. Obama administration. Bolden appointed Bretton Alexander, Executive Director of the Commercial Spaceflight Federation, to lead the Commercial Space committee, which would help NASA gain greater insight into the entrepreneurial marketplace. He appointed Albert J. Edmonds, former Director of the Defense Information Systems Agency, to lead the Information Technology Infrastructure committee and to advise NASA on cybersecurity issues. Bolden appointed Miles O’Brien, former CNN anchor and space correspondent, to chair the Public Outreach committee and Esther Dyson, a space travel enthusiast and investor in major commercial space firms, to lead the Technology Innovation panel.(NASA, “NASA Announces Advisory Council Chairs and Committee Structure,” news release 09-256, 2 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-256_NAC.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Debra Werner, “Bolden Adds New Voices to NASA Advisory Council,” Space News, 30 October 2009.)
