NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced creation of a new Office of Programs to be headed by D. D. Wyatt, and the renaming of the Office of Administration under Albert F. Siepert.
NASA-DOD Large Launch Vehicle Planning Group in session since August 1 to study the policy, management structures, and requirements of launch vehicles beyond the size of Saturn. Meeting in NASA headquarters, the group was headed by Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin, technical assistant to the Associate Administrator of NASA.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy stated that “we are spending as much money and devoting as large a percentage of scientific personnel, engineering, and all the rest, as we possibly can to the space program. We are constantly concerned with speeding it up. We are making what I consider to be a maximum effort.”
USAF Dyna-Soar System Project Office personnel visited NASA headquarters for review of technical and management programs.
NASA postponed its projected manned orbital flight from December 1961 until early in 1962 because of minor problems with the cooling system and positioning devices in the Mercury capsule, Dr. Hugh Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, said in a Baltimore interview. “You like to have a man go with everything just as near perfect as possible. This business is risky. You can’t avoid this, but you can take all the precautions you know about.”
NASA planned to spend $6 million on expansion of its Langley facilities in this fiscal year, according to Representative Thomas N. Downing after a conversation with NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Representative Downing said he was satisfied that the lower peninsula area of Virginia would not suffer financially when the Space Task Group moved to Houston, Tex.
In speech on “Scientists and Engineers in the Space Program,” Albert F. Siepert, NASA Director of Administration, outlined NASA’s basic policies on personnel. He pointed out that of NASA’s some 20,000 employees, only 4,000 had come to NASA through individual appointments, the remainder on transfer of organizations intact to NASA. NASA’s personnel utilization practices, Siepert said, were as follows: (1) Don’t use a scientist or engineer when another skill will do as well; (2) classify a man’s skills by what he actually does, rather than how he was formally trained; (3) provide professional entrance into the Federal civil service through an examination which is work centered rather than academically oriented; (4) take on-the-job training and education seriously; (5) encourage professional recognition outside the agency; and (6) recognize that job satisfaction depends upon the man’s continued interest in his work as well as his take-home pay.”
NASA began negotiations with French Commission for Spatial and Scientific Research for conducting a cooperative Franco-American space program.
At Cape Canaveral with the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, Secretary of Labor Goldberg made public President Kennedy’s message praising the voluntary, no-strike, no-lockout pledges covering labor-management relations at missile and space sites. The President’s message stated that “the Nation cannot afford the luxury of avoidable delay in our missile and space program. Neither can we tolerate wasteful and expensive practices which add to the great financial burden our defense effort already places on us.”
In response to questioning by the House Science and Astronautics Committee, Associate NASA Administrator Seamans repeated the general estimate of $20 to $40 billion as the cost for the total effort required to achieve a lunar landing, that an all-out program might cost more, and that 1967 could be considered only as a possible planning date at this stage of such a complex task.
Reactor-in-flight-test system (Rift) study, a part of the NASA-AEC program on nuclear rockets, was briefed by contractors at NASA headquarters.
In address at George Washington University, NASA Administrator Webb stated that the exploration of space was an important part of man’s “driving, restless, insatiable search for new knowledge.”
NASA Administrator Webb, appearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, requested $60 million additional for fiscal year 1962 for the acquisition of 80,000 acres adjoining Cape Canaveral for launching facilities for the expanded space program.
President-elect Kennedy received report of special nine-man committee on the national space program. Chairman of the committee was Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner of MIT.
Reported that the DOD-NASA Golovin Committee was near agreement on hybrid solid-and-liquid fuel rockets for Dyna-Soar. Golovin Committee had been meeting for 3 months to work out families of large rockets for overall national space program.
Executive order of the President suspended the 8-hour limitation on construction workers in NASA. It stated that “a clearly leading role in aeronautical and space achievement has become a vital national objective,” and that it was essential to conduct the space program “with a major national commitment of manpower, material, and facilities,” and “with all possible speed and efficiency.”
NASA Deputy Administrator Dryden and Soviet Academy of Sciences official Dr. Leonid I. Sedov both appealed for greater international cooperation and exchange of information in the peaceful exploration of space in their speeches at the opening of the 12th World Congress of the International Astronautical Federation.
The national space program portends a major technological advance for mankind, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the New Orleans Chamber of Commerce. Comparing its potential to that of the invention of the steam engine, Dr. Seamans noted: “Two aspects of such major advances are characteristic. First, the practical results are largely unforeseeable, primarily because they develop on broad fronts and, frequently, in unsuspected directions. Second, the concentration of effort required does not diminish effort expended on other frontiers of knowledge, but rather spurs such activities. For example, despite fears that space technology would monopolize the scientific effort of this country, such fields of activity as oceanography, geophysics, and the physics of high-energy particles have greatly increased since the national space effort has become a serious one.”
James E. Webb was sworn in as NASA Administrator.
In testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, nasa Administrator James E. Webb indicated that decision on the number of orbits, three or six, planned for the next Mercury flight had not been decided and that the selected pilot-astronaut would also be announced soon. On the relationship between civilian and military space activities: “President’s [space] policy has been, in accordance with the law, to develop the space program as a civilian peaceful effort to the fullest extent possible, but always pressing with the kind of technology that would permit us to move rapidly in the military field if we were required to do so. It is a little bit like ‘keep your powder dry’ with respect to the military side ...” Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric stated to the Committee that dod “was interested in developing the technology” but we [dod] have as yet no approved program for the development of a manned orbital system.” Gilpatric said that dod was “very conscious of the need to take out technological insurance” so that the U.S. could be “prepared and not surprised” in the event that the U.S.S.R. attempted to make “hostile use of space.”
Problem of communications blackout during spacecraft re-entry ionization has been surmounted, according to Boeing Co.’s X-20 Project Manager A. M. Johnston and engineers at Radio Corp. of America. RCA-developed equipment using higher radio frequencies would penetrate the blackout sheath 99 per cent of the time during which it engulfed a spacecraft.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. technical representatives held the first of a series of talks on the possibility of joint cooperation in space research and exploration. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, represented the U.S.; Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, represented the U.S.S.R.	.	.
Howard Simons reported that many U.S. space experts feel that the U.S.S.R. has reshaped its space program from a few, spreadout “spectaculars” to a more orderly scientific program. While spectaculars have not been abandoned, it was thought the bulk of the program would be conducted with smaller, cheaper rockets for more useful scientific objectives and with more international cooperation. This was considered to be a victory for Soviet scientists over military and political planners who had favored the spectaculars.
nasa would begin an education program in the fall of 1962 to provide financial support for 10 doctoral candidates in science and engineering at each of 10 U.S. universities, nasa Administrator dames E. Webb announced to the Institute of Environmental Sciences in Chicago. Students would receive a stipend of $2,400 per year, expenses up to $1,000 per year, and the university would be reimbursed for tuition, fees, and other expenses. Grants would be for one year, renewable to a maximum of three years. Mr. Webb said nasa expected the program “will increase considerably in years to come.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced first nationwide conference of scientists and educators would be held in Chicago November 1-3 to study the relationship between nasa and universities in meeting national space goals.
usaf witnesses before the Senate Military Appropriations Subcommittee testified under questioning that dod budget was not adequate in all areas. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, said that funds should be provided for “at least 100 more Minuteman icbm’s” than in present budget, and that he favored a “little more emphasis” in the military space program on early-warning systems. Secretary Eugene Zuckert indicated that he favored development of the RS-70 as a full-fledged weapon system.
Bell Telephone Laboratories announced the formation of a new corporation, Bellcom, Inc., to supply system engineering support to nasa’s space program. The new corporation would be owned jointly by at&t and Western Electric Corp.
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, was awarded the McCurdy Medal, honoring nasa for “outstanding contributions to the world in the field of science,” at the Canadian International Air Show, Toronto.
Speaking at general aaas meeting in Philadelphia, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy nasa Administrator, supported the thesis that science has developed most rapidly in an environment of a national social need, most often for national defense or health. In an atmosphere of highly motivated and widely supported national activities, science and scientists have received enhanced support over broad areas as well as in narrow specialties: Benefits of this have far outweighed unbalances. Such has been our national experience in the technologies of aeronautics, com munications, radar, nuclear energy, and now space. In such periods, the number of free scientists supported to work on problems of their own selection is greater than in the absence of social pressures, although admittedly there is a still greater expansion of team effort. Dr Dryden said: “. . . It is our aim in nasa to administer the [space] program in such a way as to strengthen science and engineering broadly, to strengthen our universities and our industrial base, in fact to add to our national strength in every possible way. As regards the problem under discussion, nasa has undertaken as a goal the support of about 4,000 graduate students per year in 150 qualified universities to do our part in increasing the supply.”
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, addressed NASA-University Conference on the Science and Technology of Space Exploration, Chicago: “During the first four years of the existence of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 157 sounding rockets, 55 satellites, and 9 space probes have been launched and have yielded a tremendous amount of information in all of the areas of interest. Many hundreds of research papers have appeared in the open scientific literature and a considerable portion of the scientific community, both national and international, has become involved in the effort to make the most of the opportunities afforded by the space program for the conduct of important research. It is hoped that the university community will continue to find new and challenging opportunities and wlli continue to increase and strengthen its participation which has already become a major element in the success of the program so far.”
West Side Association of Commerce (N.Y.C.) presented National West Side Award to nasa. In accepting the award, nasa Administrator James E. WTebb said: “Except in war time, no large national effort has had such a rapid buildup as the space program over the past five years. The end of the buildup is not in sight, but the rate is slowing down and is keyed to the policy . . . that this is a fast paced, driving, prudently managed and efficiently conducted program, but is not a crash program. . . . “In my view, we are entering a period when our national decisions and the debates which accompany them will not so much relate to whether and when we can achieve pre-eminence in space, but the rate at which we should proceed beyond the time when this pre-eminence is achieved—beyond the time when we have begun manned exploration of the moon. . . . “It is the contribution of all the forces, in industry, government, and the universities, under the leadership which President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson have given the program, that gives us the basis for the pre-eminence we have in most fields in space and the pre-eminence we will shortly have in all.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced establishment of nasa’s Northeastern Operations Office, to be located in the Boston, Massachusetts, area. The office will coordinate nasa’s liaison with university and business contractors in the northeast United States.
Reported that Secretary of Defense McNamara was not surprised by the Soviet double-orbiting of vostok iii and iv, and that he did not consider the flights as cause for changing the U.S. military space program.
U.N.’s reorganized 28-nation Committee on the Peacefil Uses of Outer Space opened its meetings with the reelection of Dr. Franz Matsch of Austria as chairman and his subsequent riling that the committee woild make decisions by “consensus” rather than by vote. U.S. delegate was Francis T. P. Plimpton; his deputy was Richard N. Gardner, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Orgailzation Affairs. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, was Plimpton’s technical adviser. Dr. Homer Newell of nasa and Leonard C. Meeker of the State Department were alternate representatives. Congressional advisers were Senators Howard W. Cannon and Margaret Chase Smith, and Representatives James G. Filton and George P. Miller. U.S.S.R. representative was Platon D. Morozov. V. Dobronravov, member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and space expert, was his scientific adviser.
NASA-wide conference reviewing nasa’s Future Applications Program was held in headquarters to review best means of increasing application of technological advances derived from the space program to commercial and industrial purposes.
nasa Administrator Webb named Franklyn W. Phillips, Assistant to the Administrator (October 1, 1958-present), to establish and direct nasa’s Northeastern Operations Office in Boston, Mass. Phillips served as Acting Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council from January 1959 to February 1960.
Deputy nasa Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden accepted invitation to become an Honorary Fellow of the British Interplanetary Society, an honor only accorded to eight persons who have rendered major services to astronautics over a number of years.
U.S.S.R. made unsuccessful attempt to launch Venus probe, the launch vehicle falling to achieve escape trajectory and remaining in parking orbit, NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported in Sept. 5, 1962, letter to Congress.
In an address to the Duke University Symposium on “Regional Implications of Space Research,” nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated: “I believe the regional approach is sound. It permits a number of universities to pool resources for research and to plan complementary programs directed to the needs of the region. Industry, too, has much to gain from regional cooperation . . . beginning, more and more, to look to the universities of their region for the most important resources of the age—ideas, scientific brainpower, and advanced technological skill and experience. “It is not a question today of whether a region can already qualify. . . . The question is whether the region is creatively doing what it can to equip its citizens to serve their area and their Nation in a period when our prosperity and our very existence as a free people depend on scientific and technological leadership. . .”
Results of Aviation Week poll of the members of the House of Representatives to secure “grass-roots” opinions on the U.S. space program were published. Representatives were asked to indicate how their constituents felt about key space aspects. The majority indicated that the U.S. space program is “proceeding at the right pace”; of the minority who disagreed with this, twice as many favored “speeding up the program.” Landing a man on the moon was considered “something the U.S. must do primarily to keep up with the Russians.” The majority also felt that nasa rather than the military should run the space program (“emphatic support for nasa on this question by a ratio of almost 5 to 1”). Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario noted on his questionnaire that it is regrettable tnat the space program is linked in the public mind to the cold war contest with Russia: “I am concerned by this because the space program does not therefore stand on its own and there is the resulting danger that it wlli not receive the continuous support it will need over the years ahead to do what must be done . . .”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Northeast Commerce and Industry Exposition in Boston, said: “The achievement of . . . [U.S. pre-eminence in space] requires that we learn to travel in space as we have learned to travel on the sea or in the air. We must develop what might be termed space power—the capability to utilize space for every purpose which our national interest may require. And, to fulfill the directives established by the Congress, we must develop that competence in space for the benefit of our own people, and of all mankind .... “Although creative individual effort is as important today as it has ever been, and the imagination and initiative of the individual remain the primary source of scientific and technical progress, the development and perfection of the complex equipment, the systems and subsystems which are taking men into space are rarely, if ever, the work of single individuals. Today, teams of talented and imaginative technicians are joined in each major technological achievement . . . .”
In message to the Second National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space at Seattle, President Kennedy noted that the U.S. was already “working hand in hand with scientific groups of fifty nations. “Ours is an open society and the benefits of our space program will continue to flow throughout the world. It is my hope that the Soviet Union will cooperate constructively in the proposals which we have made so that all peoples will gain in the improvement of weather observation, communications systems and the manifold output of the peaceful application of space technology.”
President Kennedy opened his news conference with the announcement that he had received Premier Khrushchev’s reply to his letter on cooperation in the peaceful uses of space and stated: “I’m gratified that this reply indicates that there are a number of areas of common interest.” He further announced that Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, had been designated to lead the technical discussions with Soviet representatives beginning in New York on March 27.
Reported that responsibility for all U.S. space bioscience programs, including animal flights, would be given to nasa as result of informal agreement between Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara and nasa Administrator James E. Webb.
In speech to the 1962 Boys Nation, nasa Administrator Webb spoke of the future of the space age: “There is an intimate connection between the space effort and the future of this nation.” Mr. Webb was made an honorary member of Boys Nation and was presented a plaque for his “interest in the youth of the nation.”
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was among five Government career men selected for 1962 Rockefeller Public Service Awards.
In a nasa press conference following the presentation of the Administration’s budget to Congress, Mr. James Webb, nasa Administrator, commented on the general attitude toward nasa’s doubled appropriation request: “I would say that the people I have talked to have felt that we ought to go forward with the effort at about the level the President has recommended. I have seen no indication as we have had advanced discussion with some of the leaders, like the Chairman of the House Committee, Congressman Miller, the Chairman of the Senate Committee, Senator Kerr, and with some of the Appropriations members; we have seen no disposition on their part to just simply throw up their hands and say, 'No, sir.’ Each one of them has said that what you have makes sense and we are going to look it over very carefully, of course, but nevertheless there has been no tendency to start out with a reaction that it was simply out of line with reality. . . . Under those circumstances my judgment is that there will be a good, strong, vigorous debate, just as there was when this agency was formed, and that when the issues are clearly out on the table, and the success of the very active flight program that we are now conducting makes itself felt, that there will be support for the program and that we will end up with about the recommendations of the President.”
Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, nasa director of grants and research contracts, told press conference in Chicago that by 1970 one out of every four technically trained persons in U.S. will be engaged in some phase of the space program. Press conference preceded first national conference between nasa and representatives of 300 universities, colleges, and technical schools, Nov. 1-3.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, speaking at NASA-University Conference in Chicago, said nasa needed help from universities in four main areas: space sciences, manned space flight, applications of earth satellites to communications and meteorology, and advanced research and technology. “Our educational institutions bear a major responsibility for the success of our national effort to explore space. Our universities and colleges are called upon to produce a body of scientists and engineers of unexcelhd competence. Some of these graduates wlli enter governmental service with nasa and other agencies participating in the space program; some wlli join private research organizations and industrial corporations. “But some must remain at the universities where they continue to advance knowledge and produce new talent. This last function should receive high priority. The government laboratory, industry, and research foundation all are users of creative and talented men without reproducing this vital national resource. The university alone is the producer of new engineers and scientists.”
nasa published an integrated series of three Quality Publications setting forth nasa’s intensified quality assurance program now required in nasa space programs from r&d concept through space operations. These publications required nasa prime and subcontractors on space system work to establish and maintain a quality program that in many elements was beyond traditional quality control. They also provided guidelines for nasa management to evaluate contractor quality performance both as a factor of current contract performance and as a consideration in award of future contracts.
U.K. and Canada supported U.S. request that U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space concentrate on international cooperation on space programs rather than on legal matters that contained elements of “a highly political and controversial nature.”
Ambassador Charles Bohlen officiated at the opening of a nasa exhibit at the Palais de la D&ouverte, Paris, France. The exhibit would stay in Paris until January 15, included models of past, current, and future nasa spacecraft; panels explaining the goals and results of the U.S. space program; a working telstar demonstration; and a Spacemobile lecture and demonstration. The exhibit was enthusiastically received by French scientific and government personages attending the inauguration.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was among the five Federal employees presented with the distinguished Rockefeller Public Service Award for 1962 by President Kennedy.
President Kennedy sent telegram to aerospace unions and industries stating that a strike would “substantially delay our vital missile and space programs and would be contrary to the national interest.” The International Association of Machinists, one union involved in threatened strike of 150,000 workers in major aerospace companies, immediately accepted the President’s request to postpone strike for 60 days.
President Kennedy congratlliated labor and management at U.S. missile sites for achieving a new low in work stoppages. According to the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, only 1 man-day per 1,100 man-days worked was lost during the year ending this date, while 1 man-day per 96 man-days worked was lost during the 1956-1961 period. The President expressed confidence that the commission would continue to receive cooperation of labor and management “in making sure that our missile and space programs go forward ... as economically as possible.”
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric, addressing representatives of Midwest industries and universities in South Bend, Ind., said: “The United States believes that it is highly desirable for its own security and for the security of the world that the arms race should not be extended into outer space, and we are seeking in every feasible way to achieve this purpose. Today there is no doubt that either the United States or the Soviet Union could place thermonuclear weapons in orbit. . . . “We have no program to place any weapons of mass destruction into orbit. An arms race in space will not contribute to our security. ...” He added that U.S. military space program has two objectives: “First, as part of our overall Defense effort, we have continuing programs to ensure that the United States will be able to cope with any military challenge in outer space. Our programs in this area are under constant review, and this review indicates that our present rate of effort is entirely adequate. “Second, as a part of our national space program, we in the Defense Department, along with nasa, are actively exploring the potentialities of outer space as a useful part of our expanding universe. We are developing through activities in space and observations from space our ability to improve our capabilities in fields such as communications, navigation, meteorology, mapping and geodesy. Many branches of industry are contributing to this endeavor by improving propulsion, electronic, photographic, communications and other components of systems for space research and utilization. These programs have great significance not only for our military forces but for the economic and scientific advance of the United States and of the whole world. The progress that they represent, like all scientific advances, is neu+ral in its political and moral content. . . .”
In testimony on proposed Federal salary reform before the House Post Office and Civil Service Committee, nasa Administrator James E. Webb stressed the requirements of the national space program for adequately paid scientific and technical personnel in government. He pointed out that one third of nasa’s personnel were professional scientists and engineers, one third skllied craftsmen and research mechanics and their supervisors, one eighth were engineering and scientific technicians, and one sixth were clerical and secretarial. The remainder were professional-level specialists in management, legal counsel, librarians, editors, etc. Mr. Webb said that in considering pay raise legislation (H.R. 10480) the Federal Government must be able to compete favorably in the nation-wide labor market and that present salaries must be raised to have “reasonable comparity” outside of Government.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa’s Director of Space Sciences, speaking to a sectional meeting of the American Society for Engineering Education at Texas Technological College, Lubbock, Texas, said: “. . . accomplishing the space mission absolutely requires the strong and vigorous participation of our colleges and universities, which in turn requires that nasa bear its fair share of the support required to make it possible for the universities and colleges to participate. The universities must bear their share of responsibility to the space program and allocate an appropriate fraction of their material, as well as human, resources to the effort. In such a partnership, nasa stands ready to invest an appreciable fraction of its resources.”
In interview with Data magazine, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, said that Houston Chamber of Commerce had predicted that the “arrival of the Manned Spacecraft Center mil influence the economic growth of the area to a degree similar to that associated with the opening of the ship channel here almost 50 years ago. Community leaders are enthusiastic concerning the diversion of Houston’s growth from an almost total reliance on the petrochemical industry. Of course, you must also remember that Houston, in terms of population increase, is one of the most dynamic cities of America. The Manned Spacecraft Center represents only a segment of its growth. . . . “Undoubtedly, there has been some immediate impact on the economy since msc’s arrival in the Houston area. More than 80 aerospace companies have opened local offices here. ...”
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Northwestern Univ. (Letter)
Background briefing in Pentagon on dod budget proposals for FY 1964 indicated a total request in new obligational authority of $53.7 billion. Of this, some $5.5 billion was earmarked for r*d for the three services: Army’s main emphasis would be on the modernized Nike-Zeus antimissile system and on antiguerrilla weapons; Navy’s on antisubmarine warfare; Air Force’s on missile and space systems development. The $1.66 billion for rdt&e and Astronautics represented the dod portion of the national space program, (dod Background Briefing on the FY 1964 Defense Budget, 1/16/63)
U.S. Army announced successful test-firing of Nike-Zeus antimissile missile at White Sands Missile Range. Colonel I. O. Drewry, Nike-Zeus Project Manager, said test objectives were met. (dod Release 239-62)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the Chamber of Commerce, Billings, Mont., noted that President Jefferson’s Louisiana Purchase in 1803, which brought much of the state of Montana within the boundaries of the U.S., was criticized at the time as a “prodigal waste of The public monies.’ ” Similarly the space program had been criticized. But Mr. Webb predicted that “the decisions for a dynamic national space program made by the Congress, by President Eisenhower, and by President Kennedy during the past five years will earn a place in history that, in significance will go far beyond Jefferson’s Louisiana Purchase and many of the other major decisions which have characterized turning points in our national history.” (Text)
In commencement address at Univ. of Delaware, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “. . . For the first time in the history of mankind the opportunity to leave the earth and explore the solar system is at hand. Only two nations, the United States and the Soviet Union, have the resources with which to exploit this opportunity. Were we, as the symbol of democratic government, to surrender this opportunity to the leading advocate of the Communist ideology, we could no longer stand large in our own image, or in the image that other nations have of us and of the free society we represent. “Like it or not, therefore, the hard facts of international life leave no doubt tbat we are in a contest with the Soviet Union. Like it or not, it is a fact of international life that space achievement is and will be a symbol of national character and national strength . . . .” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said:	“. . . It is important to note that the budget requested for the total program of nasa for fiscal year 1964 includes less than $50,000,000 for new programs. The remainder is to maintain the projects now underway on schedule and to pay the contractors for the work they have obligated themselves to do to meet these schedules. “The policy on which this budget is based is the mastery of space, and its utilization for the benefit of mankind. This mastery, and the relation of our position to those of other nations, will not be determined by any single achievement. Superiority in the space environment will be won and very likely can be held by that nation which first fashions into usable systems all of the scientific knowledge, all of the technology, all of the experience, all of the space launch and terminal facilities, and all of the aids to space navigation required for safety and regular operation. “These are the capabilities and resources which the United States must have, and this budget, is designed to make rapid progress toward acquiring them ....*' (Testimony)
In testimony before the House Armed Services Committee, General Curtis E. LeMay testified: “The Soviets could be proceeding actively to develop space systems for military application. We believe that the Soviets wfill produce and deploy those military space systems Which they find feasible and advantageous in comparison with other types of weapons and military equipment . . . “U.S. military achievements in space will be expensive. Our objectives will be difficult to accomplish and the risks . . . large.” “However, as in all previous military progress, risks will diminish with experience and can be minimized in early stages by thoroughly planned decision points. “We must not risk the danger of waiting for the enemy to demonstrate a capability before we undertake the development of our own. The visible threat to our National security requires a vigorous military space program.” (Text; A-N-AF Journal and Register, 3/2/63,16)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of Julian Scheer as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Scheer had been serving as consultant to nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs George L. Simpson, Jr., since November 21, 1962. (nasa Release 63-21)
Appointment of Robert H. Charles as Special Assistant to nasa Administrator was announced. Consultant to Administrator since September 1962, Mr. Charles would work closely with nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs in development and negotiation of NASA-industry contractual relationships. (nasa Release 63-134)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences began hearings on technical and scientific aspects of U.S. space program, preparatory to hearings on nasa proposed FY 1964 budget authorizations. Testifying were nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/59)
Gordon M. Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, told representatives of 11 foreign airlines that U.S. could build a safe, commercially profitable supersonic transport airliner. He stressed that “we don’t think we are lagging far behind” Britisli-French development of Concorde. (NYT, 8/22/63)	_	_
Results of Harvard Business School poll of U.S. industrialists on how they viewed America’s space program, published in Harvard Business Review, indicated that industrialists expect a considerable payoff from space in terms of tangible benefits to our planet and think that the space program is “a great energizing force on our society.” (Greenough, Boston Morning Globe, 9/2/63)
nasa announced three-year $400,000 grant to Univ. of Washington for research in new, advanced ceramics and the improvement of existing materials for use in the space program and for industrial applications, (nasa Release 63-180; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/12/63)
nasa Administrator, James E. Webb, addressed North Carolina Press Association in Chapel Hill: “Our goal is to be first in every aspect of space research, development, and exploration. To achieve it we must develop the same sort of capability in the space environment that we have achieved on land, on and under the sea, and in the air, and ‘be in a position second to none.’
Editorial in Missiles and Rockets took issue with widespread assertions that the space program was a serious drain on the Nation’s scientific and technical manpower. Asserting that no other part of the economy was known to have a serious shortage of scientists or engineers and that even if the space program were stopped tomorrow the crosstraining of scientists and engineers into some other part of the economy would be long and difficult if not impossible, the editorial concluded that the big problem of the future would be a shortage of skilled manpower against a background of a rising threat of unemployment. The Nation would need an estimated 34.5 million new jobs by 1970. “New jobs develop from new technologies. And one of the fastest and most promising routes to development of new technologies lies in the missile/space industry. “With such a demand for new jobs ahead and with a concurrent need for skilled workers, the answer seems obvious—yet has received little attention. Training of surplus manpower to fit the requirements for skilled workers is the only sensible route— not a cutback in what will soon be the nation’s largest industry. But we have yet to see any large-scale government program for training of unemployables. “Nor is it solely a government problem. It must be shared by the nation’s industrial management and labor unions.” (M&R, 11/18/63, 46)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation, pointed out the long history of naca-nasa contribution to aircraft development and its continuing research contribution to the supersonic transport. Denying that such a transport would be economically unfeasible, Mr. Webb said that further improvements were attainable during the aircraft’s development: “Reduce fuel reserves by 17%; Increase airplane lift-to-drag ratio by 7% ; Reduce engine specific fuel consumption during cruise by 3%; Reduce engine weight by 15% ; Reduce airframe structure weight by 5%. If all of these gains can be achieved simultaneously the payload can be increased 34% for a given weight aircraft designed to fly 4,000 statute miles.” (Text)
In regular press conference, President Kennedy responded to a question about the pace of the U.S. space program relative to the Soviet Union’s: “The U.S. is making, as you know, a major effort in space and will continue to do so. We are expending an enormous sum of money to make sure that the Soviet Union does not dominate space. We will continue to do it. And we will continue to take whatever steps are necessary to prevent any action against the United States. “The fact of the matter is the Soviet today with a nuclear weapon can reach the United States with a missile. So I wouh have to know in more precise detail than you [the questioner have described the exact nature of our threat before I suggestet what our counteraction would be.” (Transcript in Wash. Post, 3/22/63, A16)
nasa said it was investigating “possible improprieties” in reports that cars leased to nasa by a contractor, Management Services, Inc., at Cape Canaveral were being sold after two or three years use for as little as $50. Some of them had been sold to nasa employees, the reports said. {NYT, 10/17/63)
Even our opponents realize that we have the leading role in space,’ Khrushchev said recently. ‘They haven’t overtaken us yet, and we are not going to let them. Our people are covering themselves with glory. We shall give the capitalist world no peace, since it has to go.’ “We have a balanced, fast paced space program geared to our national needs and resources. I can assure you that the Soviets are also working hard on a well conceived program, even though they throw a veil of secrecy over their failures and try to confuse us about their objectives.” (Text)
U.S.S.R.’s most recent cosmonauts, Jr. Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova and L/Col. Valery Bykovsky, held press conference in Moscow. Both insisted that tandem flight had gone off according to schedule, both as to duration and maneuvers. Lt. Tereshkova, the first woman into space, added another fact to her official biography—that she had had pilot training prior to entering the space program. (N.Y. Herald Trib., 6/26/63)
In address at Univ. of Wichita, Kans., nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Today, it is accepted that growing industries tend to concentrate in regions where research fanilities are best. No part of the country can afford to neglect investments in advanced scientific and engineering education and in first class research facilities. “Modem industry, too, has much to gain from regional cooperation in support of the universities and associated research efforts. Industrial leaders are beginning, more and more, to look to the universities of their region for the most important resource of the age—ideas, scientific brainpower, and advanced technological skill, experience, and judgment. “It is not a question today of whether a region can already qualify—can now offer the human and natural resources required— for a particular industrial plant or government facility. “The question is whether the region is creatively doing what it can to equip its citizens to serve their area and their nation in a period when our prosperity and our very existence as a free people depend on scientific and technological leadership . . . .” (Text)
Legislative Manager of U.S. Chamber of Commerce Theron J. Rice said in public letter that CofC recommended nasa’s FY 1964 budget request be cut by $1.2 billion “and that a total of $4,512,000,000 be appropriated for nasa programs for Fiscal 1964. We believe this amount will adequately provide for a continuation of our national space program and will enable the space agency to meet the established goal of a manned lunar landing by the end of this decade. The amount we recommend will give the space agency an approximate 25% increase in appropriations over Fiscal 1963, which is the maximum growth rate we believe can be sustained and supported within the economic as well as scientific and technical capabilities of the nation . . . .” (Text, Av. Wk., 8/26/63, 21)
Total manpower working at nasa’s Michoud Operations, of which only 244 were nasa employees: 8,463. Contractor employees were: Boeing, 4,136; Chrysler, 3,207; Mason-Rust, 769; Rocketdyne, 13; and Telecomputing Services, 94. (Marshall Star, 10/23/63, 4)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket, launched from nasa Wallops Station with U.S.-Japanese experiment to measure electron temperatures and densities in the ionosphere by two different methods: Langmuir probe, supplied by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and radio-frequency resonance probe, developed by Radio Research Laboratory, Tokyo. 185-lb. payload reached 141mi. altitude and transmitted approximately 8 min. of telemetry before impacting in Atlantic Ocean about 71 mi. from launch site. Data obtained from the daytime experiment were compared with data obtained from similar experiment conducted at night, three days earlier. ( nasa Releases 211 and 218)
Washington Evening Star proposed appointment of “a devil’s advocate” for U.S. space program. He would be “a member of Government, well qualified in science and engineering and well advised on tbe doings of lawyers and publicists . . . charged with building the strongest possible case against every space proposal— before it becomes sanctified as a line item in the Federal budget .... “This functionary .. . might well save the country a good deal of money and enhance the progress of the space program at the same time . . . .” (Editorial, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/27/63, A12)
nasa announced withdrawal of controversial research grant to Columbia Univ. School of Journalism at the University’s request because of an apparent misunderstanding of its scope and purpose. nasa had awarded the grant for studying “ways of making scientific advances of the space program more readily available” to news media. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/19/631
At luncheon meeting with nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Soviet Academician Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov reported to have suggested that it might be desirable to discuss possibility of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar expedition. (Bartlett, Wash. Eve Star, 9/17/63; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/18/63; Finney, NYT, 9/18/63,11)
California’s Governor Pat Brown said in Washington that nasa Administrator James E. Webb was planning a “deliberate” effort to spread contracts throughout the nation which would result in reduction of contracts to California industries. Gov. Brown later told L.A. Times that Mr. Webb reassured him that nasa contracts would continue to be awarded competitively. Mr. Webb confirmed nasa policy “to spread the problems which we must solve in space work over the greatest number of able minds throughout the country, . . .” but that purpose of policy was not to penalize California but to “obtain the best solutions for the program .... Contracts will be let by competition alone, not on the basis of politics or geography.” (L.A. Times, 2/16/63)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in speech before American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in New York City that launching of lunik iv was an initial step “in a very well organized man-on-the-moon program.” He warned that U.S.S.R. would “employ its growing space competence for military purposes if it finds such action is effective. We must be ready to handle such a threat.” Dr. Welsh disputed former President Eisenhower’s recent charge that “enormous sums of money” were being wasted in the National space program. “Mr. Eisenhower is consistent. He was wrong about the space program two, three, four years ago, and he is wrong now.” (NYT, 4/4/63,19)
Rep. James Weaver (R.-Pa.) spoke on the space race following Premier Khrushchev’s statement that Russia was not sending a man to the moon: “This ‘moondoggle’ has been a wrong objective in a race with the Soviet Union that never existed and has resulted in a space gap which threatens our national security. “Therefore, it becomes imperative that we immediately realine [sic] our space objectives to national security and eliminate this gap. I call upon James E. Webb, Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, to carry out this objective. If he cannot immediately reevaluate and report frankly and honestly to this Congress that this has been accomplished, then I feel it is our responsibility to demand his resignation. The Congress and the public can no longer tolerate public relations gimmicks and double-talk concerning the space program and our space gap when our national security is threatened.” {CR, 10/28/63,19365)
Dr. Nello Pace, physiology prof, at Univ. of Calif., sworn in as consultant on life science programs to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release)
President of mit, Julius A. Stratton, announced plans for new Center for Space Research on mit campus, nasa would provide $3 million of the total $4 million cost. (Boston Sun. Advertiser, 1/6/63) ■January 6: Review of Space Research, report of eight-week Space Science Summer Study sponsored by National Academy of Sciences in support of nasa, was transmitted to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Consensus of the more than 100 U.S. scientists from Government, universities, and industry: “Of all the discoveries that have come from or can now be anticipated from man’s efforts in space sciences, none more easily captures the imagination nor is more likely to focus interest and acclaim than the empirical proof that there is in this universe a biota other than our own. “On solid scientific grounds, on the basis of popular appeal, and in the interests of our prestige as a peace-loving nation capable of great scientific enterprise . . . finding and exploring extraterrestrial life should be acclaimed as the top-priority scientific goal of our space program .... “What is at stake is an opportunity to gain a new level of discussion of the meaning and nature of life.” Even without “definitive evidence” of extraterrestrial life, report said there was no basis for ruling out possibility of life on Mars, Venus, or the moon; it strongly endorsed nasa policy of sterilizing interplanetary spacecraft to prevent contamination of possible extraterrestrial life. The report also recommended that trained scientist-observers be assigned important roles in future U.S. space missions. “By his presence, man will contribute critical capacities for scientific judgment, discrimination, and analysis (especially of a total situation) which can never be accomplished by ms instruments, however complex and sophisticated they become. “Hence manned exploration of space is science in space, for man will go with the instruments that he has designed to supplement his capacities—to observe what is there, and to measure and describe the phenomena in terms that his scientific colleagues will clearly understand. A scientifically trained and oriented man will be essential for this purpose.” Report asked nasa to take immediate steps to train scientists for space investigations so that: a “scientist-astronaut” would be member of each Project Apollo (lunar mission) crew; meteorologists could co-pilot future manned orbiting space observatories, beginning with two-man Gemini flights in 1964; biologists would be available for first manned flights to Mars; astronomers would be prepared for advent of space observatories and for maintenance and modification of these facilities. Urging “maximum possible participation of scientists in all space missions,” report outlined tour specific levels of training: scientist-astronauts (men combining experience and resourcefulness of trained scientist and trained astronaut); scientist-passengers (experienced, mature scientists with adequate training in critical and emergency spacecraft operations); ground scientists (leading scientists in pertinent fields collaborating with spacecraft personnel in accomplishment of scientific mission) ; astronaut observers (astronauts with varying degrees of special training in making scientific observations), (nas, Review of Space Sciences; nas Releases)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before annual meeting of Texas Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association in Houston, quoted President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations toward joint lunar exploration: “The President’s statement has captured the imagination of the peoples of the world. In itself, cooperation in space activity between the great antagonists of the Cold War is a thrilling prospect. But the significance of this possibility is not limited to space; rather, it lies equally in the fact that cooperation in space is one more step toward cooperation on Earth, toward the banishment of the fear of the annihilation of life as we know it. “The President’s statement received weight and conviction from the fact that the United States has a powerful space capability; and from the fact that this Nation is well on its way to achieving preeminence in this new environment. “This national strength in space represents a massive and productive effort on the part of the United States during the past five years, an effort whose potential value is only now beginning to emerge .... “While proceeding with the development of the launch vehicles and spacecraft of the future, more than 90 per cent of it under contract with American industry, we have also learned the essentials of space operations, and achieved a degree of reliability which has produced many specific achievements in space. “In 1958, the United States had five successful flights, but for each success we had two failures. By 1961, out of 54 flights, the success ratio was 83 per cent. In the first eight months of this year every nasa launch has succeeded, with the exception of one small Scout rocket launched from Wallops Island . . . .” (Text) September 25: Eugene Wasielewski, Associate Director of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, in address before Scientific Research Society of America in Paoli, Pa., emphasized accomplishments of nasa during its first five years: “While it is easy for me to say that nasa has, as an organization, launched over 50 satellites, of which 30 were put into orbit by Goddard . . ., I am sure that you must all realize the tremendous research and development effort that was required to put these spacecraft into orbit. “Certainly Goddard . . . owes much to the successful development of the Delta launch vehicle which has given us 20 successes in 21 shots . . . .”	(Goddard News. 10/7/63. 6]
U.S.S.R. was designing a supersonic transport aircraft from the start, not modifying a bomber design as they had done with the TU-104 and were rumored to be doing again, according to faa Deputy Administrator Gordon Bain. (NYT, 11/4/63,1)
nasa announced signing of Memorandum of Understanding with India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy, providing for cooperative U.S.-India space program. Joint scientific experiments to explore equatorial electrojet and upper-atmosphere winds from geomagnetic equator would be launched from Thumba, India, during 1963. For equatorial electrojet experiments nasa would provide nine Nike-Apache vehicles; ground launching, tracking, and telemetry equipment, ground instrumentation on loan basis; and training in U.S. for Indian personnel responsible for telemetry and launch operations. Univ. of New Hampshire would provide instrumented payloads through nasa. India would provide launching site and facilities; personnel for launch operations, telemetry, and data analysis; and supporting ground magnet ic and meteorological observations. For atmospheric-wind measurements, nasa would provide four Nike-Cajun vehicles, appropriate launching device on loan basis, and training at nasa centers for Indian personnel responsible for launch operations. India would supply four sodium-vapor-release payloads, photographic equipment, launch site and facilities, personnel, and supporting meteorological data, (nasa Release 63-5)
faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby and his Deputy Administrator Gordon Bain testified on plans for supersonic transport before Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation. They said the U.S. would cancel its development of the supersonic transport if events proved the U.S. could not produce an aircraft competitive in price with the British-French version. But they argued that estimates previously presented to the Subcommittee on costs of the aircraft were too high. Aviation spokesman had estimated cost of the U.S. aircraft at from $30 million to $40 million per aircraft, compared with the $10 to $12 million estimated for the heavily subsidized European aircraft, faa said U.S. aircraft should not cost more than $20 million. (AP, NYT, 10/30/63, 26)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology, said at Univ. of Minnesota Engineers’ Day Convocation that “all too often” the scientist “gets the credit for the work done by the engineer.” In the space program, “the boundary line between science and engineering is often so fine as to be indistinguishable . . . .” (Text)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, addressed Space, Science, and Urban Life Conference in Oakland, California: “The budget of $3.7 billion for the current fiscal year and the requested $5.7 billion for the next fiscal year are sizable sums of money, approaching one per cent of the gross national product in magnitude. But, perhaps even more important than the absolute magnitude of these sums, is the leverage they exert or can be made to exert on other more general activities and associated resources. Although the effect of the space program on the total national scene may be quite modest, in certain localized regions it can be quite large. For example, ... it appears at the present time that in Fiscal Year 1963 about 47 per cent of all nasa prime contracts will go to California firms . . . .” (Text)
Testifying at Space Posture Hearings, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Administrator James E. Webb revealed that nasa “did submit to the Director of the Budget and discussed with the President, the level of effort that might be obtained under four budget figures [$5.2 billion, $5.8 billion, $6.2 billion, and $6.6 billion] .... the figure recommended by the President, $5,712 million, was based on two policies established directly by the President after thorough disevery element respond to the surge is to cussion .... [1] the areas of space science . . . must fall under the same kind of criteria as other scientific areas in his budget . . . [2] with respect to the manned space flight activity, the budget level is set at the lowest level which will permit us to maintain target dates that give us a margin and still permit us to assure manned lunar exploration within this decade, barring some situation .... “. . . it is not a lavish budget by any manner of means; it is an austere budget set at this lowest level which would permit the maintenance of target dates that we believe are realistic .... “When John Glenn was here last week and we presented his spacecraft to the Smithsonian Institution and found it there under Lindbergh’s ‘Spirit of St. Louis’, Dr. Dryden used the phrase, ‘An aura of obsolescence is hanging over the Friendship 7.’ “It is important to recognize that just a year ago this spacecraft was the most modem thing we had in the United States. Today it has an air of obsolescence and is now in the Smithsonian Institution.” (Space Posture Hearings, 2/25/63, 3-18; Posture of the National Space Program, Rpt. of House Comm, on Sci. and Astron., 5/7/63, 5)
Stratoscope II 36-in. telescope, separated from tandem balloons by radio signal, landed 10 mi. north of Pulaski, Tenn.; balloons landed 14 mi. west of Pulaski. Project Manager Dr. Martin Schwarzchild, arriving at landing site, said he was “delighted” with condition of the instruments and termed the flight a success. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/3/63)
nasa announced appointment of James T. Dennison and Dr. Thomas P. Murphy as special assistants to nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, Dr. George L. Simpson. Dennison, formerly Director of Research and Engineering at Dennison Manufacturing Co., was assigned overall responsibilities in technology utilization. Dr. Murphy, formerly staff assistant to nasa Administrator, was assigned responsibilities in policy planning, socio-economic studies, and research projects. (nasa Release 63-159)
Astroscience Center, facility devoted to current and long-range space programs, opened in Chicago by Armour Research Foundation of Illinois Institute of Technology. Headed by Dr. Leonard Reiffel, Director of Physics Research at the Foundation, new center would coordinate research projects for nasa and enlarge space research activities of the Foundation. (NYT [West. Ed?J, 3/21/63)
Space Systems Division (ssd) recorded its 200th Thor launch. The figure includes the use of the Thor as a space booster—Thor-Agena, Thor-Delta, Thor-Able, and Thor-Able-Star—and as an intermediate range ballistic missile (irbm) . (afsc Release #312-R-114, Atch #2, 1/1/64, 2) June SO: Estimated 10,000-15,000 persons visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center on “Family Day.” (Htmtsville Times, 7/1 /63) During June: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, writing in Ordnance, said: “It should be unnecessary to point out that the space race is between the United States and Soviet Russia, not between nasa on the one hand and the Department of Defense or any of its services on the other. Yet, I believe the point needs to be made. “We are trying to build national competence and international good will and cooperation through our space program, not agency competence or intragovemmental rivalries. We are trying to build an effective image of a nation devoted to peace, to the improvement of mankind’s well-being, and to the furthering of man’s abilities and knowledge. “To do so we must be able to discourage aggression, which is the antithesis of our objectives. To fail to develop strength for peace through competence in space would, in a sense, be to disarm by default.” (Ordnance, May-June 1963,658)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb told National Transportation Institute meeting in Chicago “. . . our national defense—perhaps even our national survival—demands that we act to insure that no hostile force will be permitted to use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us.” (Chicago Trib., 1/31/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb sent a report to the Congress on the construction of facilities for the University of California: “. . . the University’s geophysics building is being expanded by the addition of wings for geology and chemistry laboratories. Accordingly, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration plans to provide funds for the construction of a 62,000 gross square foot addition to that building complex in the amount of $2,000,000. The addition will be known as the space science building.” (Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/84)
nasa’s Mississippi Test Operations (mto) had a work force of nearly 900 as of this date, of which nearly 700 were contractor employees, 81 were Army Corps of Engineers personnel, and 34 were nasa employees. Active contracts at mto now stood at some $28 million, with another $10 million out on bids. (Marshall Star, 11/13/63, 1)
Major reorganization of nasa Hq. became effective (see Oct. 9 for details), consolidating the four major program offices into three and delineating and elevating certain staff functions, (nasa Releases 63-225, 242)
Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California chemist, said at press conference in conjunction with National Academy of Sciences meeting in Washington that “more effort should be made to get more first-class scientists into the space program. If nasa really is going to use only one per cent of the nation’s scientists—how many among those will be first-class?” Comparing nasa with aec, Dr. Urey said: “The atomic energy program had a very positive base. Many top scientists worked m the program. But the space program is just the opposite, nasa grew too fast.” (Huntsville Times, 4/25/63)
Stephen J. Grillo, Director of nasa Headquarters’ Administrative Services since 1960, died.
Reported that nasa Administrator Webb and Defense Secretary McNamara were considering proposal that usaf perform military experiments during first 12 Gemini space flights, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. (Av. Wk., 6/24/63, 25)
Fourth annual Conference on Peaceful Uses of Space would be held in Boston in May 1964, nasa Administrator Webb announced. (Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, quoted in press interview, expressed his hope that Congress would continue its record of consistently taking “the necessary action to support the space program . . . As the space program builds up toward pre-eminence for the United States, a position we are rapidly approaching, the space agency is endeavoring to obtain the maximum space value for each dollar it spends and has made an excellent record in this regard .... [But] the successful and expeditious carrying out of the programs recommended in the President’s budget will require the $5,712,000,000 which he recommended . . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/1/63)
In aeronautics press briefing, nasa Administrator James E. Webb replied to reporter’s question on cost of supersonic transport development: “We can do a great deal for $1 billion. I think we could probably build a flying prototype for less than that.” In President Kennedy’s proposed plan for supersonic transport development, $750 million would be spent by Government (faa, dod, and nasa) and remaining $250 million by industry. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 7/26/63)
President Kennedy, asked in press conference if he “had any cause to reconsider” his commitment to goals of U.S. lunar program, replied: IooItaH al ii rvf nniircA xtIiab tro nrnnACAtl nnr Kntlm»i for ..	-	------	— v.	—	*' this year. We are looking at it again in relationship to next year’s budget. We are also looking at it because of the concern that has been raised in the Congress and out of the Congress. I have seen nothing, however, that has changed my mind about the desirability of our continuing this program. “Now, some people say that we should take the money we are putting into space and put it into housing or education. We sent up a very extensive educational program. My judgment is that what would happen would be that they would cut the space program and you would not get additional funds for education. We have enough resources, in my opinion, to do what needs to be done in the field, for example, of education, and to do what needs to be done in space. “Now, this program passed almost unanimously a year ago. What will happen, I predict, will be a desire perhaps, possibly, to cut it substantially, and then, a year from now or six months from now, when the Soviet Union has made another new, dramatic breakthrough, there will be a feeling of ‘Why didn’t we do more.’ I think our program is soundly based. I strongly support it. I think it would be a mistake to cut it. I think time will prove, even though we can't see all the answers which we will find in space, that tire overall expenditures have been worthwhile. This country is a country of great resources. This program in many ways is going to stimulate science. I know there is a feeling that the scientists should be working on some other matter, but I think that this program—I am for it and I think it would be a mistake to arrest it.” (Transcript, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/25/63, A5)
nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said in address before Society of Aerospace Material and Process Engineers in Philadelphia: “There is no area of technology more important to our space effort than materials and their processing. Virtually every device that is employed in space is limited in either performance or efficiency by its constituent materials. The space program is literally paced by our ability to use and process materials . . . .” (Text)
Results of marines ii flight towards and past Venus were detailed in nasa press conference. Analysis of microwave and infrared radiometer scans revealed Venus is covered by cold, dense clouds in upper atmosphere; preliminaiy estimate of Venutian surface temperature was around 800° F. Temperatures are essentially same on dark and sunlighted sides of Venus, with a cold spot in southern hemisphere. Any carbon dioxide in atmosphere above cloud layer was too small to be detected by mariner ii’s instruments. High-density electron ionosphere was not detected. Radar observation on Venus from Goldstone Tracking Station established Venus’ rotation rate as 230, plus or minus 40-50 days, retrograde, with 225 days as non-rotating status for Venus. This observation together with other ground (measurements and data from mariner n’s magnetometer indicated Venus has very low, if any, magnetic field. Analysis indicated solar plasma continuously flows out from the sun, velocity of observed solar winds varying from 200 to 500 miles per second (approximate) and having temperature of about 1,000,000° F. Density is normally about 10 to 20 protons and electrons per cubic inch. Because solar plasma “carries along with it lines of magnetic force which originate in the [sun’s] corona, and the frequent variations in plasma velocity results in the deformation of these field lines, ... it is difficult to deduce from the point-by-point measurement of magnetic field what the general undisturbed configuration of the solar field would be .... It is hoped that further data may reveal the presence of magnetic waves m space ana ciam^ me interactions oetween tne magnetic field and the plasma. ...” mariner ii data on ionized particles in space revealed a flux of about 100 million particles per sq. centimeter per sec. in the range from few hundred to a thousand electron volts. In range 0.5 to 10 mev for protons, “very few exist at times, but at other times their flux may be a number of times that of cosmic rays. In the range of energies 10 to 800 mev for protons, there is nearly complete absence of particles normally [with great number possible during solar flare]. Above 800 mev, galactic cosmic rays enter interplanetary space and these decrease in numbers quite rapidly as the energy decreases. ...” Data obtained from two-way doppler tracking of the probe during its flight would enable scientists to calculate the mass of Venus with probable error of 0.005 per cent (compared to probable error of 0.05 per cent calculated by astronomers); to determine precise locations of tracking stations on earth—specifically, to calculate exact location of Goldstone Tracking Station to within 20 yards, calculated to within 100 yards before mariner n mission; to determine value of Astronomical Unit, established by radar observations as 92,956,220 mi.—50,000 mi. longer than that by classical astronomical observations; and to determine precisely the mass of the moon, now known to certainty of 0.1 per cent. Dr. Eberhard Rechtin, Director of jpl’s Deep Space Instrumentation Facility, reported mariner ii’s flight “resulted in accumulation of some 65 million bits of information with an accuracy of at least one per cent and yet with the use of only three watts of radio frequency power.” (nasa Releases 63-36-1, -2, -3, -4, -5; nasa Press Conf. Transcript)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was elected to third four-year term as Home Secretary of National Academy of Sciences, (nas Release)
In introduction to U.N. Annual Report, Secretary General U Thant “. . . the development of cooperation in outer space exploration and use continued in an encouraging manner, especially in the scientific and technical field. “The Scientific and Technological Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its second session held in Geneva in May 1963, agreed upon a series of pew and revised recommendations concerning the exchange of information, encouragement of international programs, education and training, potentially harmful effects of special experiments and the organization of international sounding rocket facilities. The meeting of the subcommittee provided once more the occasion for the scientists of the two leading space powers to continue their private talks on cooperative space programs. “The World Meteorological Organization, the International Telecommunication Union and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization continued to participate actively in the field of peaceful exploration and use of outer space. “No agreement was reached on legal problems relating to outer space, but a valuable exchange of views took place in the Committee and its legal subcommittee . . . .” (Text, CR, 8/27/63, 15099-103) During August: The Atlantic Monthly published an article “Why Land on the Moon?” by Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director, Goddard Institute for Space Studies, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, Director, Office of Space Sciences, nasa. “These are the specific values of space exploration: the benefits of basic research, economically valuable applications of satellites, contributions to industrial technology, a general stimulus to education and to the younger generation, and the strengthening of our international position by our acceptance of leadership in a historic human enterprise. The current discussion of these values of the space program has served the United States well in directing its attention to questions of national purpose. But, however we may try to break the program down into its elements and to attempt a detailed balancing of debits and credits, the fact remains that the space effort is greater than the sum of its parts. It is a great adventure and a great enterprise, not only for the United States but for all humanity. We have the power and resources to play a leading role in this effort, and it is inconceivable that we should stand aside. “Scientific administrators ask . . . can we afford the cost of the space program in technical manpower? Their concern is heightened by the fact that federal activities in defense, space, and atomic energy together consume nearly half of the science and engineering talent available in the United States. But is the space agency the major consumer of trained manpower within this federal complex of technical agencies? In actuality, nasa will be using six percent of the national manpower pool in science and engineering through its contracts with private industry, plus an additional one percent in government laboratories. If the space program has substantial value, this is not an overwhelming drain.” (Text)
faa Administrator Najeeb Halaby announced appointment of Gordon M. Bain as Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development. Formerly Assistant Administrator for Appraisal, Bain would head faa organization charged with overall responsibility for Government-industry development of supersonic transport aircraft. ( faa Release 63-69)
Peaceful purposes,’ the Administration admits, means ‘keeping the peace’ as well as engaging in scientific exploration and m commercial activities in space. President Kennedy has said we must insure that no other nation gains a position in space that would threaten our security. And we are orbiting numerous unmanned space vehicles which could have significant militaiy purposes. But the disturbing fact is that we continue to put overwhelming emphasis on nonmilitary space programs and limit military efforts to a small list of defensive possibilities . . . .” (Sat. Eve. Post, 6/15/63,10,12)
In press conference, President Johnson discussed preparation of FY 1965 budget:	• “I am working from a budget of $98.8 billion this year. It appears that we will expend about that amount, and maybe a little under or a little over, but substantially $99 billion will be the expenditures this year. That was the amount of Mr. Ken-nedy’sbudget. There are built-in increases of $1,790 million that are mandatory —military pay increase for 9 months, military retired pay, civilian pay, National Aeronautics and Space contracts, the Agency for International Development, Post Office rise, Federal Aviation Agency, urban renewal, and public assistance grants.. .. “In the Roosevelt war years we spent as high as 46 percent of our gross national product for administrative budgets. During the transition period under Mr. Truman we spent 29 percent. In 1954, under Mr. Eisenhower, we spent 18.6 percent. We are hoping that we can come under that figure in our budget next year—in other words, that our budget expenditure as a percentage of our gross national product will be less for the fiscal year 1965 than it has been for any of these periods I mentioned . . . .” To the question, “Mr. President, have you reached a hard decision on changing the space program, including eliminating the Rover project?” the President replied: “No.” (Transcript, CR, 12/19/63,24005-007)
usaf was studying a novel method of protecting spacecraft from meteoroid hits, according to Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Demler (usaf) , Commander of the AF Research and Technology Div. usaf’s Flight Dynamics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, was studying the concept of surrounding the spacecraft with a 40-in.-thick layer of metallic dust held in place by an electrostatic field. A meteoroid hitting the vibrating dust layer would be shattered or vaporized. {M&R, 11/25/63,29) During November: Military role in the U.S. space program is “generally misrepresented and largely misunderstood,” Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Commander of AF Space Systems Div., told the World Affairs Council meeting in Los Angeles. The national policy of using space for peaceful purposes “serves to put the military into space, not restrict space to purely non-military activities. What-every shape and direction our ventures into space ultimately take, military considerations cannot be separated from the political, economic, psychological, technological and sociological implications of space development.” {M&R, 11/25/63,30)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in address at Annual Management Banquet of the National Management Association, in South Bend, Ind., that the “most important trend in NASA’s procurement activity today ... is our effort to use more incentive contracts. “Three years ago we had no incentive contracts. Today we have 52 totaling more than half a billion dollars. And we expect to raise that to one billion before the end of this year. . . . “So far we have experimented with a new type of incentive contract called the award fee. ... So far our experience with this type of incentive contract has been good; and efficient contractors who appear to be saving the government money have earned extra profits for themselves. The award fee contract is especially applicable to service contracts where targets are difficult to fix. We feel that the award fee has motivated contractors to perform better, to cut costs, and to make quick corrections when they have been deficient. Contractors, in turn, have expressed their satisfaction with this new procedure. . . .” (Text)
NASA announced Univ. of Arizona would receive $1,200,000 NASA grant to construct Space Sciences Center on the campus at Tucson. The four-story structure would “further the University of Arizona’s multidisciplinary program that is proving invaluable to the national space effort,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said, (nasa Release 64-183)
Disclosed at press conference in Florence, Italy, in connection with COSPAR meeting, mat U.S.—U.S.S.R. cooperative space negotiations would be held in Geneva within two weeks. Heading U.S. team would be NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, meeting with Soviet team led by Anatoli Blagonravov. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/14/64)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director for Space, Defense Research and Engineering, said in address before National Space Club in Washington that the Manned Orbiting Laboratory would be the first phase of DOD’s National Orbiting Space Station and would provide means of carrying out experiments to prove or disprove the military role of man in space. mol would carry two astronauts for 30 days, also would carry experiments of nonmilitary nature, primarily for NASA. Discussing nonmilitary unmanned space program, Dr. Hall disclosed that the Army had secretly launched secor last month and that it was performing “exceptionally well.” (SBD, 2/19/64, 274; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/19/64)
Col. Robert P. Young (usa), Executive Officer of NASA since 1961, was awarded NASA’s Medal for Outstanding Leadership. In making the award, NASA Administrator James E. Webb cited Young for “his outstanding leadership and dedicated service displayed in all aspects of performance while serving as executive officer of NASA, and for his significant and noteworthy contributions in co-ordinating internal management of the agency.” (nasa Release 64-181; Wash. Post, 7/22/64)
NASA-DOD-AEC committee studying space power requirements of U.S. space program through 1975 presented its report to Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (aacb). (M&R, 6/22/64)
Vice Adm. Rufus E. Rose (usn, Ret.) was sworn in as Director of Policy Planning Div., NASA Office of Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. The most recent assignment during Admiral Rose’s 44-year career was as Commandant of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, (nasa Release 64-73)
Breene M. Kerr, who had been NASA’s Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization, became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization. He thus took over part of the duties of Dr. George L. Simpson, who would function as Associate Deputy Administrator and Assistant Administrator for Policy Planning. (NASA Release 64-291)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said U.S.S.R.’s successful orbiting of three-man voskhod I spacecraft “shows they are actively in the race with manned spacecraft.” He noted Soviet emphasis on life sciences in their space program. “They have done more in this field, I believe, than we have.” Asked about U.S. chances for landing a man on the moon before U.S.S.R., he replied: “We have a 50-50 chance of getting there first.” But, he added, U.S.S.R. might be first with a circumlunar flight. Citing buildup of Soviet space program, Dr. Welsh said ratio of their spacecraft launchings in 1964 to comparable portion of 1963 was about 3-to-1. He described voskhod i as a “logical follow-on from a very rapidly stepped-up space program.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, received honorary degree in mechanical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute of the University of Milan, (nasa Release 64-74)
At Missouri Valley College commencement exercises, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “For some time we in NASA have been concerned with doing our part to help build up the nation’s supply of scientific and engineering manpower, and to ensure that our national competence grows rather than diminishes. Accordingly, in 1962, the agency initiated its present program of training graduate students in space-related fields, and nearly 900 students are already in training. “This fall the number of schools participating will grow from 88 to 131, located in 47 states—with four of these colleges here in Missouri. . . (Text)
Editorial in Washington Evening Star said postponement of manned Gemini space flight into 1965 came as “scant surprise,” since “as long ago as last Christmastime a ‘space forecast’ story in the Star made the prediction that this would be the case, and for several months the ‘last quarter of 1964’ target date has been hardly more than a tongue-in-cheek fiction at NASA Headquarters. . . . “Of course, it is far better to delay the flights than to run the risk of tragic failure due to haste or carelessness. Wouldn’t it make sense to forget about phony schedules—and phony excuses for not keeping them—and just carry on with the space program as fast and effectively as possible?” (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/64)
In a speech before the Briefing Conference on Government Contracting for Research and Development sponsored by the Federal Bar Association and the Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., in Boston, Ernest W. Brackett, NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator for Procurement Policy, spoke of NASA’s policy towards incentive contracts: “Incentive contracts are not the answer to everything, but much good can and will come from them. They will effect more realistic cost proposals. When a company’s incentive fee or profit is based on its cost proposal, it will not be on the low side. This means less cost overruns which are subject to so much criticism and which disrupt Government budgets. . . . There will also be more careful and detailed work definitions because a contractor wants to know what he is expected to do and be able to price it out if his incentive fee depends on performance and cost. It takes longer to negotiate incentive contracts and negotiations are harder. . . . Government personnel will be more careful, particularly in the technical areas, when incentive provisions are included. Another advantage should be fewer controls by Government over contract administration details, such as approval of overtime or sub-contractor selection. NASA would like to see contractors make higher profits but wants to have proof they have earned them. The health of the aerospace and electronics industries depends on their realizing a reasonable return for what they do. Incentive methods of contracting appear to be the best way this can be done.” (Text)
Soviet Government had rejected the space agreement negotiated in Geneva by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Soviet Academician Anatoli Blagonravov last June, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. After the negotiators had returned to their respective countries, Simons reported, U.S.S.R. notified U.S. in July that it chose to reject the agreement. NASA officials had no comment on the report, but other sources (unnamed) said the tentative agreement had called for exchange of information and publication of a book about space medicine and bioscience by Soviet and U.S. experimenters. U.S.S.R. refusal was based on insistence that topics be covered by either U.S. or Soviet author, although Blagonravov had agreed to U.S. proposal that each topic be covered by a Soviet and a U.S. author. This was said to be first instance of exercising the usual option to reject the space agreement reached by negotiating teams. (Simons, Wash. Post, 10/6/64)
Republican National Committee Chairman Dean Burch said in open letter to President Johnson that NASA Administrator James E. Webh was engaging “in the most blatant and transparent politics by suggesting he will shift the top space scientists and executives from Huntsville, Ala., to New Orleans. . . . This is political blackmail, pure and simple. . . .” (ctps, Chic. Trib., 10/27/64)
Both stages of first Titan II launch vehicle for Project Gemini were successfully static-fired for 30 seconds at Launch Complex 19, Cape Kennedy, producing combined total thrust of more than half a million pounds. Purpose of test was to evaluate overall Gemini launch vehicle system performance—fueling, countdown, ignition and cutoff commands, guidance control, and telemetry; and to verify engine performance by thrust generation and engine gimbaling. The stages were mounted side-by-side on separate mounts; electrical signal cut off first-stage engine after 30 sec., then started second-stage engine, which was cut off by radio signal from ground computer just as in actual flight. Charles W. Matthews, Gemini Project Manager, Msc, said static-firing test met all prelaunch requirements, (msc Release 64-9; M&R, 1/27/64,10)
NASA instituted revised patent waivers and related procurement regulations in accordance with the late President Kennedy’s directive for a more uniform patent policy among Federal agencies. New regulations gave contractors greater chance to obtain patent rights to their commercially applicable inventions made in the course of work on Government contracts. Announced Aug. 21, the new regulations were expected to accelerate contractors’ efforts to identify and report technological advances, thus enhancing technology utilization from the space program. (NASA Release 64-209; Av. Wk., 10/5/64, 26)
DOD announced award of $7,112,913 contract to Franchi Construction Co. for construction of NASA launch operations center headquarters building at Merritt Island, Fla. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers. (dod Release 96-64) During January: President Johnson sent letters to all major space/defense contractors urging them to achieve significant reductions in expenditures. In separate letters from NASA Administrator James E. Webb, contractors were told of three areas offering greatest potential for significant savings: purchasing at lowest price compatible with reliability requirements, placing greater emphasis on incentives, and reducing operating costs, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/10/64,1)
In NASA Hq. ceremony, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented cash awards to 10 inventors in recognition of their outstanding contributions to space science technology. Awards under the Space Act: $1,000 to Conrad Josias of jpl for invention of “bipolar logarithmic current-to-voltage transducer” which made possible the discovery of interplanetary plasma; $1,000 to James D.	Acord and Howard C. Vivian of jpl for invention of “space vehicle attitude control” employed in Ranger and Mariner spacecraft; $2,000 to Robert C. Baumann and Leopold Winkler of gsfc for invention of “spin adjusting mechanism” used on oso I, syncom ii, and Aerobee sounding rockets; and $4,000 to Harold R. Kaufman of lrc for invention of “ion rocket engine,” representing great step forward in ion propulsion r&d—the engine will he used in first Space Electric Rocket Test flight (Sert I). Awards under the Incentive Awards Act: $1,000 to Pleasant T. Cole, gsfc, for invention of “system for recording and reproducing pulse code modulated data,” capable of achieving significantly larger packing density on magnetic tape to reduce weight requirements; and $1,400 to William C. Morgan, Jack B. Esgar, and Richard H. Kemp of lrc for invention of “thin-walled pressure vessel” for use in testing materials subjected to cryogenic temperatures. (Hootman Memo, 2/18/64; nasa Release 64-45; lrc Release 64—16)
President Johnson transmitted to Congress his annual space report, United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, 1963 (H. Doc. 207). In his accompanying message the President said: “. . . Our space program, in both its civilian and military aspects, is peaceful in purpose and practice. Moreover, it combines such objective with a policy of international cooperation based upon a mutuality of participation and benefits as well as the wide dissemination of knowledge. “Space progress is essential if this Nation is to lead in technology and in the furthering of world peace. Such progress requires the use of substantial resources, which must be employed efficiently and effectively in order that we obtain the maximum benefits with a minimum of waste. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/27/64,1045)
Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D.-Wash.) was quoted as saying: “In view of the tremendous success of the Saturn flight, perhaps further savings in the cost of the space program might be possible between now and the first Saturn V flight by leap-frogging some of the intermediate steps.” (SBD, 1/31/64,169)
usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif., acquired 12 more students, bringing enrollment to 35. The school’s one-year course was designed to produce pilots, project managers, or consultants for future manned space programs. {A—N—AF J&R, 5/30/64, 17)
First test patterns had been sent over special cable link between Suitland, Md., and Moscow, for exchange of meteorological data, according to U.S. Weather Bureau. The link was considered operational, could be used any time U.S. and U.S.S.R. agreed on scheduling and other details of the cooperative exchange. The cable was result of cooperative space agreement reached in 1962 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden for the U.S. and Academician A. A. Blagonravov for the U.S.S.R. (Gustaitis, Wash. Post, 10/13/64)
NASA Administrator James E.' Webb was presented with Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association’s Distinguished Service Honor Gold Medal Award and Certificate at the Association’s annual banquet. {A-N-AF J&R, 5/23/64,2)
A six-month study was concluded of public acceptability of sonic boons that had been conducted by the faa in the Oklahoma City area since February 3, 1964. The study was designed to gather data on public reaction to the noise that would follow the supersonic airliners of the 1970’s. During the test approximately 8 booms a day (total in test, 1,253) were created. During the 6 months the agency received 12,588 telephone calls, most of them complaints. In addition to these direct manifestations of opinion, the Univ. of Chicago conducted a detailed public opinion survey in conjunction with the experiment. Gordon M. Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, said in announcing the completion of the study: “Sonic boom presents the most imposing single challenge to design and operation of a supersonic transport plane. The people of Oklahoma City have been helping explore this challenge as, in effect, major participants in the nation’s supersonic transport development program.” (faa Release 64-74; Clark, NYT, 8/1/64)
Addressing Oklahoma Frontiers of Science Foundation in Oklahoma City during ceremonies celebrating its tenth anniversary, NASA Administrator James E. Webb pointed out that “some of our NASA projects in education and in the transfer of space technology to the general economy owe much to the philosophy and concepts threshed out in the early days of the Foundation. . . .” (Text)
President Johnson presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom, highest U.S. civilian award, to Clarence L. Johnson, designer of U—2 and A—11 aircraft, and 29 other distinguished Americans in White House ceremony. (AP, NYT, 9/15/64, 26) *	NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in New Orleans that progress in development of vehicles for manned lunar flight was “very good.” He predicted: “If things work well, we’ll be there by late 1969. This would not be possible if it were not for Michoud [nasa Michoud Operations].” At present, he said, 11,505 persons were employed at Michoud Operations and $927 million worth of contracts had been let there since it opened. Mr. Webb was in New Orleans to meet with former members of NASA New Orleans Coordinating Committee, formed in 1961 to assist NASA in establishing Michoud Operations. (N.O. Times-Picayune, 9/15/64)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in letter to NASA Center Directors and Heads of Headquarters Program and Staff Offices: “I call upon each of you ... to demonstrate full equality of opportunity without regard to sex, and that personal attitudes must not be allowed to operate adversely against women, or men, in recruitment, selection, training, or promotion. ... I now ask your full cooperation in meeting these stated objectives.” (nasa Hq. PB 64-14)
The report that the White House might establish a “space czar” cabinet post to direct dod and NASA space programs was discounted. The White House was against it, as were Secretary of Defense McNamara and NASA Administrator Webb. (M&R, 11/16/64, 7)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, DOD Deputy Director for Space, Directorate of Defense Research & Engineering, discussed the objectives of the military space program at Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers’ Winter Convention on Military Electronics, Los Angeles: “Our problems . . . are twofold: First: the United States military space program must be one of action, not reaction. We must concern ourselves with military space developments—not necessarily to match or offset any Soviet development, but to sustain and augment our own versatility and strength. The successes we have already obtained should encourage us in this drive. Second, mindful that in the past we often have been optimistic in the short run and pessimistic in the long run, we must expect that some of the new discoveries and developments that appear may suggest applications and capabilities in wholly unplanned ways. Accordingly, while we pursue efforts where applications are clear we must also lay a foundation of technology, knowledge, and experience which is sufficiently broad in scope to provide for future contingencies as they materialize or are identified. “From these considerations, then, are derived the two fundamental goals of the Defense space program: “First, to continue with the development and exploitation of space systems and capabilities which measure up on a cost-effectiveness basis to meet clearly defined high priority national defense requirements. “Second, to develop through a program integrated with other government agencies, such as NASA and the AEC, a broad base of technology and experience to permit the timely development and exploitation of space systems and capabilities which may be needed in the future, recognizing that lead times in certain areas, such as manned military space operations, may be 10 years or longer. . . .” (Text, DOD Release 106-64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in his remarks in Grand Rapids, Mich.: “We have a fighting chance to maintain our schedules for the manned lunar exploration mission in this decade. By so doing, we will increase our ability to operate in space for any mission the national interest may require. And we will be using space for peace, discouraging those with other ideologies from political propaganda or military threats. . . .” (Text)
NASA officials told Missiles and Rockets that Phase I of the floxed Atlas development program, which was to end this year, would be continued until mid-1965. Also delayed was the decision whether to move on to Phase II, which called for development of flight hardware and two flights in the 1966-67 period. (M&R, 11/9/64,9)
Brig. Gen. Thomas J. Hayes, III, Assistant to the Chief of Army Engineers for NASA Support for the past two years, received certificate of appreciation from NASA Administrator James E. Webb. General Hayes supervised such Engineer Corps activities as design and construction of NASA facilities, lunar mapping, and advance engineering related to future programs. He was cited by NASA particularly for his “skillful direction” in the “planning, design and construction of the massive and complex structures required for the manned space Right system.” (NASA Release 64-84)
It was reported that NASA planned to cancel its lease for a Lockheed JetStar at the ksc in Florida and purchase the plane outright. This came out in a report by NASA to a Senate appropriations subcommittee. The report indicated that NASA planned to operate a total of 80 aircraft in FY 1965, an increase of 4 planes. NASA officials told the committee that 37 of the 80 would be used for research, 20 for proficiency and flight training, and 23 for administrative aircraft. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64,
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to the President that nasa had accomplished cost reductions totaling $128,783,000 in FY 1964. This greatly exceeded the agency’s target of $81,780,000. (nasa Announcement 64-162)
faa announced purchase of runway traction device to enable engineers to predict stopping distances for aircraft on wet or slippery runways. Designed and developed by J. I. Thompson Co., the equipment consisted of hydraulically operated mechanism mounted on aircraft tire and towed behind specially equipped truck; special controls permitted technicians to duplicate actual speed, skid, and braking effects of aircraft landing on slick runways, (faa Release T'64-44) “. . . Space propulsion using nuclear energy offers a capability for accomplishment of high energy increment, high payload missions in space beyond the capability of the chemical combustion propulsion systems when considering practical operating limitations. Work now underway in the United States indicates that nuclear rockets can be anticipated for earliest use in the space program. Reactor tests being conducted during this year should provide a firm technical basis for system development. Electric propulsion using the nuclear reactor energy source offers promising storable propellant performance if light-weight, long-life power supplies can be developed. Technology investigations are now underway to evaluate the feasibility of achieving the required performance. This work will simultaneously provide the information that is required to provide large amounts of electric power for non-propulsive purposes in space. Beyond these systems, a host of new and advanced concepts have been proposed. These are not well enough defined or evaluated to assure that their high performance potential can actually be achieved. Some research work is underway on these systems.” (Text)
NASA announced revision of its patent policy and regulations for waivers of commercial rights to inventions resulting from space program work. Effective September 28, the revised patent waiver and related procurement regulations implemented Presidential patent policy statement of last October which established guidelines for a more unified approach among Federal agencies regarding allocation of patent rights to inventions produced in performance of Government contracts. The new regulations also reflected more than three years of intensive study, including public hearings, on ways to improve NASA patent policies. NASA officials anticipated that they would encourage and accelerate contractors’ efforts to identify and report technological advances, thereby increasing the flow and dissemination of technical information derived from the space program, (nasa Release 64-209)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of .NASA, said he hoped for cooperation on space flights between the U.S., the U.S.S.R., and other countries at some future time. He asserted that such cooperation was not possible at the current time because of the secrecy that surrounded Soviet space efforts. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/5/64)
NASA msc officials announced first Gemini spacecraft for a manned spaceflight (GT—3) had passed design and engineering inspections; project manager Charles W. Mathews declared it would perform its mission in satisfactory fashion. (Houston Chron., 6/11/64; msc Roundup, 6/24/64,8)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an article written for the Florida Times-Union: “Expansion’s of man’s geographical horizons have almost invariably been linked with surges of creativeness in the arts and sciences. The Space Age could well revitalize human affairs even more than did the vigorous world-ranging of Western navigators that ended the stagnation of the Dark Ages in Europe. . . . “Already some philosophers see the possibility that world-wide interest in the space program and growing international participation in it could be the first steps toward providing our troubled race with a moral and constructive substitute for war. “It is entirely possible that, along with broadening of perspectives, there will be basic changes for the better in man’s aspirations as astronauts of many nations venture deeper and deeper into the vastness of space in which ours is but one small planet circling a sun-star of relatively minor importance. . . .” (Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Commercial Club of Chicago: “There is an analogy between our national space program and our national history. The exciting adventures of the settlement of North America captured popular fancy. But it was the quiet development of the free spirit of Americans and the growth of our form of selfgovernment that were to weigh heavier in the scales of history than Indian raids and campaigns of the colonial wars. “Another analogy closer to us has been the change in public attitudes that has led Americans to adopt new scientific ideas and concepts that may have been rejected only a few years ago. “Today we live in a period of unprecedented scientific and technological explosion. ... To be visionary is no longer to be labeled as impractical.” (Text)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden said in address before National University Extension Association in Washington: “The exploration of space is a continuation of the geographical exploration by man of unknown areas of the earth from the days of the Phoenician mariners three thousand years ago. The New World, the polar regions, the depths of the ocean, the limits of the atmosphere— have each in turn been the temporary goal. Space is the new frontier. . . . “We have as a nation accepted the challenge of the new frontier, and this year are spending a little more than five billion dollars on the exploration of space for peaceful purposes. This represents an expenditure of approximately 50 cents per week by each of the 200 million inhabitants of our country. . . .” (Text)
Aviation Week reported that NASA and jpl were seeking a compromise to House subcommittee recommendation that NASA appoint a general manager to act as deputy to the director of jpl. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, opposed the suggestion that NASA make the appointment. It was reported that jpl was seeking someone mutually acceptable to the committee, NASA, and JPL. (Av. Wk., 6/22/64, 25)
Six Navy and Marine flyers emerged from a cylindrical chamber at Philadelphia’s naval air engineering center where they had spent 34 days in a simulated journey into space in an experiment sponsored by NASA. The project was designed to collect and analyze information on long confinement in a space atmosphere, specifically, how pure oxygen would affect the blood, the lungs, thinking, and eating. Cdr. Kenneth R. Coburn, project manager, called it “a major success,” noting that “we find that man can live for long periods of time—for a month anyway—without any bad effects.” (ap, Chic. Trib., 4/20/65)
In an article in the San Diego Evening Tribune deploring the strikes and labor unrest at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island, Victor Riesel said: “Well over $100 million had been lost in strikes. “nasa officials report 78 walkouts between Dec. 1, 1962, and Feb. 15. 1965. Total work loss has been 63,784 man days. This means there has been an average of more than five vital strikes a month. At least 35 of them have been illegal and have cost 49,596 man days.” (Riesel, San Diego Eve. Trib., 3/18/65)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff would not terminate his service with nasa September 1, 1965, to assume the presidency of Case Institute of Technology as NASA had previously announced, but would continue as Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology until a successor was selected and had assumed these duties. Dr. Bisplinghoff would then become Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb in the advanced research and technology field. (nasa Release 65-274)
In season’s greetings to NASA employees, Administrator James E. Webb said: “During 1965 we have continued our effects to place and keep the United States in a position second to none in space and aeronautics. This is significant for many reasons, but the most important of these, perhaps, is the fact that our efforts constitute a very real and significant contribution toward the ultimate realization of the true meaning of Christmas—peace on earth.” (nasa Hq.)
Gen. Mark E. Bradley (usaf, Ret.), former commanding general of USAF Logistics Command, was appointed consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on management matters and evaluation of NASA’s contributions to supersonic transport development and aeronautical research programs, (nasa Release 65-330)
Stanford Univ. received a $2,080,000 facilities grant from NASA to assist in the construction of a space-engineering research building. After signing the NASA/Stanford agreement, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “Construction of these facilities will help Stanford provide the laboratory areas so urgently needed by scientists engaged in NASA-supported research and training activities. The national space effort will further benefit by thus increasing the capability of Stanford to train greater numbers of highly qualified young scientists, engineers and researchers.” (nasa Release 65-285)
“Our military space program is a wall decoration,” said James J. Hagerty, Jr., in an editorial in the Journal of the Armed Forces. He continued: “The technology is there, but we are not exploiting it. Our DOD civilian leadership is content to drift along with the idea that someday we’ll get around to it if we need it. This attitude seems to be based on the theory often advanced by Secretary McNamara and echoed by [NASA Administrator] Mr. Webb in his Hill testimony, that there is Tittle chance that the Russians can develop a surprise military [space] capability’ ... If there is any chance at all, we should be doing something more than we’re doing.” (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 4/3/65, 8)
Policy statement on participation by NASA employees in “widely-attended dinners honoring aerospace pioneers” was issued by Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden:	“nasa policy does not prevent acceptance of an invitation from a company to attend such affairs, provided the expense borne by the company is limited to the cost of tickets. Lodging or travel expenses may not be accepted.” (NASA Ann.)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator, succeeding Dr. Hugh L. Dryden who died Dec. 2. Dr. Seamans, who had been Associate Administrator, would also retain that position for an indefinite period, (nasa Release 65-388)
Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed nuclear-rocket technology in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The recent reactor test experience shows that nuclear rockets can be made available to furnish thrust at high specific impulse for many possible post-Apollo missions. Whatever direction the future space program may take—whether toward extensive manned lunar exploration, unmanned solar-system exploration, or manned planetary exploration—the performance advantages of nuclear rockets will be available, valuable, and, certainly for the latter mission, necessary. Through this program the country will have the options it must have in selecting future missions. For the manned planetary missions, which they can perform for all planetary opportunities, nuclear rockets offer such substantial spacecraft weight reductions, and associated savings in cost, that no less-efficient form of spacecraft propulsion could be seriously considered. . . .”	(A&A, 6/65, 34-35) During June: A decade of nuclear-rocket research at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory was described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Roderick W. Spence and Franklin P. Durham, both of LASL. The 10-yr. effort reached new levels of attainment in 1964—65, with successful tests of the Kiwi-B-4E and nrx-a2 reactors, and initial strides in the more advanced Phoebus reactor program. “The entire operations of both Kiwi-B-4E and nrx-a2 gave very close to the desired results and met or exceeded all of the test objectives. “. . . the past decade of experience has given us confidence that nuclear-rocket engines can be built and that they will prove to give good performance with high reliability.” (A&A, 6/65, 42-46)
The extent of the economic impact of the space program on a sevencounty Central Florida area around Cape Kennedy was disclosed in a report by the Univ. of Florida Bureau of Economic and Business Research. Total personal incomes in the seven counties had increased from $372,779,000 in 1950 to $572,375,000 in 1954, then more than tripled to $1,738,566,000 in 1963.	(Houston Post, 10/6/65; ksc Historian )
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced during a ceremony at Western Reserve Univ. honoring retiring Dr. T. Keitb Glennan, president of Case Institute of Technology, that Glennan had been asked to return to NASA as an adviser. Webb said Glennan would be asked to review NASA spending plans for the next ten years. Glennan, Webb’s predecessor as NASA Administrator, was appointed by President Eisenhower to head the agency when it was formed in 1958. (Ludwigson, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 5/15/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the Washington Board of Trade, said: “In 1959, when NASA attempted 14 space flights, we had 37 percent success in missions and launch vehicles. Last year we attempted 30 missions, more than twice as many as in 1959, and the percentage of success in missions went up to 83, with 93 percent success in vehicles. So far this year, the percentages are holding close to those of 1964.” (Text)
The vast accumulation of knowledge generated by the space program required a “new wave” of science reporters to challenge and stimulate “a new wave of readers and viewers who are seeking answers,” Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, told the Sigma Delta Chi National Convention in Los Angeles. He referred to a need to look “beyond the obvious and the glamorous to what is happening in space and science and what impact this will have socially, diplomatically, politically and economically.” (Text)
A briefing given by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to President Johnson and the Cabinet in session said that the success of the last two Gemini missions “has proved the design and confirmed the results of the ground tests, has increased our confidence in the reliability of the over-all Gemini systems, and has enabled the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to advance the Gemini program such that rendezvous and docking are now scheduled during calendar year 1965.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in dedicating Boeing’s new Space Simulation Facility at Kent, Wash., said NASA planned to increase its aeronautical research. Webb pointed out that while the industry-Government relationship sometimes appeared to be that of vender and buyer, it was actually a partnership	with all of its problems. Significant influences on this partnership in recent years had included: the demand on industry for faster rates of technical advance; the increased complexity and technical difficulty of major programs with consequent delays and cost overruns; the decreasing volume of production work and increasing volume of research and development contracts; the steady increase in the requirements for technical and program management personnel; the requirement for Government to better define its objectives and requirements; the emphasis in the procuring agencies on increasing competition at all stages, including research and development; changes in contracting methods which offered more incentives but imposed more risk on contractors; and necessary increases in Government controls on configuration, quality, and on financial data in multiple contract, large and long-lead-time projects. (Text)
NASA awarded $1,190,000 facilities grant to the Univ. of Florida for the construction of a Space Science Building on campus. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, said the new grant “will permit the expansion of theoretical and experimental research in aeronautical and space sciences and will enable the university to train an increased number of highly qualified young researchers.” (nasa Release 65-248)
A Gemini in experiment in which blood cells subjected to a known dosage of radiation were allowed to float around weightless in a container showed that weightlessness had no effect on irradiated human blood cells, according to Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager. He also explained why GEMINI ill landed about 60 mi. short of predicted spot: The pilots were instructed to fly a bank angle based on wind-tunnel data of Gemini spacecraft’s lift characteristics. But in actual reentry, the spacecraft’s “lift was only about % of what we had expected it to be.” Onboard instrumentation showed the discrepancy, but the command pilot followed ground instructions. When he ultimately changed the angle, based on the onboard display, it was too late to achieve the spacecraft target. (Transcript)
Six key appointments at NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility were announced by mtf Manager Jackson M. Balch: Henry F. Auter, Deputy Manager and Chief of Projects Control Office; L/Col. Frederic C. French (usa), Assistant Manager for Construction and Installation; Waldo H. Dear-ing, Chief of Management Support Office; Myron L. Myers and Robert A. Bush, project managers for s-ic and s-il operations, respectively; and Myrl E. Sanders, project manager for support activities, (msfc Release 65-278)
Donald E. Crabhill of the Bureau of the Budget discussed “Space Programs and the Federal Budget” before the National Space Club: “What are some of the significant factors to be pointed out in the relationship between the space program and the budget? “The first is, of course, the matter of growth in the funding for space and the current absolute amount of funds allocated to space programs, including not only NASA, but also dod, aec, and activities in this area by other agencies. In FY 1957, approximately $150 million was expended by the Federal Government on space programs. In FY 1960, the total was still below $900 million. In FY 1966, the tenth year of the space age, the President’s budget provides for space expenditures of $6.9 billion. “Where does this amount stand in relation to amounts in the administrative budget for other programs? It is less than the total amounts to be spent in 1966 on national defense; on health, labor, and welfare programs; and on interest on the national debt. But it is greater than that to be spent for any other function of Government. Space expenditures of all agencies will be greater in 1966 than those for international affairs and finance, for agriculture, for natural resources, for commerce and transportation, for housing and community development, for veterans benefits and services, or for other general Government. “The space program has not been, since it was initiated, and is not today, a budgetary underdog. “The second specific point to be made is that the budget process by its very nature is an exercise in priorities. ... A great many merely desirable projects get deferred throughout the Government every year under the press of the budgetary process. “In the past, this pressure has not been felt as severely in the space area as it has in most others because of the emphasis that has been given to creating in a hurry a vast capability to operate in space. The space program has been very successful in meeting this aim. In fact, it has been so successful that space is now coming of age with other Government programs. We will soon have a technical capability to do a great many more space missions than we as a nation will probably want to pay for. . . . “There is one other point that, as a budget examiner, I feel I must mention. Funding and schedule estimates for space programs have been historically quite unreliable. Cost estimates have tended not so much merely to grow, but to multiply! At the same time, schedules have tended to slip, slip, slip. “This was an understandable situation while the space program was new, but we have had enough experience that there will be considerable resistance from now on to escalation in price and radical slips in schedule of the next generation of space projects. The more detailed planning we are doing now, the phased project procurement processes, and the experience we have gained in the technology and the techniques of Space operations must be expected to show returns in better ability to make good cost and schedule estimates in the first place, and then to meet the cost and schedule targets that are approved.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee’s Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights, said: “Fundamental to NASA’s approach to the patent policy question and to technology utilization is our belief that active effort must be expended, and meaningful incentives provided, if the byproducts of the space efforts are to flow to the general public through entrepreneurs willing to risk investment capital. . . . “If NASA’s experience has served to establish one principal, it is . . . that ‘a single presumption of ownership does not provide a satisfactory basis for Government wide policy on the allocation of rights to inventions.’ NASA’s experience further establishes . . . that the ‘Government has a responsibility to foster the fullest exploitation of the inventions for the public benefit.’ ” (Transcript)
Jean Delorme, president of France’s L’Aire Liquide and head of Eurospace, said he believed there could be no large-scale European space program without formation of a European equivalent to the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. He called for establishment of a central coordinating body that would be the supranational European NASA, with the power to make financial decisions. Delorme was addressing opening of 12-day U.S.-Eurospace conference in Philadelphia, (ap, NYT, 2/27/65, 17)
KSC technicians began to repair Pad 19 for the Gemini vi launch immediately after gemini vii had lifted off. Damage was minimal, NASA officials reported, and they were optimistic about being able to launch Gemini vi Dec. 13. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/5/65, 1)
NASA Assistant Deputy Administrator Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., was named Chancellor of the University System of Georgia and would assume the duties of the new post July 15. Simpson, who had joined NASA in 1962 as Assistant Administrator of Public Affairs, later became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning. In July 1964 he assumed the additional duties of Assistant Deputy Administrator. A native of North Carolina, he had been a professor at the Univ. of North Carolina and a planner of the Research Triangle, cooperative endeavor of the Univ. of North Carolina, Duke Univ., and North Carolina State College, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/5/65)
The U.S. showing at Le Bourget was discussed by Robert Hotz in an Aviation Week and Space Technology editorial: “The United States is presenting a sorry spectacle at the 26th Paris Air Show [June 11-21] that does grave injustice to its genuine aerospace capability in relation to its principal competitors, including the Soviet Union. As the show draws to a close, only a bold stroke of public relations, such as jetting Astronauts White and McDivitt with their Gemini capsule to Le Bourget for a weekend finale would offer any chance for the U.S. to recoup the prestige lost last week through the combination of top-level government indifference, official naivete and the stifling channels of interagency bureaucracy between the various government departments involved in the U.S. show effort. . . . “For the past two Paris air shows, the NASA exhibit has been a major sensation, convincing Europeans of U.S. technological leadership. This year, nasa was conspicuously absent. Even frantic pleas from the French to have Astronaut John Glenn appear to match the Soviets’ Yuri Gagarin were strangled in the maze of interdepartmental coordination. . . . “The net result of this sad combination of government bungling at Le Bourget has been to spend large sums of the taxpayers’ dollar to create the impression that the United States is resting smugly on its technical oars, complacently relying on rapidly obsolescing military hardware for the present and craftily confident this aging equipment can be foisted on its European allies in the near future.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 6/21/65, 13) June 21-July 16: Space Research Summer Study—1965, convened at Woods Hole, Mass., by nas-nrc Space Science Board, reviewed the National space program. Various working panels were formed to examine in detail the three topics of particular focus: planetary exploration, astronomy requirements, and the role of man in space research. About 200 invited scientists participated in the multi-disciplinary review, which was under general chairmanship of George P. Woollard, Director, Hawaii Institute of Geophysics. NASA provided financial support-(nas—nrc, News Report, 9/65, 5)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb sent a letter to the House and Senate space committees outlining major reprograming of funds planned by NASA during the remainder of fy 1965. Webb said $13 million had been allocated to large solid rockets in fy 1965 and nothing in the following year “due to the President’s decision not to include funds in the NASA ’66 budget.” Close-out costs for the large solids would amount to $8.5 million in addition to the $13 million already earmarked “and would yield no technical confirmation of the planned objectives.” By adding another $5.3 million, “bringing the fy ’65 funding to $26.8 million,” NASA would “carry the Phase I program through to completion.” Phase I called for the manufacture and firing of two “half-length” rockets 78 ft. long and 260 in. in diameter. Additional close-out funds were also granted to the other programs not included in the fy ’66 budget: $2.15 million for Snap-8; $3 million for the M-l engine. (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings [Part 4], 279-88)
Dan Schneiderman, Mariner project manager at JPL, had invented “Conrad,” a self-contained radio navigation aid for amateur sailors. The device would sell for less than $100 and function as an entertainment radio when not in use. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/24/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb swore in R. Walter Riehlman, former Republican member of the House of Representatives from New York’s 34th District (Syracuse) as a consultant on policy matters. (NASA Release 65-9)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking on statistical standards at the National Governors’ Conference in Minneapolis, said: “. . . the timely availability of accurate, comprehensive data—based on valid and accepted concepts and definitions—will become increasingly important to the effective conduct of state government. The need for compatibility between federal and state data systems is recognized at the top levels of government. . . . “It is clear that the goals of complete uniformity, perfect comparability and total integration of statistical and management information systems will not soon be accomplished. But it is equally clear that urgent efforts toward these goals are being made and are necessary if state and local governments are to keep pace with the needs of modern society.” Webb recommended that each state: “1. Establish a state statistical standards unit ... 2. Sponsor a National Conference on the Comparability of Statistics Among the States . . . and 3. Examine applicability of modern information technology at the state and local levels. . . .” (Text)
Facility grants in the amount of $2,226,000 to the Case Institute of Technology and $1 million to the Univ. of Rochester, had been approved by NASA. The grant to Case, together with funds from Institute sources, would permit construction, on land owned by Case, of the Case Laboratory for Space Engineering Research. The Univ. of Rochester grant would be used to build a five-story addition to be used for space-related research in optics, geology, exobiology, physiology, and cosmic ray physics. NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “The new facilities will permit expansion of NASA-supported research directly related to the national space effort and will enable both institutions to train greater numbers of highly qualified young researchers.” (NASA Release 65-270)
NASA announced four major personnel changes: Willis H. Shapley, Deputy Chief of the Military Div. of the Bureau of the Budget, would become Associate Deputy Administrator effective September 1, 1965; Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, would become Special Assistant to Administrator James E. Webb, effective immediately; Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Sciences in the NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, would become Acting Director, Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. John W. Townsend, Assistant Director, Goddard Office of Space Science and Applications, would become Deputy Director of gsfc —a new post. When Shapley’s appointment became effective, the present Policy Planning Board would be discontinued; the office of Policy Planning would aid him in preparing policy matters for the Administrator, Deputy Administrator, and Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 65243)
NASA Hq. reorganization plan, effective Jan. 2, 1966, was disseminated throughout NASA. Two main effects of the changes: establishment of Office of the Administrator, in which the Administrator and Deputy Administrator would be supported by the Associate Deputy Administrator with a strong Secretariat; and, establishment of operating pattern within this office delegating authority and responsibility to the Deputy Administrator, who would serve as general manager as well as Acting Administrator in the Administrator’s absence. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Deputy Administrator, retained the additional title of Associate Administrator. Other changes included: Director of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition would be made Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; heads of functional staff offices except General Counsel would have the title Assistant Administrator. Heads of all functional staff offices as well as the four program offices would be responsible to the Deputy Administrator. (NASA Memo)
Discovery of a malfunction in the computer on Gemini 6 spacecraft might prevent a December 13 launch, nasa officials speculated. The computer, whose “memory” had been altered, was removed from the spacecraft to have new information fed into it. (Wilford, NYT, 12/8/65, IOC)
Report to industrial and defense management on the technical and economic status of magnesium-lithium alloys had been published by NASA’s Technology Utilization Div. The report was prepared for NASA by the Battelle Memorial Institute. A NASA technology utilization report based on cryogenic research directed toward evaluation of the stress distribution near abrupt changes in wall thickness of pressure vessels also became available, (nasa Releases T-65-12 and T-65-10)
Pocomoke City, Md., radio station wdmv proposed that Wallops Island, Va., be renamed Dryden Island in memory of Dr. Hugh Dryden, late NASA Deputy Administrator, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/ 27/65, Bl)
Gen. Charles P. Cabell (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in as consultant on organization and management development activities to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Military assignments during his career included that of directing the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff. He was deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1962. (NASA Release 65-226)
Emergency landing of voskhod ii was the third such failure in the Soviet space program, according to an unidentified Czechoslovak scientist, member of the Astronautic Commission of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, during a panel discussion on Radio Prague. He said there had been two earlier failures in the unmanned Vostoks. The disclosure was made in reply to a listener’s letter. {NYT, 4/1/65, 6)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb presented NASA Exceptional Service Award to Dr. George F. Simpson, Assistant Administrator for Policy Planning, in an informal Headquarters ceremony. Having joined NASA in 1961, Dr. Simpson resigned to become Chancellor of the State of Georgia University System, (eph)
Joint Congressional Atomic Energy Committee, in hearing on aec’s fy 1966 authorization, asked NASA Administrator James E. Webb why NASA was dropping funds for the Snap-8 spacecraft nuclear auxiliary power project. In the joint nasa-aec project, aEC was working on the reactor and NASA was working on the power conversion machinery. Snap-8 was one of three projects that had been deleted from the nasa fy 1966 budget request. Mr. Webb said:	“	... in the over-all budgeting . . . the President has a hard problem of adjusting resources to the needs of the Government. In this case, it was decided that these systems, these three systems, could not be financed within the resources available for allocation to NASA and therefore they were eliminated in the final decision relating to the President’s budget, but not on our recommendation. . . . “Because we are on the verge of significant technical milestones with our power conversion equipment, we believe we should phase out the program in an orderly way and provide the maximum amount of experience and data for future use. “Therefore, we plan to continue current testing of components combined in the test loop to achieve at least 1,000 hours of operating time on each of the major components, by reprogramming our remaining fiscal year 1965 funds into these specific task areas. “. . . we expect to present to you and the committees, if you will permit us to do so, an orderly plan for using the resources we now have. This gives the Congressional Committees an opportunity to look at and plan and decide whether it does really fit what they believe is in the national interest rather than to take a sudden action. . . .” Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, expressed his belief “that it is too bad that the Bureau of the Budget trimmed you down on this work. I wish you had gone ahead with it through the test period, we would have learned some very significant things. I disassociate it from the other two [canceled projects] but Snap-8 should have gone on priority.” (Transcript)
The number of women earning more than $10,000 annually in scientific government jobs had increased dramatically from 1959 because of interest in space programs, Mrs. Catherine Dryden Hock, NASA systems engineer, informed the New York Section of Society of Women Engineers. Between 1959 and 1963, number of women in Government grades of GS-12 and above in computer fields rose 790% ; in mathematics and mathematical statistics, 137% ; and in physical sciences, 122%. NASA’s engineering force was 3% women, (nasa Release 65-60)
nasa’s contributions to multidisciplinary research in support of development were discussed by NASA Administrator James E. Webb at a meeting of the West Point Society of the District of Columbia. Webb described how NASA programs fulfilled need pointed out by the late NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden in 1949 for cooperative research channeled "into directions permitting early application.” (Text)
nasa officials accepted Gemini 8 spacecraft from McDonnell Aircraft Corp., St. Louis, after studying data supplied by nearly 6,000 subcontractors involving close inspection of over 6,000 test points. The spacecraft, scheduled for launch in March, would be encased in a plastic shroud and flown to ksc in usaf C-124 cargo plane Jan. 7. (Wilford, NYT, 1/7/66)
Project managers for the Mariner series deep-space exploration missions to Venus and Mars were announced by Alvin R. Luedecke (M/G, USAF-Ret.), Deputy Director of jpl: (1) Dan Schneiderman would manage the Venus project involving a single spacecraft to be launched in 1967, in addition to continuing his duties as mariner iv project manager through 1967; (2) H. M. Schurmeier, former Ranger project manager, would manage the Mars project involving two new Mariner spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1969. Effective Feb. 1, Geoffrey Robillard would replace Schurmeier as Voyager capsule system manager in addition to continuing his present duties as deputy Voyager project manager, (jpl Release 372)
Commentary in the Washington Sunday Star: "One of the saddest lessons of Gemini 8 is that bureaucrats will be bureaucrats. . . . NASA officials suppressed for about 18 hours tape recordings of ground-to-orbit conversations under circumstances that strongly suggest their only reason for the suppression was to make sure nothing embarrassing was on the tapes. "For as long as the United States has been active in space, it has cultivated an image of openness in contrast to the Russians’ obsession with secrecy. The overnight gag on tape recordings—which turned out to be legitimate items of news interest—only served to tarnish this image of candor.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/20/66, Gl)
Senate confirmed appointment of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as nasa Deputy Administrator. (CR, 1/29/66, 1469)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Interavia that in addition to possible "definite and direct” economic and technological benefits, the "greatest impact the continuing exploration of space will have upon man will be upon his own philosophy: that is, his view of himself in relation to the universe as he imagines it.” (Interavia, 10/66, 1479)
Formation of Science Advisory Committee, composed of astronomers, biologists, physicists, and geologists from eight universities, to advise nasa on conduct of future space projects was announced by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Chaired by Dr. Norman F. Ramsey, Harvard Univ. physicist, committee would work directly with Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, but would study future space activities on NASA-wide basis, including manned and unmanned flight programs. In particular, it would review how best to conduct such programs as Voyager planetary spacecraft, including automated biological laboratory, post-Apollo lunar exploration program, and National Space Astronomy Observations— projects recommended by nas Space Science Board, (nasa Release 66-55)
U.S. had reaped many unexpected benefits from NASA’s manned spaceflight program, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Federal Executive Board in Seattle, Wash. Specifically, nasa was (1) "making a definite effort to stimulate the development of technology generally . . . [and had] set up what may well be a unique, formal endeavor to transfer technology which has been developed in the space program to more general usage in the industrial community ... (2) striving to promote a rising educational level among the people . . . (3) developing industrial skills, management techniques, and a high degree of quality control that are of immense benefit to the Nation in such mundane things as washing machines, television sets, transistor radios, and other household items ... (4) helping to assure the country of a hard core of engineers and scientists, technicians and managers, laboratories and industrial facilities, which have responded to the challenge of working on important projects in aeronautics and astronautics. . . .” (Text)
U.S. offer at U.N. Sept. 22 to provide U.S.S.R. with tracking facilities on U.S. territory for Soviet space program received editorial comment in New York Times: "If all the Russians are after is improved tracking facilities for their own space program, the . . . offer . . . should be most agreeable to Moscow. Conclusion of a Soviet-American treaty for this purpose would very likely help smooth the way for similar bilateral agreements between the Soviet Union and other non-Communist countries. . . . Ambassador Goldberg’s suggestion points the way to satisfying legitimate Soviet needs without forced infringement on the national sovereignty of others.” (NYT, 9/24/66, 22)
700-seat auditorium would be built at National Academy of Sciences and a special award established as a memorial to Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late nasa Deputy Administrator. Financing would be by Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fund, established by Dr. Dryden’s personal friends and scientific associates shortly after his death in December 1965. Announcement was made jointly by Mrs. Dryden, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz. Commenting on proposed memorial, Webb said: "To a very large degree nasa and nasa’s program owe their existence and success to Hugh Dryden. . . . His wise leadership as Deputy Administrator of nasa and as nasa’s first scientist, played a leading role in creating effective working relationships between Government, industry, and the universities of the Nation to meet the tremendous new scientific and engineering tasks of the space age.” Dr. Seitz said: "It is particularly appropriate that funds raised in the name of Hugh Dryden, who served the Academy for ten years as its Home Secretary, be used to provide the Academy with an auditorium in which scientific and engineering questions of national importance could be discussed and considered. Dryden’s remarkable personal gifts as fundamental scientist, engineer, and public administrator were responsible, in great measure, for this nation’s preeminence in aviation and its successes in space. To all his activities, he brought ethical and professional standards that were deeply admired by all who knew him.” (nas-nrc Release; nas-nrc-nae News Rpt., 1; Wash. Post, 9/28/66, B4)
On the floor of the House, Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) discussed Committee changes made in Dept, of Transportation bill, H.R. 13200. A "clean bill,” H.R. 15963, was introduced giving proposed Secretary of department responsibility for aviation and making Federal Aviation Administration (new name for faa) a division of Dept, of Transportation. Civil Aeronautics Board aircraft accident investigation unit would also be under Secretary of Transportation. (CR, 6/30/66, 14272-5)
Soviet physicist Peter Kapitsa, who had received the 1966 Rutherford Prize for Physics May 3 in London, told a press conference that U.S.-U.S.S.R. rivalry was good, stimulated research, and produced variety of solutions to different problems. Kapitsa said he thought the Soviet space program was ahead of U.S., but could not prove it. {Wash. Post, 5/5/66, A20)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences unanimously approved nomination of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as NASA Deputy Administrator. (Transcript)
kasa Administrator James E. Webb, in an article written for AP, discussed national power in space: "The question that arises is this: in terms of national power, is there going to be a real contest for the control of this new environment? Is there going to be a shared mastery or an effort at domination? "The danger is clear in having such a very great power available to only one nation, and especially to the Communist nations who have a strong, determined drive to dominate the world, to enforce their views on others. .. . "The U.S. space program gives us a mastery of the space environment. It gives us the knowledge which permits us to judge what is in our own interest. It gives us the assurance that we are going to be at the decision table when the big decisions of the future are made. It also gives us the image of a 'can do’ nation, the image of a nation that is not going to focus on pure commercialism or fail to respond to a great challenge. It gives us also the power to exploit space.” (Text)
M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), made 12th glide flight at Edwards afb after air-launch from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude. Purposes of flight were to obtain data on stability and control at 7° and 11° angles of attack and on upper flap effectiveness, (nasa Proj. Off.) Need to develop a V/Stol aircraft as an "air bus” for faster short-haul transportation of cargo and passengers within large urban areas was rapidly increasing with growth in population, asserted Jack D. Brewer, program manager for V/Stol research, NASA Hq. By 1985, according to prediction, more than 130 million persons—half the U.S. population— would be living in super metropolitan areas at San Francisco-Los Angeles, Buffalo-Chicago, and Boston-New York-Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 66-282) Cooperation as well as competition would be necessary to meet challenges of future air transportation, John C. Brizendine, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Aircraft Division vice president for engineering, told the Congress. He said progress in solving problems such as noise, limiting effects of weather, congestion of airports and airways, and rapid transportation needs between airports and cities, should be accelerated. ". . . if society is to realize the progress and benefits technology can offer, we as leaders of large segments of society also must display increasing unity of purpose in striving to overcome the major environmental problems common to all of us.” (CR, 1/23/67, 5729-31)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in a speech at Mills College, Oakland, Calif., that the "complex interdevelopment of technological power and of the social organization necessary to control, direct, and exploit it ... is a central element of the space age. . . . The success of our space program is helping to grove to ourselves and to the world that we have the will and the capacity to establish far-reaching, difficult goals and bring them surely to fruition. This kind of proof is a major basis for national prestige and international cooperation.” (Text)
Dr. Otis E. Lancaster, professor of engineering education at Pennsylvania State Univ., was sworn in as a consultant to NASA Administrator. He would advise on the subjects of NASA-university relationships, methods for strengthening engineering education programs, and ways to provide stronger engineering/administrative ties, (nasa Release 66-256)
Columbia Univ. professor of business administration Dr. Leonard R. Sayles was sworn in as consultant to nasa Administrator on organization policy and managerial practices and procedures, (nasa Release 66-235)
Administrative History of NASA, 1958-63 (SP-4101), by Dr. Robert L. Rosholt and with a foreword by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, was published by NASA. Volume—first in history series covering major programs and other aspects of NASA operations—would be available through Superintendent of Documents, Gpo. (nasa Release 66-158)
Rep. Hale Boggs (D-La.) told House: ". . . no businessman would invest tens of thousands of dollars in a locomotive and then allow it to rust in the yard for lack of a $5 part. Neither can we invest tens of billions in a space program and leave it to falter for the lack of funds.” Calling the present budget "austere,” Boggs warned that in future budgets we could not put important elements of our capability into mothballs. "We must use it or see it rust.” (CR, 6/21/66, 13707-08)
Lawrence Levy, founder and president of Allied Research Assoc., Inc., and former Defense Adviser to U.S. Ambassador to NATO, was sworn in as a consultant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb on "cooperation with western Europe and future space programs. . . .” (nasa Release 66-231)
Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Commander-in-Chief of U.S. European Command, was sworn in as a special assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 66-288)
Franco-Soviet cooperative space agreement was being viewed with skepticism by French scientists who foresaw effort would break down for same lack of Soviet candor that had stymied useful information exchange between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Aviation Week reported. In addition, French Communists were protesting to Kremlin that high Soviet sanction of President De Gaulle’s space program was weakening Communist political stature in France. {Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 23)
nasa awarded George Washington Univ. a three-year, $750,000 grant "to undertake a multidisciplinary program of policy studies in science, technology, and public administration.” Program was expected to contribute to analysis of various policy questions related to development of the space program and utilization of knowledge derived from it. (nasa Release 66-240)
Achievements in space since first flight in Gemini series March 1965 had been "phenomenal,” stated Washington Post editorial: ". . . the people of this country can feel pride in the officials of. . . [nasa] who have deliberately but confidently advanced the space program without catering to pressures for spectacular stunts. The total achievement, in and of itself, is spectacular beyond the wildest hopes of a few years ago.” (Wash. Post, 7/20/66, A20)
Complexities of modern society required a new concept of management, nasa Administrator James E. Webb told graduation class of Harvard Univ.’s Graduate School of Business Administration. "The kind of challenges that we in management are facing today . . . call for new and experimental approaches to organization. One ... is the question of the chief executive function. In traditional thinking, the structure of an organization peaked in the chief executive. . . . However, as organizations have become more complex and their challenges more interdisciplinary . . . there has been an increasing tendency to experiment with the idea of the multiple executive. ... We saw this kind of need at the very beginning of nasa’s history. We evolved, therefore, a partnership arrangement which included Dr. Hugh Dryden, Dr. Robert Seamans, and myself. We all had many common ideas, and yet each brought to our work on the critical decisions affecting the nation’s space effort certain specialized experience. To do it any other way would have deprived us of the kind of mutual support and broadly-based leadership that I think we achieved.” (Text)
Charles H. Ruby, president of the Air Line Pilots Assn., charged faa had implied pilots were to blame for four recent Boeing 727 jet aircraft crashes although investigations were incomplete. He referred to "premature and seriously questionable public assessment” of the 727 during a Feb. 17 faa meeting at which faa said the aircraft was airworthy and had no serious defects: "We don’t believe this [cause determination] can be expected to be achieved with total objectivity by closed door meetings of parties with a substantial stake in the outcome.” Ruby added pilots felt the 727 was basically a "good and safe aircraft.” (vpi, Wash. Post, 2/24/66, A2) Gemini program director Charles W. Mathews announced that NASA had canceled plans for land landings of Gemini spacecraft because of "development time constraint”; U.S. spacecraft would continue to make ocean landings "for the foreseeable future.” (Text; Houston Post, 2/24/66)
Senegalese President Leopold Sedar Senghor, speaking at a press conference in Dakar, criticized the wealthy nations for spending money on space programs and abandoning the world’s poor. He said that was the reason he had never cabled congratulations to heads of state for their countries’ space exploits. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 4/7/66)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) Secretary-General Renzo di Carrobio, addressing members of "Britain in Europe” committee in London, contrasted "present hesitancy” on space programs in Europe with positive U.S. position. Americans, Carrobio said, were aware of economic benefits from technological applications of space research and were "making great efforts to ensure that the spin-off from their heavy investment in space research is put to good use in the industrial sector.” He noted that U.S. $5-billion space budget meant $26 per capita annual expenditure, while Europe spent $200 million annually or $1.15 per person. (Science, 3/18/66, 1372-4)
Dr. Lee Arnold, chairman of New York Univ.’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and director of Daniel Guggenheim School of Aeronautics, was sworn in as a consultant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb on technology utilization, (nasa Release 66-271)
Siberian-born scientist Mikhail K. Yangel, elected to Communist Party’s Central Committee in April and to Supreme Soviet June 12, had been tentatively identified as new head of U.S.S.R.’s space program. Several other scientists known or believed to be associated with space program had been selected to Supreme Soviet for first time; however, since Yangel was only one also to occupy seat in Central Committee, this was taken as indication he occupied top position. (Shabad, NYT, 6/26/66,
In a White House ceremony, President Johnson awarded the National Medal of Science to 11 scientists, including the late Dr. Hugh L.	Dryden, former nasa Deputy Administrator. Dr. Dryden was cited for his "contributions as an engineer, administrator, and civil servant for one-half century to aeronautics and astronautics which have immeasurably supported the Nation’s preeminence in space.” Mrs. Dryden accepted the medal—first ever awarded posthumously—for her husband. President Johnson told recipients that "in a nation of millions and a world of billions, the individual is still the first and basic agent of change. Without the unfettered curiosity of individual men probing and reaching for new truth our planet would be a dry and dreary place.” {Pres. Doc., 2/14/66; NYT, 2/11/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/11/66, A2; Balt. Sun, 2/11/66)
AiAA-sponsored tour of European aerospace companies began in Paris with briefing arranged by Eurospace, the Council of European Industrial Groups, aiaa President Raymond L. Bisplinghoff led the combined tour, which then broke into three groups for visits to facilities in France, U.K., Belgium, the Netherlands, West Germany, and Italy. In a welcoming address in Paris, Eurospace President Jean Delorme said his group would (1) urge establishment of a "European Space Authority” modeled after esro, (2) encourage greater national investment in cooperative r&d progress, and (3) point out discrepancy between Europe’s high economic potential and low investment in aerospace R&D. (Newbauer and Hersey, A&A, 1/67, 46-56)
NASA awarded Univac $30-million, five-year contract to provide "new computing system” for msfc beginning in 1967. Computer Sciences Corp. was selected to provide support services for msfc Computation Lab. under $5.5-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract with provisions for four one-year extensions. Services would include computer operation, maintenance, and programing, (nasa Releases 66-164, 165)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was elected to National Geographic Society’s board of trustees. (NYT, 4/8/66, 3)
Apollo Command Module (Cm) hardware could be recovered and refurbished for use on extended earth-orbital missions and long stays on the lunar surface, North American Aviation, Inc., Vice President Dr. John McCarthy suggested at aiaa-aas Forum discussing "After Apollo— What Next?” in Washington, D.C. "Such refurbished hardware could be available within 18 months at no interference to the lunar landing program and would permit the gathering of vital data and experience for the more difficult task of exploring the planets,” Dr. McCarthy said. He recommended an integrated space program which would include developing one advanced earth reentry module, single basic laboratory module, and modular launch vehicle system; he emphasized the need to determine the Nation’s 10-yr. space objectives "as soon as possible.” (Text)
V/Adm. Rufus E. Rose (usn, Ret.) resigned as special assistant on policy studies and analyses to nasa Administrator James E. Webb to become an assistant to the president of Allied Research Associates, Inc. Admiral Rose, who joined nasa in 1964 after 44 years usn service, would be involved with "planning, organization, management, and overseas operation” at Allied, (nasa Release 66-148; Marshall Star, 6/22/66,3)
Deactivation of Gemini launch pad at etr’s Complex 19 began. Equipment that could be used in other space programs would be salvaged; other components would be reduced to scrap. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/13/66, A6)
Editorial on five years of "outstanding service” by nasa Administrator James E. Webb appeared in Technology Week: ". . . it is time to state . . . our belief that Mr. James E. Webb has done an outstanding job as nasa Administrator. He has presided over an explosive growth of the agency which would have overwhelmed a less capable administrator; he has met and solved some exceedingly thorny management problems; he has dealt effectively with some of the world’s most temperamental scientists; he has successfully steered the space agency’s budget through the perils of both Administration and Congressional financing; he has given the space program a nationwide base of facilities and political strength; and, most important of all, he has forged a team which is writing an unparalleled record of technical accomplishment. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk, 7/25/66, 152)
NASA Wallops Station employee James C. McConnell had been awarded $1,000 for his invention “A Method of Plating Copper on Aluminum” by NASA Inventions and Contributions Board. Award was part of agencywide program to encourage and reward NASA employees for meritorious inventions and contributions. A second Wallops employee—Joseph W. McAllister—had been named one of the 1967 Economy Champions under President Johnson’s national economy program for his “Device to Salvage Power Line Guy Anchors.” An economy champion was a Government employee whose achievement or adopted suggestion during FY 1967 had shown first-year measurable benefits of $10,000 or more. (WS Releases 67—9, 67—10)
U.S. should measure its return on space technology in terms of such things as the development of communications, meteorological, and simulation systems, rather than in dollars, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in the Second Annual Cortez A. M. Ewing Lecture at the Oklahoma Center for Continuing Education in Norman. “The marginal
NASA’s Mariner V would fly within 2,500 mi of planet Venus at 1.34 pm edt, Oct. 19, at communications (direct) distance of about 49 million mi from earth, NASA announced. Launched from etr June 14, spacecraft would have traveled about 217 million mi in its arching trajectory. Scientists and engineers hoped their instruments would record precise data on planet’s atmosphere, ionosphere, temperatures, and perhaps even surface qualities. As Mariner V approached Venus, its scientific instruments would begin measuring planet’s magnetic field, charged particles, gases present in upper atmosphere, and radiation levels. Spacecraft’s flight path would curve behind Venus and would vanish from view of tracking stations on earth. Just before spacecraft went behind planet (as seen from earth) its radio signals would pass through atmosphere of Venus. Effect of Venusian atmosphere on Mariner Vs radio signals would be measured, thereby providing measure of density of planet’s atmosphere. Current scientific theory on density ranged from five times earth’s atmosphere to several hundred times. Density measurement by occultation was one of prime objectives of spacecraft’s flight. Since launch of spacecraft, engineering and science subsystems had performed as planned. Master timer had-commanded Canopus cone angle update as scheduled on Aug. 24, Sept. 10, Sept. 26, and Oct. 10; timer had also commanded spacecraft transmitter to switch to high-gain antenna on Oct. 2. Encounter sequence would be initiated by command from dsn station in Australia, at 10:49 pm edt, Oct. 18. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 67-260, 67-267)
Dr. Roger W. Heyns, Chancellor of the Univ. of California at Berkeley, was named chairman of NASA’s Ad Hoc Science Advisory Committee, replacing Dr. Norman F. Ramsey of Harvard Univ., who resigned to devote more time to his new duties as president of the Universities Research Assn. Established in March 1966, the Committee advised NASA on the conduct of future space programs, including manned programs. (NASA Release 67-191)
Minor fire broke out during an unmanned vacuum chamber test of Lunar Module (lm) descent stage mockup at wsmr. nasa officials said vehicle was under a vacuum soak condition when fuel escaped into the vacuum chamber; fire apparently developed from spontaneous combustion. It was extinguished immediately by the water deluge system, and damage was believed to be minor, (wsmr Release)
Request for stricter controls to prevent “instrument abuse” at ksc was made by R. L. Wilkinson, chief of Measurement Systems Div. at ksc, in memorandum to NASA employees and contractor officials. An increasing number of instruments were requiring repairs because of tampering, “simple carelessness,” and apparent thievery, Wilkinson noted. He said he had instructed technicians in his instrument calibration shop to report all “cases of obvious instrument abuse or missing rechargeable batteries”; reports would be “reviewed and forwarded-through appropriate management channels for corrective action.” (Hines, W Star, 3/27/67, Al, A8)
U.S.S.R.’s Academician Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, Chairman of Soviet Commission for Exploration and Use of Outer Space, writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics, explained that general trend- of Soviet space program was similar to that of U.S. program, and refrained from “any forecasts [on] . . . further programs in space research,” He said work planning Was difficult “because [it] calls for additional checkups or presents prospects of new and unforeseen investigations.” He believed “realistically” in prolonged manned space flights, and said there was “no doubt that it will be possible to overcome all the difficulties. . . .” (Blagonravov, A&A, 10/67, 70-8)
New Jersey Governor Richard J. Hughes proclaimed April 1, 1967, TirosEssa Day in New Jersey to,mark seventh anniversary of first Tiros launch and to pay tribute to NASA and U.S. space program. (Text)
David S. Gabriel, former Program Manager for the Advanced Agena at Bell Aerosystems Co., was named Deputy Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo). (nasa Ann; NASA Release 67-131)
Latest Trendex poll indicated 69% of Americans believed U.S. space program should continue at its present pace even if U.S.S.R. were to achieve first manned lunar landing. (Jackson, LA Herald-Examiner, 1/11/67)
For the Saturn V program NASA purchased nine S-IVB stages from McDonnell Douglas Corp. for $146.5 million, fulfilling requirements for currently approved 15 Saturn V and 12 Uprated Saturn I launch vehicles. Delivery would begin in April 1968 and end in May 1970. Purchase brought total S—IVB contract for both vehicles to $957,182,093. McDonnell Douglas also received a $24-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract extension for S—IVB launch services at ksc, which increased total value of contract to $34 million. Included were stage receipt, checkout, launch, and launch evaluation, (nasa Releases 67—258, 67259)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying at Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ hearings on aeronautical r&d, recommended establishing a “civil aircraft technology” to counteract growing divergence between requirements for civil and military aircraft systems. Webb observed that most modern military aircraft could not be readily redesigned into economical commercial systems: “When unit costs were low and interaction between the elements of the design were small, a manufacturer could afford a substantial element of uncertainty to developing a new airplane, since it was not too difficult or costly to correct deficiencies exposed during flight operations. . . .” With the complexities of modern aircraft, however, deficiencies would lead to “major escalations in cost and could mean financial disaster for a commercial venture. . . . Economics thus require the designer to take an increasingly conservative approach in applying new and advanced concepts. . . .” This conservatism was causing an increasing gap between “the advanced technology that research indicates is possible and the technology actually being used in commerce. To assure pre-eminence in aeronautics, advanced technology must continually be incorporated into new designs. . . .” Webb said NASA was working closely with Dept, of Transportation and faa to identify and solve critical and specialized civil aviation technology requirements. He cited major efforts in supersonic transport field, including work on second-generation propulsion, sonic boom phenomena, and aircraft handling qualities; and study of jet engine noise-suppression problems. (Testimony)
NASA awarded contracts: (1) IT&T Federal Electric Corp. received a $4.6-million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for logistical and technical information support services at msc; (2) IBM Federal Systems Div. was selected for negotiations on a three-month, $998,000 contract extension for computer programming and engineering support services at GSFc’s Real Time Computer Complex (rtcc) ; and (3) Bendix Corp. was selected for negotiation of a $4,500,000, 18-mo, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for “design, development, qualification, and delivery of long-duration cryogenic gas storage tanks” for first 56-day manned Apollo Applications (aa) flight. Bendix contract award would not be made until NASA’s FY 1968 appropriation and expenditure levels were established, (nasa Releases 67-269, 67-270, 67-271)
Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development, OMSF, addressed the National Student Conference in Ann Arbor, Mich.: 324-801 O—69 . . the more dramatic aspects of the space program sometimes tend to overshadow the fundamental purposes of the space effort. Just as the moon had influenced the course of young lovers for centuries, so has the excitement of lunar exploration blinded many to the deeper purposes and far reaching benefits of the nation’s overall space program, and its deep impact on present and future generations. “. . .a dynamic space program will . . . bring rewards in knowledge, wonders, and resources far surpassing the investment it requires in money, materials, and brainpower. We do not know all that we shall learn when we are able to place men, instruments, telescopes, and laboratories beyond the envelope of the earth’s atmosphere. But we do know that we shall know a great deal more than we can possibly now know about the reality of which we are a part.” (Text)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., visited msfc and MTF to discuss progress in AA and Saturn launch vehicle programs. He would visit msc June 28. (msfc Release 67-132; Marshall Star, 6/28/67, 1)
Detailed information on French space budget for 1968, expected to be approved soon by National Assembly, was reported to total $141 million, increased about $36 million over 1967 budget. It would include $121.5 million for research and operations and $19.3 million for facilities and administration under spending plan being developed by Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). Research and operations funds would be divided, $87.8 million for French programs and $33.7 million for ELDO and ESRO projects. About $1 million also had been allocated for bilateral space research projects outside eldo and ESRO. Major items of budget included: development costs for eldo Europa l/PAS launch vehicle and Diamant B launch vehicle; R&d costs for two Roseau radio observatory satellites (scheduled for U.S.S.R. launch in 1971); planning costs for two Symphonie communications satellites (joint French-West German venture with one spacecraft structure group and two avionics groups to be chosen from competing groups in both countries); construction costs for Kourou launch complex in French Guiana; and partial costs of new Toulouse complex for satellite development and balloon sounding projects. Budget also contained funds for future studies for second phase of France’s space program, according to ones officials. French fifth financial plan committed about $408 million in 1965 for the first phase through 1969. (Fink, Av Wk, 11/6/67,24)
Secretary of Agriculture Orville L. Freeman and . six other Government officials visited msfc. nasa Administrator James E. Webb had invited cabinet members and representatives of other agencies to visit NASA centers to become more familiar with NASA activities, (msfc Release 67—45)
NASA awarded General Dynamics Corp. a one-year, $21.1-million, costplus-award-fee contract to provide management and engineering services for Centaur launch vehicle, ending Sept. 30, 1968. This vehicle had been used successfully to launch six Surveyor spacecraft and would continue in use for lunar and planetary as well as earth orbital missions. LeRC was Centaur project manager. (LeRC Release 67—72)
erc Director James C. Elms announced appointment of Dr. Richard M. Head, Manager of ERc’s Aeronautics Programs Office, as erc Chief Scientist. In his new position Dr. Head’s responsibilities would include research in erc aeronautics and space programs and on solar flares. (erc Release 67-44)
In response to charge by Harry Schwartz in the New York Times that “the costs to both countries [U.S. and U.S.S.R.] of . . . ten years of space rivalry have been enormous” and prediction that “the economic and technical problems ahead will force the space race to stop at the moon with cooperation replacing rivalry,” aiaa Executive Secretary James J. Harford defended space program in letter to New York Times: “The modest scientific dividends which he [Schwartz] credits the space program with producing are puny, indeed, compared to the effects space technology will certainly have on civilization in eons to come. . . . Technologically, both the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. are enormously stimulated. . . . Politically, the space program has produced the first international treaty in history. . . . Philosophically, the space program has made the world vividly aware that it is, itself, a spacecraft with three billion passengers, traveling in a solar orbit, in a vast universe.... “Everyone is for international cooperation, but two nations with icbm’s aimed at each other have understandable problems working out cooperative programs. . . . Perhaps the time for serious joint effort is coming. ... In the meantime, a peaceful program costing less than 1 per cent of the G.N.P., which has produced new technology at a rate that only wars have equaled in the past, . . . should not be diminished because of serious domestic problems.” (Schwartz, NYT, 10/2/67,47; NYT, 10/14/67,26)
NASA-Smithsonian Institution agreement providing for transfer of NASA’s historical artifacts to the Smithsonian for display in National Air and Space Museum became effective. Agreement also specified that Smithsonian would establish a Committee on NASA Artifacts, which would include the NASA Administrator or his designee, to make curatorial decisions on aeronautical and space artifacts “with regard to their significance, preservation, and ultimate disposition.” (nmi 1052.85)
nasa contract awards: (1) Brown and Root-Northrop Corp. were selected for negotiations of a one-year, SI0-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide jointly operational support services to msc’s laboratory and test facilities; (2) Graham Engineering Corp. and ltv Range Systems Div. were selected for competitive negotiations of a one-year, $ 10-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for facility support services at msc. (nasa Releases 67—180, 67—181)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, called for “developing a greater public awareness of the benefits of the total space program and . . . driving home the point of how close we are to realizing magnificent achievements in bettering our lives.” Writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics he said the space program “is no longer insulated from the tough competitive struggle for resources. . . . More bluntly, the NASA part of the national space program no longer has a very high priority.” He explained that “scientific and technological programs are the least understood of our national efforts. Tracing national growth and prosperity directly back to research and development is admittedly a tough job, hut I am convinced that space technology stimulates social and economic progress.” On budget levels through early 1970s, he said, -“Compared with earlier forecasts, it seems that a considerably stretched-out program will he characteristic. ...” In spite of his pessimistic outlook for the present, Rep. Karth said: “This outlook should not cause despair because the long-range prospects for progress are enormous . . . [hut] prospects must be sold to the public and top policymakers in terms of what makes sense for the overall benefit of society.” (Karth, A&A, 10/67, 86-92)
nasa Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., reporting on gravity of budget situation in the light of pending congressional action, said that study of program alternatives would continue while hiring of additional personnel would be suspended. He gave elements of NASA Hq. guidance on restricting activities, to provide maximum flexibility for future decisions when budget and expenditure limits were clarified. (Text)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, would become nasa Associate Administrator Oct. 1, NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced. He succeeded Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., who became Deputy Administrator Dec. 21, 1965. In his new position, Dr. Newell would work closely with Webb and Dr. Seamans on the planning, development, and conduct of the space program. D. D. Wyatt, Assistant Administrator for Program Plans and Analysis, would report directly to Dr. Newell, (nasa Release 67—228)
msfc had awarded Astro Space Labs, Inc., a $93,136 contract for further development and testing of a remotely controlled device to handle tools, equipment, and men in space. Called a serpentuator, device was invented by Hans Wuenscher of msfc’s Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory. It consisted of links connected by powered hinges, which could be remotely controlled from either end of the device; one end would be connected to the spacecraft; one would be free. Small versions of the device could be powered by a hand pump or batteries; larger versions, by electric motors, (msfc Release 67—151) During week of July 24: West German Cabinet approved $456-million five-year plan which would substantially expand national space program. Commenting on the approval, Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, Minister for Scientific Research, told the press that enlarged national program was necessary to create a basis for improved cooperation with other technologically advanced nations. Plan would emphasize projects that provided a “rapid spin-off” of technical knowledge for industry and the economy, he said. Among the areas of special interest would be new materials, energy sources, electronic components, and new methods of planning and managing. (NYT, 7/30/67,13)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb received an honorary Doctor of Science in Commerce degree from Drexel Institute of Technology in commencement exercises in Philadelphia, (nasa pao ; P SB, 6/18/67)
Science press briefing on Surveyor III was held at NASA Headquarters. Dr. Ronald F. Scott, Cal Tech, showed a movie composed of a time-lapse sequence of still pictures of the surface sampler digging a small lunar trench. The device also picked up a small rock in left side of scoop and tried unsuccessfully to crush it, exerting between 200-300 psi. Dr. Scott concluded that rock examined was at least harder than sandstone, which would have broken under impact of about 200 lbs. Surveyor III also confirmed that moon’s surface could support manned lunar landing. Consistency of surface was found to be comparable to wet sand with bearing strength between three and eight psi. Dr. Scott said of an exploring astronaut: “He’ll leave a definite footprint, that’s all.” Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said a series of 50 color photos taken by Surveyor Ill’s cameras using color filters indicated that lunar surface was gray. “The gray varies in shade from a pale to a very dark gray, but it appears to be basically all gray.” He said this color probably resulted from lack of moisture and of air on moon. Minerals on earth were brightly colored because of higher state of oxidation possible under earth environment. Dr. Shoemaker noted that some of the lunar material photographed by Surveyor III was very dark, suggesting that it had been coated with a darkening substance which he nicknamed “lunar varnish.” Among photos displayed were two pictures of the eclipse in which earth was depicted as a dark circle sitting between spacecraft and sun. Earth appeared to have partial halo of deep sunset color in one photo and orange areas connected by a faint purple halo in the other. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/24/67, A12; Clark, NYT, 5/24/67, 50; Hines, W Star, 5/25/67, A13)
Although arc was the smallest NASA field center, Newsweek said, it was producing “some of the agency’s biggest ideas.” Summarizing arc history, the article noted that when center opened in 1940 it had been primarily a site for testing warplane aerodynamics. “Ames still maintains its original wind tunnel—the world’s largest—as well as 29 others, [but aeronautics] . . . represents only a quarter of the effort at Ames today. Most of the scientists are otherwise engaged in pure research in such fields as planetology, exobiology . . . and chemical evolution. “. . . the center’s laboratories enable more than a thousand scientists, engineers and technicians to pursue as wide a variety of problems as their imaginations and the broad guidelines of the space program permit. The problems now range from designing a new hard space suit to studying the effect on mice of reproducing in a 2G environment.” (Newsweek, 6/12/67)
Engineers check the United Kingdom’s Ariel III before successful launch by mas a from wtr for U.K, Science Research Council, to investigate atmosphere and ionosphere. return on the investment in the space program is greater than in any other area. . . . One must take into account the value of the services rendered.” Asserting that U.S. investment in the space program served as “a message to the world that we do not expect to be behind the world in the area of effective use of energy,” Webb noted the success of U.S. space efforts. “We have accomplished in a decade what most informed sources in 1957 thought would take several decades.” Webb presented the Cortez A. M. Ewing Foundation with several photographs of the moon taken by Surveyor spacecraft, two atlases of the moon made from photos taken by Rangers VIII and IX, and color photos of India and Saudi Arabia taken by Gemini astronauts. (Norman Transcript, 5/7/67, 3; Howard, Oklahoma Daily, 5/9/67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reviewed nasa-university relations at dedication of Univ. of Illinois’ Coordinated Science Laboratory building in Urbana, 111.: “During NASA’s first year of operation . . . [$3 million] was invested in research at universities. . . . The second year, approximately $6 million went to universities, and the third year about $14 million . . . [primarily for] solution of immediate problems. . . .” Appraisal of program in 1961 concluded the universities were already making significant contribution to the space program, but that with the right kind of help they could do more for themselves and for NASA. Expansion included support of research, construction of facilities, and establishment of graduate fellowships, until program reached peak in 1966 with 10,600 campus participants. Today, however, need was “to reduce expenditures for research, to preserve at minimum cost the essential strength needed for the future, and to increase the multidisciplinary flux that will magnify the values the nation can derive from the activities we can support.” To find the best ways of reducing the program, he said, nasa had formed a “special task force to evaluate all our relationships with the academic community and to come up with specific recommendations as to least harmful methods we can use. There is no longer any doubt that NASA’s university support programs will have to be redefined quite drastically in some areas.” Since much of the program was funded in three one-year steps, this would help spread the impact over a longer time period. Ph. D. candidates now holding NASA grants would be able to obtain their degrees. Looking to the future, Webb urged the universities to think, reorganize, and work in interdisciplinary groupings. “The development of a few university teams working together across the traditional disciplines, combining the best efforts of technology, the social sciences and management capability which they have created and which make them the best available source of trusted information in our society can write a new chapter of history of problem solving in this nation.” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Armed Forces Reserves Joint Assembly at nasa Hq. “It is a mistake to think of the space program only in terms of the * rockets and spacecraft we launch. These are the focal points of our attention, but we are also developing the ability to organize and manage vast scientific and technical enterprises that involve large segments of our economic, social, and political decision-making process. This complex interdevelopment of technological power and of the social organization necessary to control, direct, and exploit it... is a central element of the space age.” (Text)
Briefing on NASA FY 1968 budget was held at NASA Hq. NASA Administrator James Webb said: “. . . I believe that on this budget we can build an excellent foundation for the work that we as a nation will need to do in 1970 and heyond. “I believe it is a balanced program that makes the best use of the resources that we have created since 1958. I believe it includes those items that enable the Congress and the country to clearly see and judge the issues which are basic to our future in space. “I believe it assumes success. That is, that it is a minimum budget for the work that is required and does not provide for losses of stages or for unexpected catastrophes such as are always a possibility in this program. “. . . finally, I believe that this budget indicates that we have proven in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration that the space capability of this nation can be developed, that this job he is putting in this budget can be done, and I believe it indicates clearly that he believes it is important that we continue to develop our national space capability. . . .” (Transcript)
NASA established Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to review safety studies and operations plans, report on them to the NASA Administrator and advise him of any hazard in facilities and proposed operations, and perform other duties. Panel of chairman, vice chairman, and seven other members would review, evaluate, and advise on all elements of NASA’s safety program, (nmi-1156.14)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at White Sulphur Springs 86th Annual Meeting of Proprietary Association, presented social implications of the Nation’s space program. He asked: “If our future is now more dependent than ever on human intelligence, and if these activities made possible by the rocket engine are adding large increments of grist for the human intelligence mill, and trained workers to use the result, how much more important is it today than ever before for leaders in an industry like yours to understand those institutions of organized society that will foster, encourage, and make proper use of the vast powers the human mind is deriving from its understanding and use of the forces, materials and forms and activities of life which are provided by nature in this universe?” He added: “The comprehension of space exploration and its implications for mankind is a tremendous human intellectual enterprise . . . and our capability to use it effectively is only limited by our ability to systematically order it into viable patterns.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices. Asked by Sen. Spessard Holland (D-Fla.) to make a choice between a substantial cut in funding for the Apollo Applications (aa) program and the Voyager program, Webb replied that both were vital to the U.S. space effort. “The Apollo application is a small investment to expend on something you have already spent $15 billion to get and it seems to me that this is important. “On the other hand, the United States, if it retires from the exploration of the planetary field, in my view . . . [will face] the most serious consequences because the Russians are going to be moving out there and our knowledge of the forces that exist in the Solar System can affect the Earth and can be used for many purposes to serve mankind or for military power. . . .” Criticized by Sen. Holland for refusing to make a choice, Webb said he did not want “to give aid and comfort to anyone to cut out a program. I think it is essential that we do them both.” (Transcript, 2382—3)
Our national security depends upon progress in science and technology as much as or more than any other aspect of our national strength,” Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, said at Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute in Tulla-homa. “The Federal budget for research and development test and evaluation [rt&de] has experienced a steady and phenomenal growth over the past twenty-five years . . . from 7/10s percent in 1941 to almost 3% in 1965. Most recently, we have been through a period of highly accelerated growth in which the initiation of a massive space program added to a rising curve of cost for development, and acquisition of ballistic missiles resulted in rdt&e growth rates ... of 20% per year. . . . This trend, if it were to continue from the level of ’66 for ten years, would result in a Federal RDT&E budget almost as large as the total budget of today by that time.” (NASA lar VI/129)
In the last decade, the Nation acquired vast new knowledge, wrote nasa Administrator James E. Webb in Aerospace Technology’s Seventh Annual NASA issue, and it entered “a new era, a stirring period of exploration and adventure comparable to the Age of Discovery in the 14th and 15th Centuries.” Benefits from our mastery of space, he said, “are opening to us and others new sources of national power and new arenas in which to seek international cooperation as important to our future and the future of the world as sea power and air power have been in the past.” He challenged: “Unless we are prepared to move ahead with new programs of [planetary exploration, and work with useful machines and systems in earth orbit] ... we will be backing out of the Space Age almost before we enter it.” (Webb, Aero Tech, 11/20/67, 24-5)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed l/g August Schomburg (USA, Ret.) as a consultant. Schomburg, whose last duty assignment was Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces, would work in areas of national security, NASA’s interfaces with industry and defense, and education in industrial affairs for NASA’s field centers. (nasa Release 67-280)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced resignation of Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., effective Jan. 5,1968. “Dr. Seamans joined the government with a commitment to serve two years, but . . . served seven years . . . [and] has now decided to return to private life,” Webb said. “His departure will leave a wide gap [in NASA leadership].” A former mit aeronautical engineering professor, RCA engineer, and member of naca technical committees, Dr. Seamans joined NASA in 1960 as Associate Administrator. In 1965 he was appointed Deputy Administrator and was presented NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, for distinguished service to U.S., outstanding leadership of NASA, and “ability to bring together into a framework of effective action thousands of industrial organizations, tens of thousands of scientists and engineers, and hundreds of thousands of aerospace workers.” He had also received Naval Ordnance Development Award (1945); aiaa Lawrence Sperry Award (1961); and Godfrey L. Cabot Aviation Award (1965). (nasa Release 67-257; O’Toole, W Post, 10/3/67, A3)
Report by House of Commons Estimates Committee urged U.K. to appoint a space minister and initiate a five-year national space program at a cost of $84-$98 million annually. Program should be directed toward the 1971 launch of a comsat which could be used for both commercial and military operations. Report criticized U.K.’s current space effort for lack of purpose and organization, noting that money “had been poured into international projects without a properly conceived national program.” {W Post, 8/9/67, A16; SBD, 8/10/67, 205)
NASA announced personnel changes, effective Jan. 1, 1968. Adm. W. F. Boone (usn, Ret.), Assistant Administrator for Defense Affairs, would retire after five years of service with NASA. He would continue to serve as a part-time consultant. Functions of Admiral Boone’s office would be included in new Office of Department of Defense and Interagency Affairs, headed by Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf,Ret.). Gen. Smart, Assistant Administrator for Policy, would be replaced by Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, who would also continue as a Special Assistant to the nasa Administrator on aerospace safety. NASA Administrator James E. Webb, expressing his appreciation for Admiral Boone’s service, praised the “effective cooperation developed between [dod] and NASA in the .. . buildup ... of large launch vehicles and spacecraft required for a lunar landing and exploration ... in large measure due to [his] leadership. . . .” (NASA Release 67-314)
NASA established the NASA Lunar and Planetary Missions Advisory Board to “ . . . develop and review . . . scientific objectives and general strategy for manned and unmanned lunar and planetary missions [and to formulate] guidelines and specific recommendations for the design of missions and for the scientific payloads. . . The Board would have a close working relationship with all senior NASA officials involved in lunar and planetary exploration and would work “. . . through the Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications.” (nmi-1156.12)
U.S. experts believed establishment of permanent lunar colonies and exploitation of lunar resources were among long-range goals of Soviet space program, Heather M. David reported in Technology Week. Analysis of research reports had indicated that future Soviet missions directed toward these objectives would include: (1) orbiting of three or four cosmonauts for three weeks; (2) extensive practice of extravehicular activity and assembly in orbit; (3) orbiting of animals to continue studying effects of long-term weightlessness and radiation; and (4) lunar landing of animals for observation. David predicted preparations for interplanetary travel would be initiated shortly after establishment of permanent lunar colonies. (David, Tech Wk, 1/2/61, 18) .
Republican presidential contender Richard M. Nixon told group of Southern delegates to nominating convention U.S. must restore balance of power in missile and space programs. “This Administration has allowed it to deteriorate. That is why I am opposed to any kind of program—such as defensive missiles—which allows the United States to take second place to the Soviet Union. We are going to restore our strength in the missile program.” In the space program, he said, “We have sort of a budget problem . . . and we may have to trim it in some places. But as far as these great and important objectives that involve national defense . . . [and] prestige, we have got to be sure that the United States is first and never second in space . . . [for] any great nation, to remain great, must explore the unknown. ... As far as I am concerned . . . there is a research gap at the present time. We aren’t putting enough money into basic research to keep ahead of the Soviet Union. We are going to close that gap—and then create one where they are behind us all around the world.” (M Her, 8/7/68, A22; Cocoa, Fla., Today, 8/7/68; SBD, 8/8/68,162)
nasa appointed Ronald J. Philips Director of Technology Utilization Div., succeeding George J. Howick, who had resigned to join International Research and Marketing Corp. Philips, who had joined NASA in 1964 as management intern at MSC, had been principal staff assistant to NASA Administrator and Executive Assistant to Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, (nasa Release 68—166)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb began testimony on President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He outlined significant NASA achievements and said “remarkable series of successes shows how far we have come since the beginning of the Space Age ten years ago. . . . Today . . . success is treated almost routinely, no matter how difficult the task or how significant the achievement.” Describing budget as “a compromise,” he said President “was forced, in spite of his conviction as to the importance of a larger effort in aeronautics and space, to accept reductions. . . . This means that for NASA 1968 and 1969 are . . . years in which we will be completing programs started in previous years and endeavoring to make limited further advances. Under these conditions we will devote a major effort to stabilizing our organization and the resource base we have built.” (Testimony)
Commenting on retirement of James E. Webb as NASA Administrator, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) on House floor said: “I share with Mr. Webb his continuing concern that the Soviets are determined to be the No. 1 power in space. Jim Webb has counseled us often and with great clarity on the seriousness of such a situation. We must heed Jim Webb’s warning that the United States should be first in space. . . . [He] is to be congratulated for his unselfish dedication and great skill in leadership. ... It will be difficult for any man to fill those large and capable shoes.” (CR, 9/20/68, E8135)
Chicago Tribune criticized “ridiculously small” congressional cuts in NASA FY 1969 authorization bill: “Of all the ways in which the government has found to spend taxpayers’ money, the space program is the most expendable. ... It is irrelevant to the war in Vietnam . . . irrelevant to the problems of poverty, crime, violence, and urban decay.” It could be “scrapped in its entirety without Seriously affecting any of the critical problems we face today.” However, “today’s space research does have a bearing on tomorrow’s defense. It is better to keep the machinery running in low gear than to shut it down and then try to start it up again.” (C Trib, 6/13/68)
nasa announced that Dr. Mac C. Adams, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, would resign July 1 to return to private industry. He would be succeeded by James M. Beggs, Director of Purchases and Traffic, Westinghouse Electric Corp,, who would join nasa June 1. Bruce T. Lundin, Associate Director for Development, LeRC, was named nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. Commenting on Dr. Adams’ departure, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said, “He brought to NASA strong management and engineering competence . . . [and] gave us brilliant leadership in critical times.” (nasa Release 68-92)
Science editorial on NASA administration: “In terms of numbers of dollars or of men, NASA has not been our largest national undertaking, but in terms of complexity, rate of growth, and technological sophistication it has been unique. . . . Keeping all of [its] parts—often working right at the edge of technological knowledge and capacity—finely tuned and in close harmony has been an organization achievement of high order. . . . Ever since the space program began to take shape there has been talk of technological spin-offs. It may turn out that the most valuable spin-off of all will be human rather than technological: better knowledge of how to plan, coordinate, and monitor the multitudinous and varied activities of the organizations required to accomplish great social undertakings.” (Wolfle, Science, 11/15/68, 753)
At White House press conference nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced his resignation, effective Oct. 7, his 62nd birthday. He wished to retire to devote his time to interests in education and foreign and urban affairs after 25 yr in Government and nearly 8 yr as nasa chief. President Johnson would name Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator, to succeed him as Acting Administrator. Webb would remain as consultant to Dr. Paine until Jan. 20, 1969. Webb told press: “I leave NASA well prepared and with a conservative financial structure to carry out the missions that have been approved. They will go forward. What we have not been able to do under the pressures on the budget has been to fund new missions for the 1970’s. So, there is going to be a period when there will be fewer flights than would, in my view, have been important to do. . . . We planned with the President’s leadership in 1961 and his recommendations to President Kennedy to develop an ability to fly six Saturn V’s per year and six Saturn I’s per year. . . . Under the reductions in the budget beginning in 1964 ... we have reduced that anticipated flight schedule, or production schedule, [until] we have now cancelled the production lines on both these boosters. . . . what we will have to do is develop a new base of technology for the next generation of boosters [and] . . . the country will have to look with great care into what it is it wants to do with those boosters that will be in storage.” Answering query, Webb said, “I am not satisfied with the program. I am not satisfied that we as a nation have not been able to go forward to achieve a first position in space. What this really means is that we are going to be in a second position for some time to come. ... I am satisfied with what we have developed in every field and that we have been flying three successful generations of spacecraft. ... I think now the question is what will the fourth . . . be. We have a vast amount of capability. As the U.S.S.R. proceeds to fly and remains in the number one position, we will have the capability to start new programs as the need is clearly indicated. . . . We have worked up to a work force of 420,000 people. At the end of this fiscal year, we will be down to just over 200,000. So we have shown the administrative capability to build up and then to reduce without losing pace in the program.” Webb said NASA had decided to man third Saturn V flight in December. “We did calculate that we needed 15 Saturn V’s in program to make sure we would do the Lunar landing. We have funded eight. . . . Now we can only fly seven. So the real question is can we make the landing by number seven?” A good many people, Webb said, have tended to use space program “as a sort of whipping boy. . . . But in essence, if it were not for the fiscal problems faced by the President and the Director of the Budget I would believe that the program would have been supported in the Congress and in the country at a higher level than it has been.” Webb thought U.S. had reached parity with U.S.S.R. 2y2 yr earlier except in large boosters and spacecraft. If U.S. could have had 12 Saturns a year in late 1967 or 1968, “I think we would have forged ahead.” Instead, “while we are reducing down to half to two-thirds of our program, they are still increasing.” Webb said current U.S space program had created capability that could be used for major efforts in exploration if adequately funded. “Any danger to the United States that would come from the Russian program would be visible in time to use this capability to start out. But they are going to have the reality and the image of being out in front for a number of years to come. How dangerous that is, you will have to judge yourself.” (Transcript; Sheehan, NYT, 9/17/68, 1; Kilpatrick, O’Toole, W Post, 9/17/68, Al; Dobbin, B Sun, 9/17/68, A9)
During visit to msfc, Republican presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said of space program, “I would have this clearly understood: that I consider this program as one of our national imperatives, that it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress, that the ups and downs ... in planning, programming and financing must be brought to a halt, and that as President I will make certain our country retains leadership in this great endeavor. ... It is an inescapable fact of our national life today that we cannot afford to do all we wish. But we must do all we can. ... I assert my conviction that among the claimants for Federal support I consider the space program both indispensable and of major importance to our country. . . . In every area of science—in every area of knowledge—the United States must continue to probe the unknown. In terms of our long-range security and growth, the most critical gap which we could allow to develop would be a research gap.” (Text; NYT, 9/7/68, 1; upi, W Post, 9/7/68 [photo]; B Sun, 9/7/68)
nasa FY 1970 budget request, totaling $4,698 billion, was submitted to Bureau of the Budget. Subsequently, Acting Administrator Thomas 0. Paine met with bob Director Charles J. Zwick, and bob staff members held budget hearings with nasa officials, (nasa Off of Admin)
nasa appointed Jerome Freibaum, Assistant Executive Secretary, Office of the Administrator, to succeed l/c Wayne Mathews (usaf, Ret.) as Program Manager of ComSatCorp-related activities in Space Applications Programs Office. Col. Mathews had joined Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (nasa Ann)
In Washington Evening Star Carl T. Rowan wrote: “Some disenchanted Americans shake their heads as they note the poverty, the hunger, the sickness, the ignorance that plague the earthlings about them, and they ask what logic provokes our government to ignore critical problems at hand while investing vast sums in space ventures of doubtful value. ... we have become an ‘either/or’ society. . . . Even though our gross national product is now running at a fantastic level of $871 billion a year, it is absolutely inconceivable to most taxpayers that we can have guns and butter, space spectaculars and dramatic domestic change. . . . Well, no man of vision, imagination, or hope can possibly believe that we are wrong to search the darkest reaches of outer space. . . . Who can say that contributions to medicine, to weather control, to science in general, to the problems of feeding man, to national defense, and ultimately to peace may flow from the space program?” Space program was “inherently and intrinsically, justification enough for spending $340 for every man, woman, and child in America. But are we not wise to ask: what is man profited if he harness the universe and yet fail to conquer the meanness . . . the hatreds, that dog those who inhabit the earth? . . . Much of the public is not in a mood to finance anything else. So we shall be stuck with the ordeal of setting priorities where there is scant room for making choices.” (W Star, 10/25/68, A15)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, was sworn in as consultant by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Webb said Dr. Seamans would “lend his talents and experience to the complex problems we face as the space program moves into its second decade.” (nasa Release 68-7)
Former NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., became visiting professor in mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and at Sloan School of Management. He would continue as part-time consultant to nasa. (Boston Globe, 3/6/68; SBD, 3/11/68, 51)
Republican Coordinating Committee released statement on U.S.—U.S.S.R. relations, including policy on space: “Outer space should be seen as the focus for ever increasing United States-Soviet collaboration rather than as the site of an endless series of increasingly expensive prestige races. Because our society is open, so much is known about our space program that inviting Soviet participation in the nonmilitary projects would be unlikely to endanger national security. By insisting upon reciprocal privileges we would acquire much additional knowledge about their space efforts, thus achieving a net gain for United States security. At the same time, we must not intimate that the Soviets and ourselves have an exclusive role to play in this area. We must constantly reiterate our willingness to collaborate with NATO and other Allies in space technology.” (Text; upi, NYT, 4/30/68, 95; Unna, W Post, 4/30/68, A5; SBD, 5/1/68, 2)
With task of designing equipment for U.S. space program largely over and because of cuts in NASA-spending, hundreds of scientists and engineers were losing their jobs or getting out “while the getting is good,” said Peter H. Prugh in Wall Street Journal. Boeing Co. was laying off several hundred at New Orleans and Cape Kennedy; its Huntsville work force was down from 4,600 in 1966 to 3,000, with more cuts coming. Chrysler Corp. had cut employment at New Orleans from 3,300 to 1,500 and most of its 900 Cape Kennedy employees faced layoffs or shifts to other cities. Huntsville office of Alabama State Employment Service said area employment had declined 3,500 in past year with biggest drop in aerospace field. Space scientists and engineers were finding even mundane jobs difficult to land because of their specialized skills and relatively high salary demands. Exodus was worrying space experts, “who fret that a new emphasis on U.S. space efforts or new military needs would leave companies hard pressed to fill the rows of desks being vacated now.” (WSJ, 11/6/68,1)	>	_
nasa Manager for Space Nuclear Propulsion Milton Klein explained to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that aec’s nuclear space power work would “establish technology in advance of missions, with specific system development undertaken as mission requirements dictate.” He presented a sampling of aec’s activities as it worked closely with nasa and dod “to keep in focus the types and likely timing of future mission needs.” (Testimony)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Deputy Administrator [see Jan. 31]. (Transcript; nasa LAR VII/10; UPl, NYT, 2/8/68,4)
Howard H. Haglund, jpl Surveyor Project Manager, had been named Stanford-Sloan Fellow for 1968—69. Recipient of National Space Club Astronautics Engineer Award and NASA Exceptional Service Medal, Haglund would attend special nine-month Stanford Univ. graduate course in advanced management. (Pasadena Star-News, 8/16/68; Glendale News-Press, 8/19/68)
Newsweek said nerva project had “become one more casualty of cutbacks in the space program.” Workers at Nevada test site “say only a skeleton staff will be left on the project by spring.” (Newsweek,
President Johnson—watching world’s largest aircraft, USAF C—5A Gallaxy jet, roll off production line—called event “a long leap forward in the effective military might of America.” President praised USAF, Lock-heed-Georgia Co., and General Electric Co. for carrying out “a great new adventure” in aviation and completing the job “on time.” (AP, NYT, 3/3/68, 1; afsc Neivsreview, 3/68, 1) tions of magnetosphere. Secondary objectives were to demonstrate technological capability of OGo’s three-axis stabilization system in highly eh liptical orbit for extended operations of 135 days or more and to conduct electric-field, gamma-ray, and radioastronomy observations. On March 16, second of two 30-ft-long extendable antennas was deployed to complete post-launch checkout and NASA reported Ogo V was operating satisfactorily. All experiments except one, low-energy electrons and protons experiment, which had stopped operating March 11 when input power apparently failed, were acquiring data effectively. Data provided first observations of hydrogen cloud surrounding earth (geocorona), first detailed measurements of electric fields at shock and magnetospheric boundaries, and first spark chamber observations of gamma rays. . Ogo V was fifth spacecraft in NASA’s six-mission OGO series, last OGO planned for highly eccentric orbit, last spacecraft to be launched by Agena launch vehicle, and last to be launched from Complex 13. Agena would be replaced by Atlas-Centaur, and Complex 13 would revert to usaf. Scientific instrumentation for Ogo V’s 24 experiments had been provided by six U.S. universities; four groups from U.K., France, and the Netherlands; four Government centers; and two private companies. Ogo V joined three other operational OGOs—Ogo / (launched Sept. 4, 1964), Ogo III (launched June 6, 1966), and Ogo IV (launched July 28, 1967)—in providing data for studies of earth’s environment and solar-terrestrial interactions during period of maximum solar activity. Ogo II, launched Oct. 14, 1965, had been turned off in November 1967. Of 85 experiments assigned to four missions still operating, 68 were still obtaining useful data, including 12 for which instrumentation was working after 42 mo in space. OGO program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. LeRC was responsible for Atlas-Agena launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—38, 68—53; LeRC Release 68-14; upi, M Her, 2/25/68; W Star, 2/27/68, A9; NYT, 3/5/68, 17; W Post, 3/6/68, A7)
Rep. Silvio 0. Conte (R-Mass.) inserted in Congressional Record results of questionnaire mailed to his constituents which showed 3,857 out of 8,145 would reduce Government spending on space program. Second and third most popular candidates for cuts were public works (2,298) and poverty program (2,070). (nasa LAR VII/55)
In Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial Robert Hotz said, “The national space program is approaching a critical watershed at about the same time the Nixon Administration will assume stewardship. ... It is obvious now that space technology has demonstrated its ability to provide a wide range of benefits for better living on earth. It would be a national tragedy, if this country failed to capitalize on the substantial investment it has already made in developing space technology. It will fall to the Nixon Administration to make the critical decisions during the next few years that will determine the future course of the national space program.” (Av Wk, 11/25/68,11)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial said: “The principal criticism of the proposed cuts in the space budget is that they aren’t deep enough. NASA will be left with an expenditure of nearly $4 billion in the current fiscal year. With the nation in a financial bind and the Administration pledged to prune $6 billion from the federal budget, it seems that a good deal more than now suggested should be lopped off the space program.” (St. Louis G—D, 8/7/68)
Oakland Tribune editorial, “Space Race Has Big Stakes”: “The orbital bomb is one chilling example of the potential military threat posed by the Soviet space program. Yet, so far, the only officially announced U.S. reaction . . . has been reports of plans for an over-the-horizon radar to lengthen the warning time against orbital devices and missiles. “It would be more reassuring to the nation if the Pentagon were given the authority to devote whatever resources it requires to counter the orbital bomb threat, not simply with defensive measures but with an offensive military capability of our own. . . . The ultimate prize in the space race may be national survival.” (Oakland Trib, 5/1/68)
Resignation of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as Deputy Administrator of NASA, announced Oct. 2, 1967, became effective. (NASA Release 67-257)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb conferred with West German Science Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg in Bonn on U.S.-German space projects. (AP, Min Trib, 8/28/68)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb delivered first of three McKinsey Foundation lectures, “Reflections on Government Service,” before Columbia Univ. Graduate School of Business: “Our society has reached a point where its progress and even survival increasingly depend upon our ability to organize the complex and do the unusual. We cannot do the things we have to do except by employment of large aggregations of power in highly specialized forms.” Present technological revolution was “the most decisive event of our times.” Great issue of the age was whether U.S. could, within framework of acceptable institutions, “organize the use and development of advanced technology as effectively as the USSR with its totalitarian system of allocating and utilizing human and material resources.” Webb believed capabilities of U.S. system had “immense advantage over all other systems.” (Text)
Col. Albert J. Wetzel (usaf, Ret.), Director of Sponsored Programs at Tulane Univ., was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Former technical assistant to Director of Defense Research and Engineering and former Titan icbm program director, Col. Wetzel would advise Webb on NASA Project Management System and other technical and personnel management activities, (nasa Release 68—156)
President Johnson reads citation before presenting NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal to fames E. Webb, who retired as NASA Administrator Oct. 7. Medal was given for outstanding leadership of America’s space program. * Business Week commented on results of “two bad decisions by agencies of the federal government.” Boeing Co. was scrapping swing-wing concept on SST in favor of fixed-wing and “word seeped out of the Pentagon that a real fight has developed over whether to cut back production of . . . F—111.” How were such mistakes to be prevented in future? “One lesson that emerges ... is that the government must learn to avoid premature commitment to any huge-scale project. , . . Another lesson is that in such major decisions, an independent, technologically competent judgment should be brought to bear on the issue. On the F—111, the President’s Science Advisory Council did not even look at the design features of the aircraft. On the SST, a Special Presidential Advisory Committee was set up, but it was chaired by [then Secretary of Defense Robert S.] McNamara and was dominated by top Administration officials. Such changes in procedures may not wipe out all mistakes, but they could greatly reduce the chances of astronomically costly blunders.” (Bus Wk, 11/2/68)
President Johnson announced appointed of David D. Thomas, Deputy Administrator of faa, as Acting Administrator, {PD, 8/5/68, 1190)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Special Consultant to NASA Administrator and former NASA Deputy Administrator, had been elected to board of trustees of Aerospace Corp. (Aerospace Release; SBD, 7/8/68, 10)
In last of three McKinsey Foundation lectures NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed “Executive Performance and Evaluation.” NASA program at peak level had employed more than 400,000 full-time workers and 20,000 contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers and drawn on more than 150 universities, in addition to 8,000 NASA-supported professors, scientists, and technicians. It had worked with urban communities on problems, reclaimed wasteland, constructed massive buildings, and developed new transportation means. NASA would not be viewed in history as unique but was likely “to prove a prototype.” As Administrator, Webb said, his purpose was to work toward environment within which NASA could be as innovative in the management of all its activities as it was in its scientific and technical work. Large-scale endeavor required executives of unusual type and had to be designed to enable executives to perform in an unusual way. (Text)
LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson was appointed Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb and head of NASA Hq. Interim Working Group to evaluate future manned spaceflight projects. LaRC Deputy Director Charles J. Donlan would serve as Acting Director in Dr. Thompson’s absence, (nasa Release 68—41; W Post, 3/1/68, A7) During February: nasa published 1967 Summer Study of Lunar Science and Exploration (nasa SP—157), results of July 31—Aug. 13, 1967, conference at Univ. of California in Santa Cruz. Conference recommended nasa: (1) develop lunar flying unit (lfu), Saturn V dual-launch capability, and dual-mode local scientific survey module (lssm) for lunar surface mobility; (2) make available in 1970—75 Block II Surveyor or another system capable of deploying numerous experiments; (3) increase total returned payload to 400 lb so that at least 250 lb of lunar samples could be returned on Apollo Applications (aa) missions; (4) increase flexibility of alsep stations’ design, possibly by adopting modular concept; (5) provide for continuous telemetry coverage of all payload elements and operations; (6) develop subsatellite system for deploying instruments in close lunar orbit; (7) implement any extension of Apollo science program by open solicitation of experiments from scientific community; (8) undertake strong programs in scientific instrument definition and development and in lunar supporting research and technology; (9) establish position of Project Scientist within manned spaceflight program; (10) include ability in field geology as a major requirement for astronauts who would land on moon; (11) conduct immediate and intensive program of detailed mission analyses for prime lunar landing sites and traverses suggested by the conference; and (12) include in lunar surface studies observations of micrometeoroid environment, radio-frequency noise levels, surface impedance and conductivity, lunar ionosphere, gamma rays and x-rays, soil mechanics, thermal effects, and contaminants, (nasa SP—157; AP, NYT, 2/19/68,
Resignation of James E. Webb as NASA Administrator, announced Sept. 16, became effective. Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, assumed duties as Acting Administrator, (nasa Off of Administrator; Off of Acting Administrator)
President Johnson announced his intention to nominate Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, manager of General Electric Co.’s Technical Military Planning Operation (tempo), as NASA Deputy Administrator to succeed Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., who resigned Jan. 5. (PD, 2/5/68, 176)
Dr. George Kozmetsky, dean of Univ. of Texas College of Business and of Graduate School of Business, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, NASA announced. Specialist in system analysis, organization theory, quantative methods, and system management, Dr. Kozmetsky would serve on NASA’s Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—153)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Associate Administrator (1960—67) and now mit professor and consultant to the NASA Administrator, was nominated as AIAA President for 1969. (A&A, 10/68, 106)
In statement on dod FY 1969 budget released by Senate Armed Services Committee, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said dod was requesting $79 million more for r&d in FY 1969 than in FY 1968 to “support more vigorously many scientific fields that show great promise and clear relevance to our future security.” dod would continue working closely with NASA to ensure maximum interchange of personnel, ideas, technology, and hardware and to avoid wasteful duplication of effort in national space program. Under new budget work on mol development would be increased substantially. “FY 1969 is expected to be a peak year of activity in the MOL program, including the completion of a major portion of the structural test programs on flight hardware, continued fabrication of hardware for the first three flights, developmental test firings of the seven-segment solid motors for the Titan III—M, and installation of the ground equipment in the launch complex.” (Text)
NASA personnel changes: Thomas B. Shillito of LeRC’s Office of Development Evaluation and Management Review was appointed Supersonic Transport Program Coordinator for nasa in Washington, D.C. He would have offices at faa and would “stay abreast of technical progress in the sst program [and] inform nasa ... of any impending requirements.” Shillito would report to nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology (Aeronautics) Charles W. Harper. Harvey Sherman and James M. Beggs were named consultants to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Sherman, Port of New York Authority’s Director of Organizations and Procedures Dept., would be member of senior group of advisors on management matters. Beggs, Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Assistant Director of Purchases and Traffic, would advise on management concepts and policies. (LeRC Release 68—7; nasa Release 68-22) During January: New knowledge of movement and state of electrons in Van Allen radiation belts that explained movement of electrons into and out of belts and trapped electron activity was reported from three new discoveries. Bell Telephone Laboratories used energetic particle collectors aboard NASA’s Ats I, launched Dec. 6,1966, to show that high-energy outer Van Allen belt electrons exhibited bunching phenomenon as they drifted around earth in its magnetic field. Bell scientist Charles S. Roberts presented theory that “radio noise in the charged particle gas” surrounding earth was “responsible for the loss of electrons from the Van Allen belts, rather than the mere presence of lightning-bolt-initiated whistlers alone, as previously believed.” At Nov. 16, 1967, meeting, Dr. James A. Van Allen had presented satellite-collected data suggesting that “both electrons and protons enter the outer Van Allen radiation belt” drawn by high voltage generated across earth’s magnetic field, caused by earth’s spin between dawn and evening sides of earthsurrounding magnetic envelope. (Strasser, Aero Tech, 1/29/68, 18-20)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator in NASA Hq. ceremony. Nomination had been confirmed by Senate Feb. 7. (nasa Ann)
President-elect Richard M. Nixon named Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, retiring President of Cal Tech, as his Science Adviser and announced formation of task force under Dr. H. Guyford Stever, President of Carnegie-Mel-lon Univ., to make recommendations in general science field. Task force headed by Dr. Charles Townes, Nobel Prize winning physics professor at Univ. of California at Berkeley, would recommend in space field. Dr. DuBridge described as a “very critical matter” loss of momentum in U.S. space program because of appropriations cuts and said reducing activities in basic and applied research damaged nation’s future. Later, National Science Board Chairman, Dr. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., said of Dr. DuBridge, “He has one rare attribute . . . wisdom, an unusual commodity. He is knowledgeable about the role of technology in our society and has a deep belief in the importance of fundamental research to the health and welfare of the country. And he is usually understanding of the problems of the private universities.” Homer, W Star, 12/3/68; Cohn, W Post, 12/3/68, A7; SBD, 12/4/68, 141; W Star, 12/4/68, A13)
Col. Robert L. Stevens (usaf), holder of four of nine new world speed and altitude records set in Lockheed YF—12A jet interceptor, was named technical adviser to faa sst Program Director, m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf), (faa Release 68—32)
NAS announced appointment of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator (1958—1961) and Assistant to Chairman of the Urban Coalition, as Chairman of nrc’s Committee on Radio Frequency Requirements for Scientific Research. Dr. Glennan had been President of Case Institute of Technology, AEC Commissioner, and President of Associated Universities, Inc. (nas PIO; nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 4/69, 10)
Eugene S. Burcher, NASA Tektite Program Manager, omsf, received Navy Distinguished Public Service Award for “distinguished and outstanding service to the United States and to the Department of the Navy as a participant in Project tektite i mission, as well as its planning and implementation.” (nasa Hq WB, 6/2/69, 6)
President Nixon’s Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, announced at his first Washington press conference that overall plan for next decade of U.S. space program would be drafted at President’s request by his office, NASA, nasc, and DOD for submission to President about Sept. 1. Charting “new directions, new goals and new programs for the entire United States Space program” was necessary. “Bringing to the benefit of people the marvelous space technologies that have been developed in the last decade and certainly orbiting satellites for the purpose of learning more about the earth must be an important element in our future space program,” Dr. DuBridge said. “Whole problem” was balance between that enterprise and planetary and lunar exploration and “this is the problem which our group will seek ... to bring into perspective as we project ahead and consider the budget problems that also lie ahead.” In answer to question on White House appointments, Dr. DuBridge said, “We have not yet located the right man” for either Administrator of NASA or Executive Secretary for Space Council. (Transcript; White House Memo)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released 1969 Aerospace Facts and Figures. During 1968 industry sales reached #29.5 billion, up 8.1% over 1967, with civil transport aircraft accounting for major share. These sales were expected to decline in 1969 when current models were phased out before third-generation jet transports were delivered in substantial quantities. Total industry sales were expected to decline to #28.7 billion in 1969 but 1968 backlog for 60 major companies was #31 billion— approximately 2% times that in 1960. Overall space program expenditures during FY 1969 were estimated #6.3 billion—#4.1 billion for NASA, #2.1 billion for dod, $117 million for aec, and #34 million for other agencies. Space expenditures declined approximately $300 million from 1967. Aerospace r&d, including nasa’s, reached $8 billion. (Text)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Brown Univ., his alma mater, (nasa Off of Administrator)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Administrator. (CR, 3/20/69, S2949)
At nonpartisan farewell dinner given to President Lyndon B. Johnson in New York, former NASA Administrator James E. Webb read statement on accomplishments in space effort under Johnson Presidency: “Lyndon Baines Johnson has done more than lead the United States forward in space. He has stamped on our program its significant characteristics: that it be conducted in the open for all the world to see; that it be carried out so as to strengthen and not to undermine the basic institutions and values of our society; that it be dedicated to the cause of peace and the benefit of all mankind. “Of all the debts the American people owe President Johnson, none is likely to loom larger over time than that he started them on the road to mastery of this new, unlimited environment by means of the new rocket technology. ... It is the lasting tribute to Lyndon Baines Johnson that he has seen from the beginning that accomplishments in space and the capability which can sustain and increase these accomplishments constitute a new barometer of the stature of our Nation.” (CR, 1/17/69, S496)
In Bonn Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and West German Science Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg signed Memorandum of Understanding calling for NASA and West German Ministry for Scientific Research cooperation on Helios. Most advanced international scientific space program, Helios would consist of two solar probes carrying 10 scientific experiments 28 million mi—closer to sun than any other yet scheduled—in 1974—75 to provide new understanding of fundamental solar processes and sun-earth relations by studying solar wind, magnetic and electric fields, cosmic rays and cosmic dust. NASA would launch two German-built spacecraft on Atlas-Centaur vehicles one year apart. Seven experiments would be provided by German scientists and three by gsfc in cooperation with U.S., Australian, and Italian experimenters. (nasa Releases 69—86, 69—91)
Madrid ceremony marked takeover by Spanish crew of operations at U.S. Deep Space Network tracking facility. Attending were NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine; Spanish Space Research Council President, Gen. Luis Azcarrago; U.S. Ambassador Robert C. Hill; and Gen. Antonio Perez-Marin, President of Spanish Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial. Dr. Paine sent final U.S. signal to Pioneer Vlll (launched Dec. 13, 1967) orbiting sun. Short time later Gen. Azcarrago sent first signal under Spanish control. Dr. Paine said, “Spanish determination to participate in this exciting 20th Century form of exploration reminds us that five centuries ago Columbus’ great voyage of exploration was carried out under the flag of Spain.” (NASA Release 69-93)
On ABC radio-TV program “Issues and Answers,” Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said he did not favor increased military participation in U.S. space program. “We’ve had very good cooperation between the military and our civilian programs and I think that’s the way it should continue.” (B Sun, 5/19/69, Al)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, told Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, “Our intellectual resources—not our material resources—are the limits to what we can now achieve.” During hearings on H.R. 35, bill to promote advancement of science and education of scientists through institutional grants to U.S. colleges and universities, he said: “We hear it said that if we only spent as much money on urban programs as we did, say, on the atomic bomb project or on our space program, we could quickly solve the crisis in our cities. But let us not forget that we launched the Manhattan project and the space program only after, and not before . . . efforts in basic research over the previous 30 or 40 years had uncovered the knowledge which showed us how we could build atomic bombs or launch payloads into space. Neither the Manhattan project nor the space program could have been dreamed of 10 years before they started, because we did not even know enough to even formulate a development program. Now, in many ... of our present crises we are in the same position as far as technology is concerned. We do not know enough about certain technologies and . . . many social phenomena to justify mounting a concentrated, technically based attack on these problems now. We must . . . greatly enhance . . . measures to relieve immediate suffering and injustice. But at the same time we must encourage and support new efforts to learn more, to extend our base of fundamental knowledge in science, technology, social science, so that we can move sure footedly toward long-range solutions.” (Transcript)
Space program spinoffs of medical benefit to mankind were described by Howard A. Rusk, M.D., in New York Times. NASA’s Scientific Information Div. provided stockpile of knowledge indexed in computer tapes and distributed on microfiche. Collection of 250,000 documents increased by approximately 75,000 items annually. NASA Technical Utilization Div. selected inventions, ideas, and new techniques for use in nonaerospace activities, including medicine, and distributed them through eight regional centers. Under interagency agreement, NASA and hew Social and Rehabilitation Services Administration reported results of aerospace research to solve problems of 4 million physically or mentally disabled Americans of working age. Research had developed technique for sharpening x-rays, micrometeorite sensor to record Parkinsonian tremors, and technique for applying electrodes with spray of conductive material. (NYT, 8/10/69, 55)
Senate confirmed nomination of George M. Low as NASA Deputy Administrator. {CR, 11/26/69, S15140, D1126)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, announced resignation of Albert F. Siepert, ksc Deputy Director (Management), effective Dec. 1. He would become Program Associate at Univ. of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research and project manager for large-scale organizational research study sponsored by General Motors Corp. Siepert had been executive officer at National Institutes of Health before joining NASA and had received HEw’s Distinguished Service Award (1955), Arthur S. Flemming Award (1950), NASA Exceptional Service Medal (1968), and NASA Distinguished Service Medal (1969). (ksc Release 464-69)
President Nixon sent directive to Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Science Adviser to the President, asking assessment of proposal to appoint interagency committee to advise President on post-Apollo space program. Directive also asked report on “possibility of significant cost reductions in the launching and boosting operations of the space program,” with judgment on “how best to assess future developments in this area.” White House announcement from Key Biscayne, Fla., Feb. 8 said directive had asked assessment of recommendations that dod and nasa be directed to coordinate activities in this area. (PD, 2/17/69, 249; 3/10/69, 349-51)
First day of public display of lunar rock at Smithsonian Institution attracted 8,200 visitors, including former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Webb said: “The rock represents all the work and all the submergence of personal ambitions that thousands put into the space effort. It proves we have the scientific, technical and managerial capability of expanding our space values for use under the' sea, on the land and in the air.” (Schaden, W Star, 9/18/69, B4)
Sen. Ralph W. Yarborough (D-Tex.) offered amendment to H.R. 11271, FY 1970 NASA authorization bill [see June 24], to increase funds for NASA R&D and program management from amount reported by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to amount passed by House. Increases would total $256.50 million in R&D and $6.35 million in research and program management. He said: “My amendment authorizes the bare minimum that we, as a nation, should commit to space. Its adoption is vital to the proper balance in our national priorities; it is vital to the future of our exciting and promising space program; and it is vital, in my opinion, to the interests and well-being of our country.” {CR, 8/7/69, S9383)
In Washington Evening Star, Crosby S. Noyes said: “. . . it would be a mistake to consider the space program itself as nothing more than a kind of inspirational stunt to show us what we can do if we really put our minds to it. The idea that once the demonstration is over, we should divert all of its resources to domestic problems is excessively simple-minded. Of all the resources that have gone into the space program, the money that is so much on everyone’s mind is undoubtedly the least critical. The major resources . . . are people and organization and a continuing process of research and application. These resources cannot be ‘diverted’ into new areas; nor can a program such as this be turned off and on again like a spigot. Once the process is interrupted and the concentration of talent is broken up, it will be virtually impossible to reassemble it.” (W Star, 5/22/69, A9)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Administrator, told news conference aboard U.S.S. Hornet he expected U.S.S.R. to land men on moon within 18 mos. “My guess is it’ll be much sooner than most people think.” He thought U.S.S.R. had lost race “by keeping their program so secret.” U.S. had encouraged suggestions from scientists throughout non-Communist world, while details of Soviet program were known only to “small elite.” Apollo 11 success would eventually lead to closer cooperation with U.S.S.R. in space exploration. “I don’t look for any early change in the attitude . . . but a steady interest on their part. I don’t see joint efforts but cooperation from time to time.” (upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 30)
Dr. George M. Low—veteran o) Mercury, Gemini, and Apolh pro-grams^was sworn in as Deputy Administrator of nasa by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Administrator, after Nov. 26 Senate confirmation.
Rep. Charles W. Whalen, Jr. (R-Ohio), inserted in Congressional Record results of annual opinion poll of his constituents which showed 51% preferred continuation of space funding at present level, 21% preferred cutback with reallocation of space funds to social welfare programs, 16% wanted acceleration of space program with increased funding if necessary, and 12% wanted none of these. (CR, 4/22/69, E3230)
U.S. News & World Report published interview with Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. Apollo 11 lunar landing would be “culmination of America’s satisfying everyone that it is indeed the leading technological nation that it thought it was before Sputnik blazed across the skies.” U.S.S.R. would continue to put great stress on space and move ahead steadily. “. . . there’s always the danger that we may feel we can relax now—having attained the lunar goal—and perhaps slack off. ... if we were not to start new programs now, I think the situation might well reverse and the Soviets might once again develop superior technological capabilities in space.” Space technology could affect future defense posture. In the past, “wherever man has flown farther and higher and faster, wherever he has developed new capability to observe from higher areas, to carry out operations in new media, this has had a major effect on the equations of international power. We’re quite confident that this will probably be true again in space.” Application of space to defense area was DOD’s job. “We do not consider Apollo applications as any kind of substitute for mol.” Journey of man to another solar system was “completely out of the realm of possibility” for next generation; “but in the more distant future, if it were ever possible ... to control the energy of nuclear fusion and adapt it in some efficient way to the propulsion of spacecraft, it might be possible to think in terms of longer voyages to another star.” Fundamental breakthrough would have to be made. Chance that life existed in other solar systems seemed “absolutely 100 per cent.” (US News, 7/7/69)
Scientists from U.S., Canada, and France, participating in NASA-sponsored 25-day probe of aurora borealis Nov. 24 to Dec. 18, had discovered very high ratios of red oxygen emissions to blue nitrogen emissions in earth’s upper atmosphere, NASA announced. Higher measured ratios indicated many solar electrons that bombarded atmosphere might have been low energy. There might be more oxygen in polar atmosphere than at other latitudes, or high temperatures in upper polar atmosphere. Studies in airborne laboratory—NASA Convair 990 jet aircraft Galileo—also detected bombardment of earth’s atmosphere by protons. Comparison of light emission caused by protons and electrons would help explain particles’ origin. Measurement from six photometers and three spectrometers would provide explanation of newly discovered phenomena, (nasa Releases 69—165, 69—169)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences ordered favorably reported the nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Administrator. Nomination awaited approval by Senate. (NASA LAR, VIII/42)
Portrait of James'E. Webb, second NASA Administrator (1961—1968), was unveiled in anniversary ceremony at Smithsonian Arts and Industries Building. Painted by Gardner Cox, portrait would eventually hang in NASA Hq. (Program; nasa Release 69—140)
In address at Clarkson College of Technology in Potsdam, N.Y., Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “We know that hydrogen bombs work (unfortunately)—the Lord made the Universe that way. And, of course, we know that (fortunately) fusion energy keeps the sun shining every day. Our great visionary dream is to find out how to unlock this energy for spaceship propulsion. This is a great challenge but consider the new tools that we have available: giant magnetic fields with superconducting magnets, tremendous power densities from lasers, the great energy of nuclear power, and new high temperature materials. These, with new plasma dynamic developments, may usher in fusion power in the eighties, the nineties, or in the next century. Harnessing fusion power for propulsion is an even farther-out challenge, but it could prove to be one of the more direct applications. We won’t have to convert the fusion energy to electricity; just fuse a couple of deuterium atoms and then let them blast out the back of the vehicle! “So fusion remains a tantalizing promise for the future. ... If we ever do achieve such propulsion, we’ll be able to move with some ease out from our little 8,000-mile-diameter Solar System. All of the 9 planets, 32 moons and 1600 known asteroids will come within reach of our vehicles. And, indeed, if we could achieve high efficiencies in a fusion propulsion process, we could talk of eventual relativistic velocities, of time compression, and of travel to the nearest stars.” (Text)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, delivered commencement address at Univ. of New Brunswick in Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada:<l.. .the Space Age, being only a decade old, has not (yet had time to develop a professional university curricula. Thus, we have not been able to hire graduates specifically trained in space and astronautical engineering. . . . This parallels the experience we had when solid-state electronics replaced vacuum tubes, and we had to move ahead by retraining people. ... It was also true at the start of the nuclear age, when we had to develop new nuclear power plants without the benefit of professionally trained graduates. The message for you here is that all of these programs were successful because the primary discipline that universities teach is intellectual discipline itself.” (Text)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced appointment of Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, effective March 1.	Dr. von Braun would be succeeded by his deputy, Dr. Eberhard F.	M. Rees. Dr. Paine said: “It is essential that we bring NASA’s best talents to bear on our future space planning.” NASA must select its “new space ventures with the best critical judgment and make every dollar count. Dr. Wernher von Braun has an unmatched record of looking to the future to choose the most promising avenues of technical advance. He brings to his new assignment sound vision, insight, and technical competence. .. .” (msfc Release 70-19; NASA Release 70-13)
Employee Assistance Center at NASA Hq. had mailed resumes of available former nasa employees to 600 prospective employers in effort to place about 200 personnel affected by budget cutbacks, NASA reported. Engineering was largest single category of jobs eliminated by reduction in force. Administrative positions made up second largest category, (nasa Release 70-168)
Atlantic magazine article said U.S.S.R. had “used aid and trade, backed by its newly acquired sea power, to build a vast arc of influence around the northern rim of the Indian Ocean and up as far as the home islands of Japan.” Included were “two large mooring buoys laid near the Seychelles Islands in connection with the Soviet space program.” They provided “refueling base for the Soviet flotilla.” {Atlantic, 5/70)
NASA announced it had installed remote terminal for high-speed computer service in offices of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. recon (remote console) system—linked to computer at NASA Scientific and Technical Information Facility in College Park, Md.—would permit Committee members to make literature search of NASA’s worldwide collection of scientific and technical documents. Pilot project initiated by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Committee Chairman, would evaluate equipment over several months. Miller said it was first time agency of Executive Branch had been tied directly by computer to a committee of Congress. (NASA Releases 70-75, 68118)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, to be U.S. representative to International Atomic Energy Agency with rank of Ambassador. (CR, 6/25/70, S9950)
Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) introduced S. 4430, “Economic Conversion Act” to create Economic Conversion Commission composed of government and industry representatives including NASA Administrator. Measure would require that 1216% of each contractor’s profits from space and defense work be held in trust by commission to finance implementation of conversion plans developed by contractor and to pay benefits to workers who might suffer during transfer to civilian production. (CR, 10/2/70, S16995-7003)
New York Times editorial commented on substitution of Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., for Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II on Apollo 13 mission. “The decision adds a new note of tension and a new reason for worry in what will be—despite the brilliant success of the two earlier moon trips—an exceedingly dangerous venture whose maneuvers require the most precise possible coordination among all three crew members. In the entire history of the space program there can have been few if any more difficult or more hotly debated choices faced by the program’s top leaders.” {NYT, 4/11/ 70,30)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, began six-day visit to Australia to discuss space program cooperation. (Reuters, W Post, 2/13/ 70)
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced intention to nominate Dr. T. Keith Glennan, former NASA Administrator, to be U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency with rank of Ambassador. Dr. Glennan would replace Henry DeWolf Smyth, who had resigned. Dr. Glennan had served as mfcmber of Atomic Energy Commission from 1950 to 1952, Nomination was submitted to Senate June 1. (PD, 6/1/70,703; 6/8/70, 734)
Between June 30,1970, and June 30,1971, there would be reduction of from 1000 to 2000 in number of aerospace contractor personnel at msc, NASA Deputy Administrator George M. Low said during meetings with press and staff at MSC. Civil service employees would be reduced by 49. (Maloney, HPost, 2/3/70)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, former msfc Director, was sworn in as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. (Off NASA Dep Assoc Admin)
Cause of July 23 failure of ion engine on board orbiting Sert II had been identified and could be prevented in future, LeRC announced. Project Manager Raymond J. Rulis said beam from neutralizer had eroded and broken off small piece of metal from one of two grids at back of engine. Metal, attracted by forces of electric field between screen grid and accelerator grid, had been welded between grids by high voltages and had caused short circuit that shut down grid power lines. Although damaged thruster on Sert II could not be repaired, erosion problem could be prevented in future by relocating neutralizer and redirecting its beam to eliminate localized wear on grid. Second ion engine on board Sert II was operating satisfactorily after more than 1300 hrs. Engine would be shut down in late November for three months while spacecraft was in earth’s shadow and then restarted to complete six-month test. (LeRC Release 70-49)
Recommendations on conduct of “comprehensive review and analysis of the complete NASA acquisition process from determination of requirements through final contract award” were requested by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, in memo to Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs. NASA procurement policies were “sound ones which have in general fairly treated our contractors while giving NASA excellent value for its money,” Dr. Paine said. But NASA was now planning programs in “changed economic environment with more limited resources.” (NASA Release 70-146)	.
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel submitted report to NASA in form of letter to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, from panel chairman, Dr. Charles D. Harrington. Panel found that Apollo 13 Review Board procedures and scope of inquiry had “proved effective in their task.” Board had “performed a thorough and technically competent analysis in the reconstruction of the factors contributing to the Apollo 13 abort.” Panel “found no evidence and no reason to doubt the technical validity of their determination and findings.” (Hearing, Sen Com on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Apollo 13 Mission Review, 6/30/70,51, 56)
NASA released text of Oct. 29 agreement with Soviet Academy of Sciences for joint efforts to design compatible space docking and rendezvous arrangements. Agreement had been confirmed by exchange of notes between Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy. [See Oct. 29.] (nasa Release 70-210)
Chemist Dr. Gustaf O. S. Arrhenius of Univ. of California at San Diego said in interview that he was working with NASA on plans to expand U.S. space program by sending unmanned spacecraft on “mission to an asteroid.” He said idea had been presented to NASA in 1969 by Dr. Hannes O. Alfven, 1970 Nobel Prize winner in physics. (UPI, NYT, 11/4/70)
upi reported in Washington Post that NASA report not yet made public acknowledged General Electric Co. was permitted to submit bid for controversial $50-million ATS-F and ATS-G contract one week later than the deadline its competitor Fairchild Hiller Corp. was required to meet. NASA denied knowledge of any leak to GE of Fairchild Hiller’s design and price. Report said Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had been told before he announced award of contract to GE on April 8 that both companies had submitted bids on same date —March 6. Actually, UPI said, Fairchild Hiller proposal had been submitted Feb. 27—NASA deadline—and copies were circulated among NASA personnel before GE proposal was submitted March 6. (Cassels, UPI, WPost, 6/13/70, E8)
Nixon Administration was finding “no takers” in its efforts to replace Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator, New York Times said. Lack of NASA Administrator seemed “as much a reflection of the low level of attention that space commands among White House priorities as it is an indication of the unavailability of candidates.” Since Dr. Paine’s Sept. 15 retirement, U.S.S.R. had successfully launched 33 space payloads. (Lyons, NYT, 12/13/70, 50)
General Electric Co. said it would not challenge NASA decision to reverse award of $50-million contract for ATS-F and ats-g [see Sept. 5]. In statement to press, Leon L. Farnham, General Manager of Spacecraft Programs at GE Valley Forge Space Technology Center, said GE still thought NASA decision was wrong but that the “further delay [of a court challenge] would be injurious to NASA and the total space program.” (Jones, W Post, 9/30/70, D9)
Agreement under which U.S. Coast Guard would conduct National Data Buoy Development Project at MTF had been signed by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Adm. T. R. Sargent, Acting Commandant of USCG, NASA announced. Agreement established basic operational support and reimbursement relations between NASA and USCG. Slidell, La., NASA computer facility also would be available to project. (NASA Release 70-114)
dod announced General Dynamics Corp. was receiving $191 297 000 as final payment for cost overruns on production models of F-lll aircraft. Original contract, managed by Aeronautical Systems Div., had been for $3 251 947 744. (dod Release 693-70; WSJ, 8/26/70,4)
Washington Post editorial urged House to follow Senate in denying sst funding [see Dec. 3]: “For that was no idle expression of narrow interests or shallow sentiment on the Senate’s part; it was. . .almost an explosion of public concern, as surprising to the backers of the move as it was apparently shocking to the supporters of the sst.” What Senate vote said “was that somewhere out there, away from the corporate boardrooms and the offices of the Federal Aviation Administration and the corridors of Congress, a lot of people care more about the quality of life and the nation’s urgent economic and social needs than they do about breakfasting in London and New York at roughly the same time on the same day.” (W Post, 12/8/70, A 20)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received President’s Safety Award on behalf of NASA in White House ceremony. Award recognized Federal Executive departments and agencies which best safeguarded lives and health of Employees. Other 1970 winners were USAF and Civil Service Commission. (NASA Hq WB, 7/13/70, 2)
NASA announced appointment of members of Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright: Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong; Robert F. Allnutt, Assistant to NASA Administrator; Dr. John F. Clark, GSFC Director; B/G Walter R. Hedrick (usaf), Director of Space, DCS/R&D; Vincent L. Johnson, OSSA Deputy Associate Administrator (Engineering); Milton Klein, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office; and Dr. Hans Mark, ARC Director. (Off NASA Administrator; Wilford, NYT, 4/22/70,27)
Nixon Administration had decided against big space program for 1970s, Thomas O’Toole wrote in Washington Post. There would be “no set goal for landing men on Mars, no plan to colonize the moon and no sudden push to orbit a permanent manned space station above the earth in the next five years.” While space program would “not be allowed to shrink much” in 1970, Administration would ask Congress for no more than $3.7 billion for space in FY 1971, “the lowest request for space funds in almost a decade.” Low funding level meant space spending would not rise above $4 billion annually for at least several years and new programs would not be started in near future. (WPost, 1/11/70, Al)
Experience in space program, Borman said, “has been the most rewarding of my life. This new opportunity will enable me to work with a major industrial firm, continue an association with the space effort and to devote a substantial amount of my time through the Foundation to many issues which have interested me for a long time.” (NASA Release 70-14)
Value of space program to national defense was discussed by samso Commander, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), before Executives’ Club in Chicago. Program had produced “greatly improved military communications, strategical and tactical; the ability to detect and monitor nuclear detonations anywhere in the world; new capabilities for precise navigation of fast-moving aircraft, ships, submarines or land vehicles; and a variety of capabilities for early warning and other defensive space systems.” First defense comsat system had been transmitting “substantial load of voice communications between Washington and Vietnam since 1967. It can also handle highspeed digital data such as tactical reconnaissance photographs. Improved adaptations of this 26-satellite initial system have been developed for the United Kingdom and NATO.” In year’s time “we will be launching a still further improved Phase II United States system with greater traffic handling capacity, higher reliability and longer life expectancy.” First experimental satellite had also been launched “in development of a new tactical communications capability that will enable troops. . .to communicate with each other in spite of intervening obstacles like mountain ranges or enemy forces. Another new defense capability was built into our vela satellites. . .launched in October of 1963 to monitor the nuclear test ban treaty.” Velas had become “oldest man-made functioning systems in space; they still respond to command, although their duties have largely been taken over now by more advanced versions.” Velas had performed scientific chores like “monitoring the level of solar radiation during manned space flights, to ensure against danger to the astronauts.” usaf navigation satellites under study would permit pinpoint accuracy in navigation of supersonic aircraft and surface and subsurface vehicles. They held promise for prevention of midair collisions. “We’re also doing extensive studies on a space shuttle system that would be. . .a reusable space booster capable of supporting both military and civilian space operations.” It could put satellites into orbit, service satellites operating in space, supply manned space station, or assist in rescue of astronauts in space emergencies. (Text)
Senate passed S.J.R. 193 appointing former NASA Administrator James E. Webb as Citizen Regent of Board of Regents of Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 4/27/70, S6234-5)
usaf announced award of additional $78 million to General Dynamics Corp. to cover cost of overruns on F-lll aircraft and said further overrun payments were forthcoming. USAF had announced award of $191.3 million to General Dynamics Corp. Aug. 25 as final payment for cost overruns on production models of F-l 11. (WSJ, 12/1/70) During November:	usaf total-force concept for 1970s was described in Air Force and Space Digestby Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force: Increased numbers and total payload of Soviet icbms and Soviet deployment of abm system could reduce effectiveness of U.S. land- and sea-based missiles. “We are deploying abm protection for our missile fields and strengthening the penetration capability of our missiles with the deployment of mirv. But . . .effectiveness of our missile forces will tend to vary, depending upon the length of time it takes us to respond to new Soviet capabilities.” Dispersed manned bomber force with quick reaction would provide stability. “It might be possible to undermine the effectiveness of either missiles or bombers alone, but to counter both at the same time would be a vastly more difficult problem.” B-l bomber represented most economically feasible means to retain stabilizing capability. “Given the decade of leadtime involved, we must expedite the development of this aircraft.” With Soviet fighters “becoming superior to our own,” air-to-air combat was “primary concern in our development of the F-15, which will have superior capability for close-in, highly maneuverable combat” and “provide the effective weapon system necessary to defeat any enemy fighter. . . .we are convinced that effective close air support will continue to be a vital mission.. .and that an aircraft especially tailored for that role is required. . . .we are proceeding with the development of the A-X. To modernize our airlift capability, we are relying heavily on the C-5, which will produce a revolution in air mobility.” In 1973, “with the C-5 in the inventory, projections indicate that we will be able to move an Army division with equipment and six fighter squadrons with support units to Europe in less than one week.” (AF/SD, 11/70,68-71)
George A. Derbyshire, Executive Secretary of nas-nrc Space Science Board, died in Bethesda, Md., at age 52. He had been responsible for more than 20 scientific reports on lunar programs, space goals, and physics goals, and had directed scientific conferences on space program and planetary exploration. (WPost, 9/18/70, CIO)
Blue Ribbon Defense Panel, with Gilbert W. Fitzhugh as Chairman, submitted to President Nixon Report to the President and the Secretary of Defense on the Department of Defense. Report offered 113 recommendations, including top-to-bottom dod reorganization, removing Joint Chiefs of Staff from involvement with day-to-day problems of war, streamlining military staffs, reorganizing all U.S. combat forces under three main operating commands, and abandoning contracting policies that led to cost overruns and weapons that didn’t work. Panel had been appointed by President and Secretary of Defense in 1969 to study dod problems. (Text)
NASA officials would meet with Soviet counterparts to discuss possible compatible space docking arrangements in Moscow Oct. 26-27, NASA announced. Discussions were outgrowth of correspondence during year between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences. Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh had proposed Moscow meeting in Sept. 11 letter to NASA and had invited NASA to select dates. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, had accepted invitation and proposed dates in Sept. 25 letter. Keldysh had confirmed acceptability of dates. NASA officials attending meeting would be: Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director; Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; George B. Hardy, Chief of MSFC Program Engineering and Integration Project; Caldwell C. Johnson, Chief of MSC Spacecraft Design Office; and Glynn S. Lun-ney, Chief of MSC Flight Director’s Office. (NASA Release 70-173)
Use of aerospace management to solve social problems was advocated by Albert J. Kelley, Dean of Boston College School of Management, in Astronautics A Aeronautics. “In the quest for application of technology to domestic and other internal problems, aerospace management with its ability to marshal resources to solve complex problems may well be the greatest [space program] spinoff. In addressing current and emerging problems, the most urgent tasks will be to identify the parts of the problem that can be solved by existing technology, to recognize the parts of the problem that need more r&d, to identify the resources needed to solve all elements of the problem, and to organize the resources and efforts and get the job done,” (AAA, 8/70,46-52)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, named Oran W. Nicks, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, as Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective immediately. Nicks succeeded Bruce T. Lundin, who had been named LeRC Director. (NASA Release 70-11; NASA Ann, 1/23/70)
Kenneth M. Smith, former President and Chief Executive of Windecker Research Inc., was sworn in as faa Deputy Administrator. (FAA PIO>
South African surgeon Dr. Christian N. Barnard, heart transplant pioneer, toured msfc and addressed NASA audience. He asked for closer cooperation between heart transplant research and space program so that studies of effects of weightlessness could be more closely observed. (Marshall Star, 2/25/70, 1)
Accomplishments of Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, retiring Presidential Science Adviser and OST Director, were described in Science. Dr. DuBridge was credited with influencing Nixon Administration to moderate space program, initiating steps to meet electric-power generating-capacity crisis, contributing to President’s renunciation of biological warfare, and assisting “modest recovery in the fortunes” of nsf. (Walsh, Science, 8/28/70,843-3)
Dr. Eli L. Whitely, President of U.S. Congressional Medal of Honor Society, presented NASA with plaque honoring agency for “making America first in space.” Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, accepted plaque on behalf of NASA and other organizations that had contributed to space program. (NASA Release 70-87; Citation)
Development of Fluorel, which could be applied by spray to fireproof material against temperatures to 1500 K (2200°F) was described by Jerome F. Lederer, Director of Safety, OMSF, in interview released by AP. Compound was developed by Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co. under direction of msc engineers. Fluori-nated copolymer paste developed to reduce flammability hazards in spacecraft consisted of 20% of Fluorel solids homogenized to form methylethylketone solution. It had been designated Refset L-3203-6 by manufacturer, Raybestos-Manhattan, Inc. Fluorel would be among nonflammable and fire-resistant materials developed for U.S.' space program and reviewed by NASA for industry and Government agencies at safety conference at msc in May. (AP, NYT, 1/12/70, 10; nasa Release 70-7)
President Nixon submitted nominations to Senate: Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, as U.S. Representative to 14th Session of General Conference of International Atomic Energy Agency; Dwight J. Porter as Deputy U.S. Representative to IAEA; and Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, as alternate representative. President announced appointment of George M. Wolfe as an alternate U.S. representative on ICAO Council and accepted resignation of J.D. Braman as Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and Urban Systems, effective Oct. 1 (PD, 9/14/70, 1196,1197)	.
Dr. Charles H. Townes, Nobel Prize winning Univ. of California physicist and member of NAS Council, was appointed Chairman of NAS-NRC Space Science Board. Dr. Townes had headed President Nixon’s task force to make recommendations on national space program in 1969. (NAS PIO; NAS-NRC-NAE News Rpt, 3/70; A&A 68)
Dr. James A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa physicist and discoverer of radiation belts encircling earth, said in Durham, N.H., that U.S. should phase out manned space programs. Maintenance of men in spacecraft “increases the cost of a given mission enormously and risks human life unnecessarily, and in a conspicuous and dramatic way.” Dr. Van Allen was in Durham to deliver first Spaulding Distinguished Series lecture at Univ. of New Hampshire. (AP, WPost, 11/6/70, A7)
TV commentator Walter Cronkite was named by Boston Museum, Boston, Mass., as 1970 recipient of Bradford Washburn Award for his “superlative presentation” of U.S. space program. Gold medal and $5000 honorarium were awarded annually in spring for “outstanding contribution toward public understanding of science, appreciation of its fascination, and the vital role it plays in all our lives.” (upi, NYT, 1/16/70)
Julian M. West, former MSC Special Assistant for Long Range Planning, was sworn in as consultant to Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. George M. Low. West would advise on potential space and aeronautics development programs. (NASA Release 70-164)
Finance was one of main reasons for resignation of Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator, Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. At 48, Paine had four children in college and private school. His NASA salary was $42 500 per year “which after taxes barely pays for his children’s schooling, his housing and his everyday expenses.” While “nobody at GE will discuss it,” Dr. Paine apparently would move into “executive suite” at General Electric Co. “whose chairman (Fred Borch) makes $275,000 a year and whose four top executives under Borch all make more than $200,000 a year.” (W Post, 7/30/70, A2)
House passed S.R. 193, to provide for appointment of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb as Citizen Regent of Board of Regents of Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 5/4/70, H3828-9)
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Dr. Raymond L.	Bisplinghoff, Dean of MIT School of Engineering, as NSF Deputy Director. Dr. Bisplinghoff had been NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, 1963-1965, and Special Assistant to NASA Administrator, 1965-1966. (PD, 8/17/70, 1068)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Kenneth M. Smith, President and Chief Executive of Windecker Research Inc., to be faa Deputy Administrator. He would replace David D. Thomas, who had resigned. (PD, 3/30/70,421,447)
Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), discussed space program spinoff on House floor: “Between 1965 and 1971 NASA awarded grants and research contracts for 1640 programs to 223 colleges and universities in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The total university expenditures by NASA from 1959 through 1969 totaled $2.7 billion and contributed to this Nation’s educational goals by the development of new scientific disciplines, technologies and educational facilities.” NASA’s educational efforts in secondary and elementary schools had been “many and varied, but one of the unpublicized and most important has been its programs to assist underprivileged youth in the inner city. The problem has been tackled in a number of locations by a wide variety of techniques, including special materials, instructors, and so forth.” (CR, 4/21/70, H3317-25)
Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial on President’s space goal message: “Underlying the message seemed to be one word—flexibility. And because the space program deals with the unknown, it is reasonable to accept flexibility as a necessary factor.” (C Plain Dealer, 3/8/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, told Cleveland, Ohio, press conference LeRC would receive $22-million increase for FY 1971.	“We expect Lewis to play a very significant role in the space station-space base evolution. The challenge in electric power alone is one that will keep Lewis people going indefinitely.” Dr. Paine was visiting NASA centers to explain effects of FY 1971 budget cuts. (Lewis News, 2/13/70, 1)
mit oceanographer Dr. Henry Stommel commented in Science, on prospects for physical oceanography: “Is the dynamics of the ocean similar to or fundamentally different from that of the atmosphere? Only measurement will tell, and it will have to be measurement at a level of technological sophistication quite beyond the present level and beyond that proposed for routine monitoring. Access to somebody’s monitoring system, or to a few years of ship time, will not suffice to obtain the kind of information the scientist needs about the oceanic velocity field. Some carefully designed measurement programs are going to be needed—on a scale larger than an oceanographic institution can manage but smaller than the space program. To be useful scientifically, these programs will have to give first priority to questions of hydrodynamics. To date there is little indication they will do so.” (Science, 6/26/70,1531-6)
Atlas of the Universe by Patrick Moore was published by Rand McNally & Co. Volume contained almost 1500 maps, drawings, and charts, many provided through cooperation of NASA and U.S. Geological Survey. Book had foreword by Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, and epilogue by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, former NASA Administrator. (Gordon, W News, 11/16/70)
New York attorney Paul Sawyer was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator on nasa Public Affairs Program. Sawyer was member of law firm of Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim, and Ballou, (nasa Release 71—46)
Dr. James C. Fletcher was sworn in as nasa Administrator by District of Columbia Superior Court Judge James A. Belson as President Nixon, Mrs. Fletcher, and Dr. George AT, Low, Deputy Administrator {behind), watched in the Presidents office. director De E. Beeler, frc Deputy Director, was named Acting Director with Bikle acting as an adviser. (NASA Release 71—77)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh told session of Soviet Party Congress that “we must to a large extent apply [space activities] to the solution of practical problems. Armed Forces Journal later observed that previously, U.S.S.R. had spoken mostly of furthering “scientific knowledge” as basis of its space program. (AFJ, 6/71, 54r-9)
nasa’s structural analysis computer program (nastran), designed to analyze behavior of elastic structures in space program, was being used by Ford Motor Co. in predicting performance of 1973 light truck components, NASA announced. Ford had reported 60°/o improvement in predicting behavior of components under stress and time-saving of two thirds in calculations. Program also had been used in design of people-mover system to be used at transpo ’72 exhibit planned for spring 1972 at Dulles International Airport, Va. (nasa Release 71—221)
Space program for 1970s was outlined by Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in speech before Society of Sigma Xi at Daytona Beach, Fla. It would be “program of transition; a program in which the exploration and technical pioneering of the Sixties will begin to pay substantive dividends; it is the logical transition to the intensive and economic use of space in the 80’s and 90’s. Strong evidence will emerge . . . that will refute many of the arguments advanced against science and technology as embodied in the space program.” Program’s primary strength was “that it is balanced to meet the basic national needs.” Program “strikes a harmony among scientific exploration in space, the practical utilization of space, and the development of improved technologies for space.” (Text)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, former aec Chairman, as U.S. Representative to General Conference of International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, Sept. 21—27. Among nominees for alternate representatives was Dr. T. Keith Glen-nan, first NASA Administrator (1958-1961). (PD, 9/13/71,1250, 1261)
NASA announced confirmation of text of agreement with Soviet Academy of Sciences on exchange of lunar samples and on procedures toward recommendations for joint consideration of objectives and results of space research [see Jan. 18—21J. Agreement had been confirmed by exchange of letters between Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy, (nasa Release 71-57)	'
Technological intelligence concerning salt was reaching U.S. through Soviet scientist who had defected to West under pseudonym of Anatoly Fedoseyev [see May 26] but had been identified subsequently as Ignatiy A. Nikitrine, deputy director of Soviet space program ip charge of electronics and cybernetics, Don Cook of Los Angeles Times reported in Washington Post. Meanwhile, AP said, British officials insisted scientist’s real name was Fedoseyev and that he was expert in field of “powerful magnetrons” whose research had applications to Soviet space effort. (W Post, 7/8/71, Al; AP, W Post, 7/9/71)
New York Times editorial commented on nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator: “Mr. Fletcher’s highest priority at nasa will undoubtedly be to try to restore morale, insofar as possible, in a program whose ranks have been decimated by the budget cuts of recent years, nasa’s new chief apparently takes the job with few illusions. This is suggested by his recent comments that budgetary problems will probably force a shift from manned to unmanned space exploration, especially beyond the moon.” Such realism should “serve Mr. Fletcher well in the difficult days ahead as he tries to lead NASA toward a new equilibrium with a Congress largely disillusioned about the worth of showy and ultra-expensive ventures in space.” (NYT, 3/4/71)
Soviet defectors—writer Leonid Vladimirov, who defected in 1966, and scientist Anatoly Fedoseyev [see June 19]—said at London press conference that Soviet space technology had lagged behind that of U.S. and had produced less scientific data. Fedoseyev, not present but responding by tape recorder to questions put to him previously, said he did not think Soviet space achievements would be scientifically impressive for some time because Soviet space program was short of funds and technology level was low. Fedoseyev was said to have been responsible for bringing down U-2 reconnaissance aircraft pilot Francis Gary Powers in May 1960, Reuters later reported. (Reuters, B Sun, 11/24/71, A4)
Slackening of U.S. R&D was scored by Eberhardt Rechtin, Principal Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering in dod, in Astronautics & Aeronautics article: “The image of world technical leadership earned by our electronics and aerospace industries in the 1960s will predictably be eroded in the 1970s by our own lack of planned ‘firsts’ in contrast with the continuing achievements of the Soviet Union, France, and probably Germany and Japan.” Major source of future wealth “must be the special skills of our population— yet we are presently pricing ourselves out of the world markets, including our own. We are also disseminating our science, our inventions, our management expertise, and our manufacturing technologies around the world in a way which, though it raises the standards of living elsewhere, also diminishes the competitive advantages of our own people.” While U.S. had been world leader in R&D less than 25 yrs, “you hear discussions about reordering national priorities as if we could make unilateral decisions, independent of the international competition •—as if international interactions were not a significant, much less a driving, factor—concerning defense R&D, the NASA space program, tax incentives to industry, or a wage/price freeze.” (A&A, 12/71, 22-7)
USN was concerned that F-14 fighter aircraft might go into potentially dangerous flat, fast spin, Capt. Lionel E. Ames, Jr. (usn), F—14 Project Manager, said in testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services. (Transcript)
President Nixon was expected to name Univ. of Utah President, Dr. James C. Fletcher, as nasa Administrator, Washington Post reported. Dr. Fletcher, a physicist, had been an aerospace executive and consultant to Naca, dod, and President’s Science Advisory Committee. (O’Toole, W Post, 2/19/71, Al)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as nasa Administrator. (CR, 3/11/71, S3088)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on space funding: “If Congress wants to be truly responsible about our national priorities, it will avoid making further cuts which would damage the space program out of proportion to the savings involved.” In addition to “advancing the frontiers of knowledge about the origins of the earth and the nature of the universe,” space program promised “to pay off in much more concrete ways.” “We are already reaping huge benefits from weather and communications satellites, as well as from the development of compact, highspeed computers, new metals and fabrics, microminiature circuits and many other technological advances.” Space program also promised more efficient use of earth’s resources, help in global attack on environmental pollution, possible prediction of earthquakes, and hope for more productive agriculture by use of lunar soil ingredients. “The line between true and false economy is hard to draw. But the space program is one area where the time has come to draw it.” (LA Times, 1/31/71) During January: Creation of global resources management system was discussed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in guest editorial in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “Can we afford to create a global resources management system? I think we cannot afford not to develop it. As the richest nation in the world we have a moral obligation to bring our new technology to bear to help the helpless. But let us talk about our national security. On both well-fed sides of the Iron Curtain, an uncomfortable amount of raw thermonuclear power has been piled up in the name of ‘deterring the other side.’ In the meantime, the under-fed, over-populated part of the world, too poor to build thermonuclear bombs, has quietly developed a far more terrifying threat to the thermonuclear powers: the Population Bomb. Is is not just common sense to spend at least a small part of our tax money set aside for national security on the task of defusing that bomb? It is gratifying indeed to know that, by establishing a global Earth-resources survey and management system, we can combine a project bound to vastly enhance our national security with a noble contribution to the welfare of the world, a charity quite likely to save the lives of millions.” (A&A, 1/71, 24-5)
President Nixon issued statement on Oct. 6 death of Rep. James G. Fulton. Rep. Fulton would be “especially remembered for his unfailing support of our space program.” (PD, 10/11/71, 1382; Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
JPL announced selection of Howard H. Haglund, former Surveyor project manager, to be project manager for dot’s People Mover transit system at Morgantown, W. Va. Dr. Albert R. Hibbs would be deputy project manager, jpl was initiating research and design of automated, computer-controlled system under $1353 000 dot contract, (jpl Release 570)
Former F-14 project manager Capt. Lionel E. Ames, Jr. (usn), said in interview that F-14 fighters would cost $16.6 million each—almost $4 million more than $12.7 million announced by dod Aug. 10. He said confusion over cost illustrated some of problems he had had as project manager before being replaced. (W Star, 9/2/71, All)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, delivered commencement address at Cal Tech: “One of the paths we can take—the obvious one ■—is to help develop some new area of high technology that will serve to strengthen our Nation’s economic base, and thus indirectly, our whole culture. We don’t necessarily have to perform this task with productivity foremost in our minds . . . even though that’s really the way it works. “A second path—and the demand for this path will be growing rapidly, I believe—is to attack directly the social, economic, and other serious problems of our time that have a definite technological component. Problems of ecology . . . have technological solutions. Urban and interurban transportation have technological solutions. As soon as we determine the appropriate political system which will spend the time and money, we already know a good deal about how to solve problems like these, and what remaining technology needs to be developed will undoubtedly appear. Other problems such as rural and ghetto health, housing, hunger, and poverty, have only a partly technological solution; still others, with strong human and sociological components, are even harder to deal with, and it may be a long time before problem-solvers learn to deal with ‘people’ problems. . . . while it wasn’t easy to land men on the Moon—it was nevertheless a straightforward, engineering kind of problem. And as someone has said, there weren’t any people between here and there.” Third path—and he thought few persons “yet realize what a broad and important path it can be in years ahead”—was “to pursue long-range study and research on applications of problem-solving techniques to some of the more purely human problems.” (Text)
Dr. James C. Fletcher held first press conference as nasa Administrator. In response to questions Dr. Fletcher said strength of U.S. depended critically on development of new technology. “And this means new technology of all kinds—electronics, computers, materials, as well as military technology. And 1 think that’s . . . why NASA . . . programs should be vigorously pursued.” nasa had studied possibility of second Skylab and “many other manned missions in space, most of them somewhat cheaper than the second Skylab; and we intend to look at these very carefully to see what programs, if any, made sense after . . . the first Skylab is flown.” Dr. Fletcher thought NASA stol experimental aircraft program was “long overdue.” Asked his personal plans for NASA, Dr. Fletcher said, “I can’t say that I want to go in a new direction from the way nasa has been going, except maybe up instead of down.” He was interested in international cooperation in space and “whole business of commercial use of the things that nasa has been developing,” including “strides in the applications satellites area.” He was “great supporter of the shuttle,” and had been “for many years before coming to NASA.” With development of shuttle, or “a cheap transfer system to orbit . . . it’ll open up all kinds of new things you can do in space. Since the costs will be much less—the costs per launch will be so much less. That is, all kinds of new applications, all kinds of new science programs, new manned, near-earth programs, almost anything you can think of can be done much cheaper once you have the shuttle developed.” With sufficient funds, NASA would probably pursue space station. “But in my judgment, if you have to decide between the shuttle and the space station, you pick the shuttle first because you have to have that for the second.” (Transcript)
NASA interest in “phased approach” to development of reusable space shutde system was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Contractor studies near completion indicated “preferred configuration” was “two-stage delta-wing reusable system in which the orbiter has external propellant tanks that can be jettisoned.” While studies to date had favored “concurrent approach” in which development and testing of orbiter and booster stages would proceed simultaneously, NASA also had studied feasibility of sequencing development, test, and verification of system’s features. “We now believe that a ‘phased approach’ is feasible and may offer significant advantages.” Additional studies in progress, plus those nearing completion, would enable NASA “to make a decision this fall on the technical and programmatic approach to be followed in the space shuttle program.” (NASA Release 71-107)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences unanimously approved nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as nasa Administrator, following one-hour hearing. Dr. Fletcher told Committee U.S. had made “some small steps” toward cooperation with U.S.S.R. in space. “I think we can .make these even larger steps.” Asked if he thought nasa needed any change in direction Dr. Fletcher said, “No organization is perfect, and a new administration will always look at the program to see if it can make any changes and I intend to do that.” In response to question from Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), Dr. Fletcher said it was “not NASA’s mission” to act as technological wpa in aiding depressed areas through the channel of space contracts. (CR, 3/10/71, D144; O’Toole, W Post, 3/11/71)
Tenth anniversary of President Kennedy’s message to Congress urging that U.S. “commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) said on House floor: “As we attempt to plan for a significant and aggressive national space program for the 1970’s, it is well to remember that on this date in 1961 the late President John F. Kennedy made an equally difficult and challenging decision. It is time again that we seize the initiative and make a positive decision for a strong national space program.” (CR, 5/25/71, S7698, E5023)
Soviet Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 cosmonauts were described by Dr. Vladimir Dupik in Sovietskaya Rossiya article as best-fed crew in history of space flights. Length of flight had necessitated diet of four hot meals daily including “first breakfast” of veal, bread, candy, and coffee; “second breakfast” of tongue, sausage, and curds; lunch of dried, salted fish, borscht, meat, bread, cake and black currant juice. Fourth meal was not described. Oven had been installed in spacecraft for first time in Soviet space program, spices had been added to meats to improve flavor, and 14 varieties of meat carried had “higher moisture content which makes them juicier and gives off a nice aroma.” (upi, W Star, 6/27/71, All)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 docking in AP interview published by Chicago Tribune. Docking indicated U.S.S.R. was “more or less on schedule in their declared program for developing a major experimental station in space, at least two years ahead of us.” In answer to question Dr. Fletcher said prospect “frightens me only because I don’t know what they’re doing there. They may have some military purposes that we don’t know about.” On U.S.S.R.’s two vehicles en route to Mars he said that “we don’t know what these vehicles are going to do, but it’s conceivable that there will be attempts to land.” Dr. Fletcher said NASA had been “shocked and saddened” by loss of Soyuz 11 cosmo-/^2_ nauts but “we find no reason to make any major changes in our plans for manned missions.” (AP, C Trib, 7/11/71)	•
President Nixon sent message to Congress transmitting Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Transmitted to the Congress January 1971: “The activities of our space program during the year are consistent with the recommendations I made in March for a balanced space program. Our goals are continued exploration, scientific knowledge and practical applications. The technology acquired through our space programs has many practical applications on earth ranging from communications, meteorology and navigation to agriculture, education and transportation.” Specific objectives were continued lunar exploration to increase scientific return on Apollo program investment, exploration of solar system and universe, reduction of space operation costs, expansion of knowledge of “man’s ability to perform productively in the hostile environment of space and to relate this knowledge to uses here on earth” and application of space technology to environmental problems. “We should also promote international cooperation in our space program by pursuing joint space ventures, exchanging scientific and technical knowledge, and assisting in the practical application of this knowledge. We are greatly encouraged by European interest in joining us in cooperative post-Apollo planning.” Year 1970 had produced “substantial contributions to continued U.S. pre-eminence in civil aviation, major improvements in aeronautical services, and impressive developments in a sound sst program.” New military aeronautics programs initiated in 1970 would “enhance our national security.” (Pres Rpt 71; PD, 2/8/71, 158)
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Dr. James C.	Fletcher as NASA Administrator [see Feb. 27]. (PD, 3/8/71, 437)
NASA announced award of $1.6-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Aerospace Corp. for studies of advanced space programs. Studies, which would advance work performed under previous contract, would include space shuttle mission and payload capture analysis, payload analysis for space shuttle applications, analysis of advanced program operations and logistics analysis, and advanced missions safety. (nasa Release 71—255) During December: U.S. manned lunar missions Apollo 14 and 15 were voted fifth most important news story of 1971 in AP poll of member newspapers. Communist China was voted number one newsmaker for admission to U.N., changed diplomatic relations with U.S., and emerging position in world affairs. (W Star, 12/27/71, C9)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, held news conference during first visit to LeRC. He said LeRC would play major role in development of commercial engines geared toward reducing noise pollution by future jet aircraft. (Lewis News, 9/10/71, 1; LeRC pio)
GAO study had disclosed that cost overruns on 61 weapon systems had reached $33.4 billion, of which some $9.5 billion had taken place before production began, Washington Post reported. Report blamed “deliberate underestimating,” unanticipated development difficulties, faulty planning, poor management, bad estimating, inflation, and desire to exploit new technology. It said newer dod programs “are characterized by a slower development pace and more conservative procurement practices.” (Nossiler, W Post, 3/19/71, Al)
Dr. James C. Fletcher was sworn in as NASA Administrator by D.C. Superior Court Judge James A. Belson in White House ceremony attended by President Nixon, (nasa Off Admin; W Post, 4/28/71, A2)
Space Program Advisory Council, established by NASA to advise on space program goals and objectives and aid in reviewing plans for and work in progress on space programs and accomplishments, held first meeting. Council of prominent scientists would report to NASA Deputy Administrator on findings of four committees—Applications, Physical Sciences, Life Sciences, and Space Systems, (nasa Release 71-71)
Results of Harris survey of 1614 U.S. households on priority areas for cuts in Federal funding were published in Washington Post. Top three candidates for cuts were Vietnam war, foreign aid, and space program; 50% of those polled favored cut in space program; 13% would cut program least of Federal spending areas listed. Support for spending in education, urban aid, and environmental areas, Harris said, “appears to be on the rise.” (Harris, W Post, 8/5/71)
Total new obligational authority for U.S. space program including all pertinent agencies in President Nixon’s proposed FY 1972 budget was $4,707 billion—down $73.6 million, or 1.1%, from FY 1971 space noa of $4,780 billion—Space Business Daily estimated. Total FY 1972 space expenditures would be $4,633 billion, down 5.2% from $4,888 billion in FY 1971. (SBD, 2/3/71, 148)
U.S. space program was “beyond the days of reacting to each major Soviet space event,” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in speech before Aviation/Space Writers Assn, meeting in Wichita, Kans. NASA’s FY 1972 request was typical of those to come for several years; “we have made no commitment to any new program beyond the 1972 budget.” In response to questions, Dr. Low said Soviet Salyut 1—Soyuz 10 mission was “not clearly successful or unsuccessful.” It was “inconceivable” that total planned mission was 48-hr flight to rendezvous and dock briefly. But U.S.S.R. had “strong program. They are concentrating very hard on a major space effort.” (Aero Daily, 5/10/71)
Dr. Marvin J. Kelly, former President and Board Chairman of Bell Telephone Laboratories, died at age 77. After retiring from Bell in 1959 Dr. Kelly had been named adviser to NASA Administrator and consultant to IBM, Ingersoll-Rand Co., and Kennecott Copper Corp. (NYT, 3/20/71, 32)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div. of Library of Congress’ Congressional Research Service, reviewed Soviet space program in A1AA Student Journal. Soviet program’s physical size and upward pace “suggests it exceeds in real terms the U.S. program at its previous maximum.” In contrast to U.S. program— which had been eroded as programs ended and technical manpower teams broke up—Soviet “application of resources to a broad program of space flight has continued fairly steadily upward toward an ultimate level which has not yet been publicly defined.” Soviet program began its space flights with adaptation of its first ICBM, SS-6 Sapwood. “This vehicle, with improved upper staging, is still the mainstay of the present program while our corresponding, but very small, Redstone and Vanguard first stages have long since disappeared into history.” Largest single element in total U.S.S.R. program was Cosmos reconnnaisance satellite, which stayed in low-circular orbit a few days and was then recovered and which represented “rather passive military support flights.” Other elements with direct weapon implications were special uses of SS—9 Scarp ballistic missile carrier with space versions F— 1-r carrying fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) and F-l-m carrying highly maneuverable payloads. Some payloads launched by F—1—m “seem almost certainly aimed at developing the techniques of rendezvous with uncooperative spacecraft to inspect them and, if need be, destroy them. In a series of flights . . . such inspectors have made close passes on other Soviet payloads and then have themselves been blown into clouds of debris. At least one, instead of being destroyed . . . was deliberately redirected to plunge into the atmosphere and ocean.” (AIAA Stu /, 12/71, 14-28)
Economic slump that hit Cape Kennedy and Brevard County, Fla., after space program cuts appeared to be bottoming out, New York Times reported. Three Chambers of Commerce and county economic development council were spending $260 000 annually, “compared with next to nothing three years ago,” to promote ksc tours find area’s natural assets. Decline in jobs since 1968 had leveled off and panic sale of homes at bargain prices had ended. (Janson, NYT, 3/8/71, 25)
USAF had announced that 130-member review team of specialists from usaf, Lockheed, and other aerospace companies would make year-long review of usaf C-5A program, Wall Street Journal reported. Object of review was to “recommend operational refinements or aircraft modifications where necessary.” (WSJ, 11/30/71, 3)
Federal Aviation Administration released aviation forecasts for FY 1972 through FY 1983: U.S. passenger emplanements would increase from 170 million in FY 1971 to 174.9 million in FY 1972 and 189.7 million in FY 1973—gain of about 3% in FY 1972 and almost 9% in FY 1973. By end of 1983, emplanements were expected to reach 475.5 million— almost three times FY 1971 level. Revenue passenger-miles recorded by U.S. airlines were expected to grow at annual rate of about 10.5%, to reach 445 billion in FY 1983, more than three times total of 132.4 billion in FY 1971. Total hours flown by general-aviation aircraft was expected to increase almost 4% in FY 1972 and 5% in FY 1973, to 28.8 million. By 1983, total hours were expected to reach 46.2 million. General-aviation fleet was expected to grow from 131407 aircraft in January 1971 to 212 000 in January 1983. (faa Release 72-67)	_	_
NASA notified staff of Civil Service Commission directive canceling special salary rates for engineers, scientists, accountants, mathematicians, and others. Approximately 500 NASA employees affected would be converted to General Schedule and placed on saved pay rates or in higher pay steps with longer waiting periods for step increments, effective Feb. 6. Persons hired to affected positions after Feb. 6 would be paid General Schedule rates, (nasa Hq WB, 1/10/72, 2)
Term “post-Apollo” had “outlived its usefulness,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in message to staff. “When plans for this decade were still uncertain it made sense to refer to them as post-Apollo plans. But today we are advanced with new programs which stand on their own merits.” Skylab, space shuttle, Viking, High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), and Pioneer and Mariner missions to planets drew heavily on technology of 1960s, “but they take this technology giant steps into the future.” Dr. Fletcher suggested names for future years: 1973 would be “Year of Skylab” and of Pioneer 10, 1975 would be year of Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, in 1976 Viking would land on Mars, and in 1978 first space shuttle orbital flight was scheduled. “Each of these events will make a memorable page in the story of human progress. Each of them will contribute importantly to mankind’s knowledge of our planetary environment.” (NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 244-5)
U.S. was “running out of blank spaces on the map” and needed last frontier of space “to keep the human spirit up,” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said in interview published by National Enquirer. “Huge tasks” set for computer industry by Apollo program had boosted that industry from $1-billion-per-year earnings in 1969 to $8 billion in 1972. “The aerospace industry itself is a $27 billion business. These and associated industries which the space program stimulates . . . produce the base for the taxes to support all programs. Let the tax base erode and you will very soon see that we won’t be able to afford the social programs.” (Adler, National Enquirer, 4/16/72)
Further space budget cuts were forecast by Senate Finance Committee Chairman, Sen. Russell B. Long (D-La.), during Lafayette, La., press conference. He said President was trying to pare Federal budget to “reasonable limits.” There was “a lot of appeal to making some reductions in the space program.” (Sen Long Off; upi, W Post, 12/7/72)
President Nixon signed H.R. 15097, $8.393-billion Dept, of Transportation and related agencies appropriations act that contained $1,671-billion Federal Aviation Administration appropriation. Act became Public Law 92-398. {PD, 8/28/72, 1288; faa pio)
Army Aviation Systems Command issuance of requests for proposals to 10 aerospace companies for prototype development of advanced armed helicopter was reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology. Helicopter would be equipped with advanced air-to-surface missiles. Airframe contractors were expected to b,e selected in June 1973. (Av Wk, 11/20/72, 19)
Plaque placed in auditorium of National Academy of Sciences bore inscription: “The National Academy of Sciences Auditorium is dedicated to all individuals who through the Academy have devoted their talents and knowledge to the service of the Nation and mankind. It perpetuates the memory of Hugh L. Dryden whose friends, by establishing the Dryden Memorial Fund, helped to make this auditorium possible.” Dr. Dryden was NASA Deputy Administrator 1958-1965, former Director of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca), and former Associate Director of National Bureau of Standards. (nas Pres Off; NASA Hist Off)
NASA policy on autographs was outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in memo to officials of Hq. program and staff offices and field installations: “1. No autograph should be treated as a commercial commodity; nothing of value should be requested or accepted in exchange for an autograph. 2. Multiple autographs for the same individual or concern are discouraged; multiple autographs should not be provided when it is apparent that they will be. used commercially by the requesting individual or concern.” Policy applied to all NASA employees on and off duty but did not affect official signatures for official purposes or signing of autographs for noncommercial purposes. (Text)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, discussed cost of doing business in space in speech before Aerospace Industries Assn.’s 26th Williamsburg Conference at Williamsburg, Va. NASA was developing “steady flow of products in the space business.” With shuttle “we will have a real opportunity to do something about the high cost of doing business in space.” Formula was to identify areas with greatest potential payoff for cost improvement, determine standard requirements for systems with highest potential payoff for future spacecraft, develop these standard items with low cost and high reliability, and ensure that items were used. “Our work to improve the costs of the things we will do in space is an essential adjunct to the Shuttle—not only for our own projects, but to help pave the way for many more commercial uses of space.” (Text)
President Nixon accepted resignation, effective July 15, of Kenneth M. Smith as Deputy Administrator of Federal Aviation Administration. (PD, 5/12/72, 1008)
NASA announced formation of JT3D/JT8D Refan Program Office in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. New Office—to be managed and directed by James J. Kramer, Chief of Noise Pollution Reduction Branch in Aeronautical Propulsion Div.—would direct program to develop and demonstrate modifications to JT3D and JT8D engines produced by United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. Larger diameter, quieter, single-stage fans, together with suitable acoustic nacelles, would seek maximum practicable quieting at takeoff and landing approach. Refan program was part of joint effort by NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Federal Aviation Administration to define retrofit changes that would produce significant aircraft noise reduction. (nasa Release 72—96)
NASA Equal Opportunity Council to review, advise, and recommend on implementation of NASA Equal Employment Opportunity Program was established by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. Membership of full-time NASA employees from key staff and program offices would serve two-year terms. Chairman, Bernard Moritz, would serve one-year term. (NASA Activities, 6/15/72, 119)
Federal Aviation Administration announced appointment of Robert F. Bacon as Director of Office of Aviation Policy. He had been Acting Deputy Director of System Planning Div. in faa’s Airports Service. (faa Release 72-200)
Federal Aviation Administration completed installation of automated flight-data processing system in all 20 of its contiguous air route traffic control centers, rendered 34 automated radar terminal systems (arts hi) operational, and installed 53 instrument landing systems, (dot Release 99-S-72)
House by vote of 356 to 32 passed H.R. 11021, to control emission of noise detrimental to human environment. House rejected amendment— after consultation with NASA Administrator, Secretary of Transportation, and Federal Aviation Administration—that would have authorized Environmental Protection Agency to provide for control and abatement of aircraft noise and sonic boom. (CR, 2/29/72, H1508-39)
Federal Aviation Administration announced award of five-month 1414 226 contract to Xonics, Inc., for additional wake-turbulence studies leading to design of ground-based acoustic wake-turbulence detection system. Xonics would analyze results of previous studies and recommend design of system capable of providing wake-vortex surveillance along airport instrument-landing-sytern approach path, (faa Release 72-37)
Award of cost-sharing contracts totaling nearly $9 million to Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Co. to determine feasibility of retrofitting jet aircraft with noise-reduction devices was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. Cost of Boeing contract was $3 365 000, of which Government would provide $2 771 549. Cost of McDonnell Douglas contract was $5 600 000, with Government share $2 771 549. (faa Release 72-141)
Release of first 24 in series of supersonic transport (sst) foliow-on technology reports was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. Reports covered noise reduction, supersonic inlets, flight controls, fuel tank sealants, and titanium structures, (faa Release 72-179)
Doomed civilization theory was disputed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in speech at Carnegie Institute Museum of Art in Pittsburgh. Speech was part of Man and Idea Series sponsored by museum’s Women’s Committee. “I think these views overlook the very center of civilization—man himself, his intellect and his capacity to learn and act, and thereby retain in some great measure control over his own destiny.” Goal of space program was to “place the tools of planetary management into the hands of man.” Rather than barrier or constraint, space had become to man “a natural extension of his sphere of activity. I do not see this as ephemeral or temporary; I believe that, both physically and intellectually, our operating environment has been permanently expanded. This is a real contribution to the human spirit.” Human spirit was difficult to define; “it is measured by attitudes and aspirations and mature expectations. Our space experience, in the fourteen years past, has given us all a different—and better—view of the future. In a very real sense, the future is already here; we must learn to recognize it and live in it responsibly.” (Text)
NASA and Federal Aviation Administration announced they would jointly sponsor major aeronautics exhibit at world’s first international transportation exhibition, transpo ’72, to be held at Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va., May 27 to June 4. Exhibit would illustrate how two agencies were working with aviation community to overcome problems of congestion, noise, pollution, and inadequate airport facilities, (faa Release 72-57)
Full-scale model of Boeing supersonic transport costing $10 million would be stored at Boeing facility near Seattle, Wash., another year for further “technical evaluation,” Washington Evening Star reported. Federal Aviation Administration had said technical benefits to be gained by retaining mockup would outweigh proceeds from its sale. (W Star, 4/30/72, C12)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced award of a $3 485 861 contract to Westinghouse Electric Co.’s Aerospace and Electronic Systems Center to design, fabricate, install, and test one prototype air-route-surveillance radar, designated ARSR-3. The radar would include the latest technology to improve coverage area and target detection and to reduce clutter, (faa Release 73-26)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved a favorable report on S.J.R. 37—to change the name of NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Tex., to Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center—after hearing testimony from Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. (CR, ‘1/1/13, D71)
President Nixon sent to the Senate the nomination of Dr. Gerald F. Tape to be the U.S. Representative to the International Atomic Energy Agency with the rank of Ambassador. Tape would succeed Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, who had resigned. The nomination was confirmed by the Senate June 7. (PD, 5/14/73, 658, 669; Tape Off)
NASA’s hydrogen injection program—to decrease automobile and aircraft engine pollution by injecting hydrogen gas into the gasoline and air mixture before combustion—was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in a speech before the Economic Club of Detroit. The program, being carried out by Jet Propulsion Laboratory with assistance from Lewis Research Center, was “an exciting experimental effort to bring old and new technology to bear on one of the major problems of modern society.” In Phase 1, begun in April for conclusion in December, small amounts of hydrogen gas were being injected into a lean gasoline and air mixture to be burned in a standard automobile engine, first in a laboratory and later in an operating automobile with bottled hydrogen carried in its trunk. Preliminary laboratory tests had shown “a significant reduction in pollution without an increase in fuel consumption. In fact, our preliminary figures indicate that hydrogen injection may even produce a fuel saving. This comes both from the direct effect of the hydrogen on the combustion process and from the better atomization of the fuel mixture.” Work was progressing at LeRC on a laboratory model of a generator in which the hydrogen would be produced from gasoline and water. Phase 2 would attempt to solve engineering problems in integrating the hydrogen injection system, generators, and fuel controls into a smooth-running automobile. (NASA Activities, 10/15/73, 183—4)
The Federal Aviation Administration and industry Area Navigation Task Force issued the report Application of Area Navigation in the National Airspace System. It recommended a 10-yr program to establish area navigation as the primary method of aircraft navigation in the U.S. The program called for a total overhaul of the airspace route structure above 5000 m (18 000 ft) and redesign of high- and medium-density terminal areas. Small airborne computers would enable pilots to fly designed courses by extrapolating signals from ground navigation aids, freeing them from the necessity of flying directly between ground stations and allowing greater flexibility in route selection, (faa Release 73-45)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, gave personal views on the existence of extraterrestrial life in a speech at the Univ. of Maryland: “There is no hope of finding intelligent life elsewhere in the solar system. As far as this particular corner of the universe is concerned, we are it.” Chances were that primitive life forms would be found on other planets or in their atmospheres, “and this will still be one of the great discoveries of all time. This discovery will shed light on how life arose on Earth. It will strengthen our conviction that intelligent life must exist on the planets of millions, or even billions, of other star systems in the universe.” Dr. Fletcher doubted that any other civilizations would exchange visits with the earth because of the great distances. “We could not begin to build the kind of spaceship that would be needed. But who can say what new technologies, what new understandings of the physical laws of the universe, future generations will develop ■—or hear about on the inter-galactic radio network?” He was “very optimistic” about long-range chances of communicating with very advanced civilizations in the Milky Way or other galaxies: “When you think how many stars there are which could have planets like Earth, and how long they have been in existence, it is quite easy to believe that there must be many advanced civilizations broadcasting in our direction. And I am sure we have the technology needed to intercept such signals and eventually answer them.” (Text)
The “deeper meaning” of Apollo 17 (Dec. 7-19, 1972), the last manned lunar landing mission in the NASA program, was discussed by author William I. Thompson in a New York Times article: The mission had represented a “sunset” of rocket technology. “Apollo 17 turned the night into day, but elsewhere smaller lights were going on as men began to discover relationships between consciousness and the growth of plants . . . , between enzyme change and faith healing . . . , and between mind and matter in psychokinesis. . . . The space program was an important scaffolding, but now that the building of the new human culture is up, we no longer need the scaffolding.” To spend a fortune on rockets now “would be the same as spending a fortune on dirigibles in 1916. There are other forms of space travel to be invented, and these forms are more likely to spring from the new paradigms emerging in science than from the hardware of the old technology. The era of the rocket has climaxed in Apollo 17; if we push on and ignore the sense of an ending, we shall find only the bitterness and disappointment of the anticlimax.” (NYT, 1/1/73, 3:13) January 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, expressed gratification in his monthly letter to the staff “with NASA’s excellent performance in 1972, and with the successful transition . . . from the completed programs of the Sixties to the new programs and new challenges of the Seventies. In 1972, Phase I of the national space effort of the United States was completed and Phase II well begun.” NASA’s first year with all launches and missions successful underlined that it was NASA’s custom “to do the unprecedented and then quickly make it routine.” Zero failures could now be the goal year after year. Dr. Fletcher also noted that of 18 space launches in 1972 half had been for other organizations or countries, with 8 being reimbursed. On another “important front,” the NASA-wide payload cost-reduction campaign begun in 1972 had gone well, with valuable suggestions from Centers and contractors. The effort “was not a routine cutback exercise and not a threat to anyone’s security. It is, instead, a creative effort to expand our usefulness even though funds are limited. And you can be sure it has a lot to do with NASA’s long-range survival as the instrument of the U.S. Government to handle most kinds of space and aeronautical r&d and other related assignments.” (NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 2-3)
A Baltimore Sun editorial commented on NASA’s problems with the Office of Management and Budget: omb had promised NASA about $3.4 billion annually, but omb impoundment of funds had cut NASA’s FY 1974 budget to about $3 billion and “it appears OMB will hold the space agency to about $3,235 billion in fiscal 1975.” Inflation had aggravated nasa’s problems and $85 million had been cut from the FY 1974 shuttle development budget. “But now NASA is suggesting what some aerospace contractors are stating explicitly: That if the OMB squeeze stays on, then NASA will have to cut back on new starts in scientific programs. This is an odd irony, indeed, since the very purpose of the shuttle is to serve these new programs.” The Sun felt “that if NASA accountants are told to sharpen their pencils they can keep the shuttle alive as well as provide for initiation of the new scientific programs. The Nixon OMB consistently has given science short shrift, however, and it would be sad indeed if the space program were hobbled at the very time it is beginning to show immense scientific promise.” (B Sun, 9/10/73, All)
Dr. Philip Handler, President of the National Academy of Sciences, told newsmen in Moscow that he had informed President Mstislav V. Keldysh of the Soviet Academy of Sciences that there would be a time when the U.S. would need “more definitive information” about the Soviet space program. Dr. Handler had referred to the 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Concluding a two-week tour of Soviet scientific establishments as head of an NAS delegation, Dr. Handler said U.S. science was “a cut ahead” of Soviet science but the distance between the countries was “not very great.” (Reuters, W Post, 7/4/73, A24)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data through 1972 and a Forward Look. The report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—was the latest in an annual review series and first to use the metric system in all quantitative measurements to conform to nasa and Soviet practice. The U.S. expected to have spent $70 billion by June 30 on combined civilian and military space programs. Physical evidence of Soviet space activity indicated the U.S.S.R. had committed a similar amount. There had been no manned Soviet launches in 1972. Moscow had been “filled with rumors” in late July of an impending “more ambitious Salyut-Soyuz manned mission,” but press reports had indicated later that tracking ships which usually supported such missions were returning to port. NASA employment—peaked at 400 000 in 1966—had dropped to 150 000. Soviet space employment might be close to 600 000 because the “effort today seems to be at least equal to our 1966 peak” of a total 600 000 space employees in the U.S. The state of the Soviet effort toward a space shuttle was unknown but the “Soviet effort to maintain a position of leadership in space, and the continued high level of Soviet flight activity of more than double that of the United States” in(Heated the U.S.S.R. “may have even more compelling reasons to develop a reusable shuttle as a cost saving device.” (Text)
Rep. Thaddeus J. Dulski (D-N.Y.) introduced H.R. 4927 to amend Title 5 of the U.S. Code to make Level V of the Executive Schedule applicable to three additional NASA positions. The action was taken following receipt by the House Speaker of a letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, requesting legislation to double the number of NASA Level V positions. Dr. Fletcher requested authority to establish titles of Associate Administrators “in a manner consistent with evolving functional responsibilities as they may develop and be altered . . . ; and to add three such positions to provide salary equality among all Associate Administrators having comparable responsibilities and authorities. Legislation was required because reorganization of NASA offices had created six offices headed by Associate Administrators, rather than three. (CR. 2/28/73, H1244)	'
The Federal Aviation Administration released Aviation Forecasts, Fiscal Years 1973—1984. Airline passenger traffic was expected to increase 10% annually, passing the 500 million mark in 1984. The number of hours flown by general-aviation aircraft would increase from 27.7 million in FY 1973 to 46.6 million in FY 1984 and the general-aviation fleet from 136 000 to 217 000 aircraft. U.S. airline passenger enplanements would increase from 200.4 million to 524 million in FY 1984, with international passengers increasing from 21.3 million to 62.8 million and domestic from 179.1 million to 461.2 million. Revenue passenger-miles recorded by U.S. air carriers were expected to reflect a continuing long-term trend of increased average passenger trip length; the FY 1984 total of 500.5 billion was expected to more than triple the FY 1973 figure of 162.1 billion. The air carrier fleet would increase by 1000 additional aircraft, bringing the total fleet to 3600, of which 60% would be wide-body aircraft accounting for 80% of available seat-miles. Operations at airport control towers were expected to rise from 56.8 million to 112.5 million. Annual production of U.S. civil aircraft would jump from 10 005 in FY 1973 to 24 465 in FY 1984, with general aviation accounting for most of the gain. Annual air carrier aircraft production would increase from 205 to 265, while the general-aviation figure would soar from 9800 to 24 200. (faa Release 73-60)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, announced that future spacecraft technical requirements would permit a phasedown beginning in mid-1974 of a Deep Space Network (dsn) facility and a Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) facility—NASA’s two major tracking and data-acquisition facilities near Johannesburg, South Africa. The 64-m (210-ft) antenna facilities at Goldstone, Calif., and the new large-dish facilities in Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, with smaller 26-m (85-ft) antennas at these stations, would be used for the new planetary spacecraft probing further into the solar system and beyond after June 1974. (nasa Release 73-128)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, dismissed Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity. In a Nov. 2 memorandum to NASA employees he said: “Mrs. Harris has made public a paper she wrote me criticizing NASA’s Employment Opportunity Program and recommending the reassignment of the Assistant Administrator.” Dr. Fletcher was “deeply and personally committed to the goal of equal employment opportunity for members of minority groups and women” and “was not satisfied with NASA’s performance in this field.” He said NASA would consider Mrs. Harris’ recommendations and suggestions and “will adopt those we feel will be helpful.” He appreciated her effort and respected her “for having expressed her opinions.” But, “because Mrs. Harris has not demonstrated the degree of administrative and management skill required of her position, because she has been unwilling to share the broader problems of management with her peers, and because she became a seriously disruptive force within her own office, I concluded that she should not continue to serve. ... In so concluding, I also concluded that Dr. [Dudley G.] McConnell [Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity] can successfully do the job he has been assigned provided he has the good will and working support of all nasa employees.” Dr. McConnell, a former civil rights activist, had said most of Mrs. Harris’ report had been on public record already “but the time they spent preparing it should have been devoted to more positive kinds of things,” the Baltimore Sun reported. (O’Brien, W Post, 10/29/73, A5; Text, B Sun, 10/29/73, A3)
Federal Aviation Administration award of a six-month $125 082 contract to Boeing Co. to develop data to identify aircraft noise patterns in airport vicinities was announced by Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar. Boeing would collect and analyze noise and performance data on its four in-service commercial aircraft—Boeing 707, 727, 737, and 747. (faa Release 73—55)
The Senate agreed by a vote of 82 to 10 to S. Res. 71 to seek agreement with other governments to prohibit the use of environmental or geophysical modification activity as a weapon of war. (CR, 7/11/73, S13101-02) July 12:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, outlined potential uses of space age technology before the Western Assn, of State Game and Fish Commissioners in Salt Lake City, Utah. He said earth surveying could find hidden resources, such as formations likely to have petroleum beneath them. (Evans, Desert News, 7/12/73)
Australian Prime Minister E. G. Whitlam and Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, officially opened the largest space-tracking antenna erected in Australia for NASA. The 64-m-dia (210-ft-dia) antenna at the Tidbinbilla Deep Space Communications Complex near Canberra would be part of NASA’s global Deep Space Network (dsn) of three stations. The first station was built at Goldstone, Calif., in 1966 and the third was nearing completion in Madrid, Spain, (nasa Release 73-69; NASA pao)
The Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1972 was presented in Washington, D.C., by the National Aeronautic Assn, to the 7th and 8th Air Forces and Task Force 77 of the Navy for their “demonstrated expert and precisely integrated use of advance [d] aerospace technology” in the conduct of Operation Line Backer II, the 11-day air campaign in December 1972 that “led to the return of the United States prisoners of war” in Southeast Asia. Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, received the trophy on behalf of the servicemen at a luncheon hosted by the National Aviation Club and the National Aeronautic Assn. Guests included Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator. (Invitation; nac Off)
Dr. Alexander Hocker, European Space Research Organization (esro) Director General, sent a message to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, on NASA’s 15th anniversary: “The resourcefulness, courage and remarkable achievements of NASA personnel have been an inspiration to us in Europe and ESRO is proud to be associated with some of nasa’s most stimulating endeavours.” (ESRO Newsletter, 10/73, 3)
The Senate confirmed Alexander P. Butterfield as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration. (CR, 3/12/73, D214)
The appointment of Frederick A. Meister, Jr., as Deputy Associate Administrator of Plans for the Federal Aviation Administration was announced by faa Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield. Meister would succeed Ronald W. Pulling, who had retired, (faa Release 73—68)
Award of a $33 982 080 contract to Rockwell International Corp. for lease or purchase of 11 75A Sabreliner aircraft with electronic systems, to flight-test more than 7000 ground navigational aids, was announced by the Federal Aviation Administration. The contract was part of an faa program to replace 47 DC-3s and T-29s with 21 modern, light, twin-turbine-powered aircraft for flight inspection, (faa Release 73-78)
A Federal Aviation Administration rule protecting the public from sonic booms generated by civil supersonic aircraft was announced by Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar. The rule, prohibiting civil aircraft from exceeding mach 1 when flying over land mass or territorial waters of U.S., would become effective April 27, 1973. (faa Release 73-57)
Sen. Pete V. Domenici (R—N. Mex.) introduced S. 2755, a bill to require the NASA Administrator to study the feasibility of entering into international cooperative programs using space technology and applications. The nasa Administrator would work with the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and the National Science Foundation Director to study the desirability of international cooperation and cost sharing to develop a solar energy collection and conversion system. (CR, 11/29/73, S21370) November 30:	The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 613 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 274-km (170.3-mi) apogee, 188-km (116.8-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Western observers identified the spacecraft as an unmanned Soyuz. It was brought down by parachute near Karaganda Jan. 30, 1974, after orbiting the earth 60 days, a record length of flight for any Soviet spacecraft recovered intact. Cosmos 613 flew the same orbital track as other manned Soviet spacecraft but at a higher altitude, leading to speculation that the purpose of the mission was to test the ability of Soyuz spacecraft to fly higher and the durability of its systems as a prerequisite to a possible two-month manned mission, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; 1/31/74; SBD, 12/3/13, 164; O’Toole, W Post, 12/16/73, A25; 2/10/74, A27; Av Wk, 2/11/74, 32)
The National Space Club held its Awards Luncheon in Washington, D.C. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award of $500—named for the U.S. rocket pioneer—was presented to Barton C. Hacker of Iowa State Univ. for his essay “From Space Station to Orbital Operations in Space Travel Thought, 1895-1951.”' The Dr. Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship award of $2000, presented annually to an “individual . . . pursuing the challenges of research, exploration, and administration in astronautics, so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space” for the U.S., was given to Dr. Palmer Dyal of NASA Ames Research Center Electrodynamics Branch. The award was named for the first NASA Deputy Administrator, who died in 1965. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Scholarship of $2000 was presented to David 0. Starr of Catholic Univ. (Program; nsc News Letter, 2/22/73)
Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management since Oct. 1, 1970, had resigned effective Dec. 12, NASA announced. In accepting the resignation, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said: “He brought much to NASA in managerial knowhow from his former capacity as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Shell Oil Company. ... He made NASA a better organization—in our dealing with industry and in our handling of internal affairs.” (NASA Ann)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, issued a management instruction continuing in existence, and setting forth the charter for the NASA Space Program Advisory Council and its related standing committees under the Federal Advisory Committee Act of Oct. 6, 1972 (P.L. 92-463). The nasa Administrator had determined Jan. 4, 1973, that the Council and committees were in the public interest in the performance of duties imposed upon NASA by law, “and they are therefore continued for the period ending June 30, 1974.” Council functions were to consult with and advise NASA, through the Deputy Administrator, on plans for, work in progress on, and accomplishments of NASA’s programs. (NASA nmi 1156.20C)
The Federal Aviation Administration put into effect Phase II of the tightened airport security measures announced Dec. 5, 1972. An armed guard would be stationed at every departure gate of every U.S. air carrier airport; every passenger would be screened before boarding aircraft; and all baggage would be inspected before being carried aboard, (dot Release)
The Federal Aviation Administration released Census of U.S. Civil Aircraft for 1970 and 1971. Civil aircraft at the end of 1971 totaled 166 785, of which 131 870 were listed as “active.” End-of-1969 figures had shown 190 749 aircraft, of which 133 814 were listed as “eligible to fly.” (faa Release 73—197)
Maj. Alexander P. de Seversky (U.S. Army Air Corps), aviation pioneer, died of a respiratory ailment in New York at the age of 80. Maj. de Seversky had begun his career as a pilot in the Czarist air force in Russia during World War I. After coming to the U.S. in 1918 he contributed to military and commercial aviation, helping to develop the first fully automatic synchronous bombsight, gyroscopically stabilized flight instruments, inflight fueling techniques, and a variety of landing gear for seaplanes and aircraft. He also led the effort to design, huild, and test an all-metal fighter aircraft, the P—35, the first aircraft to fly faster than 480 km per hr. In 1931 he founded the Seversky Aircraft Corp., the forerunner of Republic Aircraft Corp. During World War II de Seversky became one of the country’s leading advocates of strategic air power, saying that the U.S. could not win a “limited war fought with traditional forces.” He argued that “the whole military philosophy must be changed or we shall forever trail the rest of the world not only in conventional aircraft, but in intercontinental ballistic missiles and even in man-made earth satellite development.” (Fraser, NYT, 26 Aug 74, 32; AP, Orlando, Florida, Sentinal Star, 26 Aug 74, B4) Tass reported 28 Aug. that on the second working day the cosmonauts felt well and had made “experiments to perfect the technique of piloting the ship in different flight regimes.” During maneuvering Soyuz 15 approached the Salyut 3 space station many times, the cosmonauts controlling spaceship functions, observing the approach, and inspecting the station. Tass then reported the crew was “concluding the flight and . . . preparing the spacecraft for the return to the earth.” After a 48-hr 12-min mission, Soyuz 15 sofflanded safely at 1:10 am 29 Aug. Baykonur time (4:10 pm edt 28 Aug.)—the first Soviet night landing—48 km southwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan despite a “difficult meteorological situation.” On-the-spot medical examinations showed the cosmonauts to be in “good health.” Early press reports quoted Western experts as saying the flight probably ended early because of a failure in the docking mechanism of the spacecraft, damage to or failure of the spacecraft during the attempted linkup, or a serious deterioration of the Salyut orbital station. In'response to questions about the impact of the Soyuz 15 mission on the planned July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a 29 Aug. statement, “nasa personnel engaged in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. . . were informed in advance by Soviet personnel of the ‘Soyuz 15’ flight and its approximate timing.” Dr. Fletcher said that neither Soyuz 14 (launched 3 July) nor Soyuz 15 “carried the astp docking mechanism. We have no reason to douht this information.” At a 9 Sept, press briefing at Johnson Space Center, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, Soviet chief of cosmonaut training, confirmed through his translator that a hard dock had been one objective of the Soyuz 15 mission and that there were problems with the docking system. “In our previous flights ... we had worked out the automatic rendezvous and docking, but it worked only up to 150 meters. . . . From that point, it was purely manual.” At an 11 Sept, jsc press briefing, Shatalov said that during the Soyy,x 15 flight the automatic system “worked well” up to 30 to 50 m. “But when going beyond 50-40, the range rate exceeded the necessary or the intended parameters.” He also said the approaches had been repeated “a number of times and each time the automatic system worked up to 30-40 meters. ... At no time in these approaches was it intended to use manual docking.” He emphasized that they were satisfied with the automatic system to the point it had worked. He also said the second major objective of the mission was “to perfect this night landing.” Soyuz 15 was the second spacecraft to visit Salyut 3, the Soviet’s third orbiting station. A two-man crew, launched 3 July aboard Soyuz 14, had spent nearly 16 days aboard the station performing scientific experiments. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 27-29 Aug 74, Ul; NASA Release 74—242; Wren, NYT, 29 Aug 74, 1; W Post, 30 Aug 74, A32; SF, Dec 74, 470; Transcripts, 9,11 Sept 74)
A NASA plan for energy conservation and management, effective immediately, was outlined in a memo from Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, to heads of all program and staff offices and Center Directors. NASA expected to exceed by a wide margin the nationwide goal of a 5% reduction in energy consumption for the following 12-mo period as established in a 29 June 1973 Presidential Memorandum. Management actions included scheduling all energy resources, using fewer cars and aircraft, encouraging employee carpools, and examining alternative power sources in large energy consumers such as wind tunnels. NASA would also play a key role in the research, development, and technological application for the longer term solution of energy requirements and efficiencies. A Special Task Force on Energy Conservation, activated 10 Dec. 1973, would review and recommend . policies and guidelines on energy conservation, consider NASA’s response to external energy directives, develop suggestions for conserving energy, and review NASA’s progress in conservation. (Text)
President Ford accepted a segment of crystal grown in the orbiting Skylab Workshop during January, from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology Chairman Howard W. Johnson. Johnson said the indium-antimonide crystal, produced in an MIT experiment, was the purest crystal with the longest life yet produced by man. Using it to carry power current, a computer could be the size of a postage stamp. (NASA Activities, 15 Nov 74, 17; PD, 11 Nov 74,1428; UPI, W Post, 5 Nov 74,1)
The Federal Aviation Administration proposed a new safety regulation that would require all shipments of radioactive material on passenger and cargo aircraft to be inspected for leakage and scanned with radiation monitoring instruments before flight. On passenger flights, radiation monitors would check the cabin floor above the cargo hold before departure and the cargo compartment after the aircraft had landed. The FAA proposal had been prompted by incidents of improper packaging that had exposed passengers and crew members to higher-than-normal radiation levels [see 9-10 April]. (faa Release 74-59)
A Turkish Airlines, Inc., DC—10 jumbo jet airliner carrying 335 passengers and 11 crew members crashed in the Forest of Ermenonville 42 km northeast of Paris, France, killing all aboard in the worst air disaster in history. The crash—the second by a jumbo jet—occurred shortly after takeoff for London from the Paris Orly Airport. Aviation experts from the Federal Aviation Administration, National Transportation Safety Board, manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp., ana Turkish government were sent to the scene to help French officials determine the cause. Eyewitness reports were conflicting but initial evidence pointed to a mid-air explosion; six bodies and one section of seats were found 10 km from the main point of impact. Later findings indicated that the rear cargo door had flown off. The sudden loss of pressure in the cargo hold had collapsed the cabin floor, severing the aircraft control cables, and sucked out the six passengers before the plane plunged steeply earthward. (Robertson, NYT, 4 March 74,1; 6 March 74, 5; AP, B Sun, 7 March 74, A2; Randal, W Post, 4 March 74, A1)
The papers of Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator from 1958 until his death in 1965, were opened to the public in ceremonies at Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, Md. The papers would be housed in the university’s Milton S. Eisenhower Library. (NASA Release 74-120; NASA Hist Off)
Radioactive material like that which had leaked from an improperly shielded container on two 5 and 6 April Delta Air Lines, Inc., flights, and germs, bacteria, and nerve gas were shipped routinely on commercial aircraft, the Washington Post reported. The Post quoted an Atomic Energy Commission investigation as saying that 1 million shipments of radioactive material had been made during 1973. Medical isotopes had accounted for 95% of the total. On 20 March the Air Line Pilots Association had asked the Federal Aviation Administration to ban the shipment of radioactive material by air temporarily. (Conlan, W Post, 15 April 74, A6)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Housing and Urban Development Secretary James T. Lynn signed and sent to the President and Congress their agencies’ joint plan for implementing the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974. Under the Act, signed 3 Sept., NASA was responsible for development and procurement of solar equipment. HUD would coordinate the demonstration, including installation of solar equipment in residential structures, and collecting and disseminating information about solar energy, (msfc Release 7dr-246)
NASA’s equal employment opportunity program was reviewed during a hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said that during the 1970s NASA faced the challenge of catching up in a most important area of human need. The challenge would be difficult because the NASA work force had decreased by nearly one third. In addition, 47% of the NASA work force were scientists and engineers. Of these, 3.4% were minorities, while the nationwide percentage of minorities in this category was 3.5%, and these persons were in high demand in private industry, where starting salaries were $1200 to $1700 per year higher. Dr. Dudley G. McConnell, NASA Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, said NASA would during 1974 achieve a minority complement of 6.1% of the total permanent work force, hiring 80 minority members and 80 women into professional positions. In addition NASA would help increase the availability of technically trained women and minority members by NASA’s cooperative education program and by initiating an aerospace fellowship program. Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, former NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, testified that NASA had turned away qualified women and minority applicants. She said NASA ranked 22 out of 26 agencies in percentage of female attorneys. Also, although NASA had a 47% scientific and engineering work force, in the 53% nonscientific and technical category NASA had a 3.7% minority participation, not significantly better than the 3.6% in the scientific and engineering category. (Transcript)
Edwin C. Kilgore had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Center Operations, NASA announced. He had assisted Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator and Acting Associate Administrator for Center Operations, in organizing and managing the new office since its establishment 15 March. Before March, Kilgore had served as Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, (nasa Ann, 20 May 74) _
The fact that fewer and fewer young people are entering the field of aeronautics” was endangering the U.S. aeronautical position, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a speech before the NASA-University Conference on Aeronautics at the Univ. of Kansas. The number of college students in junior classes in aerospace engineering had dropped 75% during 1968-1973, although civil aeronautics export business had increased fivefold in the past 10 yrs. Total civil and military aerospace exports were expected to reach $7 billion in 1974, with a “self-evident” importance to the U.S. balance of payments. U.S.-designed and -produced transport aircraft formed 80% of the non-Communist world’s transport fleets. Because of the increasing system complexity, costs, foreign competition, and complex environmental and economic problems, it was “clear that the support of the research and technology critical to the future health of civil aeronautics will depend on heavier government involvement.” NASA was “prepared to support a stronger aeronautics research and technology effort” and had organized a long-range study group to evaluate the “Outlook for Aeronautics” in the 1980-2000 period. A report was due in the summer of 1975. Among possible technology goals, Dr. Fletcher was convinced that aircraft fuel savings of 50% within the next 20 yrs could be reached, through weight reductions by composite structures and fly-by-wire and active controls and through supercritical aerodynamics, advanced engine techniques, and operational methods. NASA would also give special attention to technology for alternative fuels, such as hydrogen. (Text)
Air traffic activity during 1973 had increased 6% over 1972 activity at Federal Aviation Administration airport control towers, air route traffic control centers, and flight service stations, the FAA reported. The increase was the largest recorded by towers since 1968 and followed three years of declining activity. Takeoffs and landings at the 386 FAA-operated control towers during 1973 totaled 56 533 953, up from 53 255 919 in 1972. (faa Release 74-86)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate James E. Dow to be Deputy Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, succeeding Kenneth M. Smith, who had resigned. Dow had been Associate Administrator of FAA since August 1972. The nomination was submitted to the Senate 22 July and confirmed 8 Aug. (PD, 22 July 74, 817; 29 July 74,995; FonF, 7 Sept 74)
The Federal Aviation Administration issued an airworthiness directive ordering all DC-10 jumbo jet aircraft operators to make certain that cargo holds were locked and pressurized before the aircraft left the ground. Evidence had increased speculation that the 3 March crash of a DC—10 Turkish airliner had been caused by a faulty rear cargo door. In addition, operators were required to observe normal pressurization of aircraft during the initial flight period. If pressurization problems did occur, the aircraft was to be depressurized and brought down at the nearest suitable airport. (AP, B Sun, 7 March 74, A2)
Robert .Hotz, in an Aviation Week editorial, praised the “stabilizing and peace-keeping functions” of the large U.S. military space program. Scoring the “official government hypocrisy about our non-military space program,” Hotz argued the Eisenhower Administration’s attempt to separate civilian and military roles in space had “persisted to this day and badly impaired and obscured the truly peaceful role played by military space vehicles.” Air Force boosters and military-trained astronauts and managers had played key roles in NASA programs. Military reconnaissance satellites and early warning satellites added up to “one of the biggest forces in deterring major aggression and keeping as much peace as there is left in the world.” In contrast, claimed Hotz, the Soviet Union “never made any pretense of separating its military and scientific space activities” and had gone beyond reconnaissance satellites into “offensive space weapons.” (Av Wk, 7 Oct 74,11)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ Subcommittee on Aviation held hearings to determine whether the Federal Aviation Administration and McDonnell Douglas Corp. had dealt adequately with cargo door problems on the DC-10 aircraft. Experts believed that the door had caused a 12 June 1972 near crash in Canada and the 3 March 1974 crash outside Paris that killed all 346 persons aboard. Documents had revealed that, following the Canadian incident, the FAA had drafted an airworthiness directive requiring three improvements in the suspect rear cargo door. McDonnell Douglas appealed to the FAA, which then agreed to let the company issue voluntary service bulletins. An inspection of all 134 in-service DC—10s after the Paris crash had showed that two aircraft, including the Turkish airliner, had not been modified despite McDonnell Douglas records to the contrary. Seven months after the Canadian incident the FAA, at the suggestion of the National Transportation Safety Board, had asked the company to consider a redesign of the vital systems, reinforcement of the passenger cabin floor, and more pressure vents. In a 25 Feb. 1974 letter to the FAA, McDonnell Douglas said that they did not “have the manpower available at this time to undertake the study, nor are we in a position to accept this burden alone.” (Egan, W Post, 23 March 74, A4; 27 March 74, A2; Wilkin, NYT, 21 March 74,1; 26 March 74,1)
Japan and the People’s Republic of China signed a civil aviation agreement in Peking setting up commercial flights between the two countries. Japan Air Lines Co., Ltd., would be able to fly to Peking and Shanghai. Civil Aviation Administration of China flights to Tokyo would be the P.R.C.’s first service to a non-Communist country. The P.R.C. had purchased 10 Boeing 707s for its expanded international service, including possible future service to Canada, the U..S., and Latin America. In addition to ratification by Japan’s Diet, technical details would have to be worked out before regular service could begin. Within hours after the agreement was announced the Foreign Minister of the Republic of China (Nationalist) announced termination of service by jal and Taiwan’s China Air Lines between Taiwan and Japan and a ban on jal flights over Taiwan. (Mackenzie, W Post, 21 April 74, Al; Butterfield, NYT, 21 April 74,1)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced a proposed new regulation requiring fuel tanks and fuel venting spaces on turbine-powered transports over 5670 kg to be equipped with explosion-prevention systems. Under the proposal, aircraft operators and manufacturers could use a system that maintained a continuous nonflammable atmosphere, such as nitrogen, or a system that arrested a fire or explosion once initiated. All turbine aircraft manufactured two years after the effective date of the final rule would be required to be fitted with this equipment within three years, (faa Release 74-4,7)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Alexander Hocker, European Space Research Organization Director General, held a Spacelab program review in Paris to assess the proposed esro design, appraise an esro presentation of contractor evaluation and findings, and discuss follow-on production. The review indicated that size, "volume, subsystems, transportability, and operational turnaround met or exceeded design requirements. The design payload weight had been reduced from phase B results. An esro team with NASA support would further assess the weight, and the common payload support equipment and instrument pointing system would be studied for nine months. NASA would give a letter of commitment to buy one flight unit with follow-on production commitment scheduled after critical design review, (nasa Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 June 74; NASA Spacelab Newsletter 74-5; 3 July 74)
NASA announced signing of an agreement with the Federal Aviation Administration to act as a third party for the purpose of receiving, processing, and analyzing safety reports filed under FAA’s Aviation Safety Reporting Program. The third-party arrangement would stimulate the free and unrestricted flow of information, by assuring users that FAA’s objective in the program was to provide the safest possible aviation system by identifying and correcting unsafe conditions before accidents occur. The agreement provided for specific procedures to protect the identity of persons involved in the reports submitted to NASA, except in criminal cases or accidents. NASA would set up an aviation safety reporting working group under its Research and Technology Advisory Council to advise NASA on the reporting system, to evaluate and review the program once it is under way, and to ensure the anonymity of those submitting reports. The group would include aviation and consumer groups and others involved in operational aspects of the national aviation system. (NASA Release 75—273)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Commercial Airplane Co. of Seattle for negotiations leading to award of a $9.8-million contract to develop a computer software system that could substantially reduce design time and costs of aircraft and space vehicle design and ensure improved vehicle performance. The system, called IPAD (integrated programs for aerospace-vehicle design), would process installation of engineering information on computers at major U.S. aerospace companies, acting as the key communications and calculations integrator for many designers and increasing their effectiveness by speeding up computations and data management required in design. It would serve large engineering staffs from the design concept through detailed design, and would help to organize and assemble design data in support of manufacturing processes. (NASA Release 75—312)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that the combined efforts of government and industry could reduce fuel consumption of civil air transport by 40 to 50% without degrading the environment or reducing aircraft safety. The conclusion was based on a study by NASA, Federal Aviation Administration, DOD, and industry at the request of the committee. Need for a vigorous fuel-conservation program had been underscored by estimates from the Federal Energy Administration and Air Transport Association of America that U.S. outlays for imported oil had increased from $3 billion in 1970 to $24 billion in 1974, and could reach $32 billion by 1977. Jet fuel costs had risen from 12 cents a gallon (4.4 cents per liter) in 1973 to 29 cents (10.5 cents) in 1975. NASA studies had shown that, by the year 2005, the U.S. could save one million barrels of refined aircraft fuel per day by use of new technology in civil air transport. NASA’s proposed fuel-efficiency plan would include six major programs of research on engine components, engine efficiency, aircraft design, turboprop performance, laminar flow control and drag reduction, and increased use of composite materials for aircraft parts. (Transcript, NASA Release 75—252)
A recommendation by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to transfer Skylab backup hardware to the Smithsonian Institution was agreed to by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.), Chairman of the House Science and Astronautics Committee. In a letter to Dr. Fletcher, Teague said he understood the transfer would “in no way affect the status of the Saturn launch vehicles and Apollo spacecraft being retained for possible use.” Teague said he shared a “belief that to display the Skylab hardware to the public will foster a better appreciation and increasing support for our national space program.” Other equipment was being stored to permit restoration if additional space missions should become desirable [see 9 Apr.]. (Letter, Teague to Fletcher, 21 July 75)
NASA had begun a demonstration of hydrogen-injection technology, a technique that could help reduce fuel consumption in large aircraft engines by 20 to 25% and lower emissions of pollutants from general-aviation engines. Working with the Federal Aviation Administration and industry, NASA was studying minor engine modifications that would reduce characteristic engine emissions. A separate NASA-industry program was investigating emission reduction and fuel efficiency by means of more extensive changes in the basic design of aircraft engines. In a third program, NASA was investigating both the noise and the emission characteristics of small general-aviation engines. (NASA Release 75-198)
NASA was inviting scientists to propose experiments for a 1979 mission that would fly by Jupiter in 1981 and then travel to a mid-1985 encounter with Uranus. Although the mission was not yet approved, NASA officials wanted to select flight investigations early to initiate necessary science planning and development. (NASA Release 75 —127)
Mariner 10 made its last and closest flyby of Mercury at a distance of327 km at 6:39 pm EDT. To prepare for the flyby, the trajectory had been corrected on 30 Oct. 1974 and 13 Feb. 1975. An additional correction 7 March was to reduce the probability of Mariner 10’s impacting the surface of Mercury from 30% to 1%, targeting Mariner 10 to approach the planet from the sunlit side, then loop around behind it. One last-minute problem was navigational difficulty in locking onto the star Canopus so that the spacecraft would point in the proper direction for data collection. Because a commanded roll search for Canopus would expend all remaining attitude-control gas, Mariner 10 had to be maneuvered using solar-radiation pressure on the solar panels and high-gain antenna. The problem was intensified because of the tandem demands of Helios 1 and Mariner 10 on the antennas of NASA’s deep-space tracking network. However, the primary users— West German scientists tracking Helios 1—gave receiving time to the Mariner 10 flight controllers, who obtained Canopus lock in time for the encounter. Major objective of the third encounter was to determine whether Mercury had an intrinsic or induced magnetic field. In a press briefing 17 March, Dr. Norman F. Ness, principal investigator of the magnetic fields experiment, said that Mercury did have an intrinsic magnetic field, encountered on the incoming trajectory at precisely the time predicted from the first Mercury pass. Mariner 10 had measured the field to be a maximum of400 gamma. Plasma science experiment data supported the presence of the field; Dr. Ness observed that the interface between the solar wind and Mercury’s magnetic field appeared to be a scaled-down version of the interaction between the solar wind and the magnetic field of earth. The spacecraft returned about 300 TV pictures of the planet’s surface between 12 and 17 March, with best resolution at 100 m obtained from quarter-frame near-encounter pictures. All photos were transmitted in real time and at 22 kilobits per sec, instead of the planned 117, because of overheating of the spacecraft. (NASAMORs, 10 March 75, 7 April 75; NASA Releases 75—58, 75—59; NASA Activities, April 75, 12—13; Av Wk, 24 March 75, 24- 25)
The U.S. space program was an adventure whose potential benefits were undefinable and incalculable, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher told the National Academy of Engineering. Speaking on the “Outlook for the Space Program,” Dr. Fletcher noted that the public and the Congress were “now” oriented, and that concentration on immediate benefits might jeopardize “the vast potential” of the national space program. Admitting that “NASA’s present actions seem to speak louder than its words,” in that its money had been spent on current needs rather than on tomorrow’s goals, Dr. Fletcher said this did not result from lack of vision but from “accommodation with current constraints.” Projects to be considered for NASA’s future should include satellite systems to beam solar energy to earth; a permanent manned space station in orbit, as a forerunner of the space colony that had been proposed; exploration of the planets expanded to interstellar missions; and making contact with another intelligent race—“the most significant achievement of this millennium.” (Text; NASA Release 75—294)
“No useful data” appeared in photographs taken during the artificial-eclipse experiment on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine, quoting U.S. scientists who examined the photographs. This view contrasted with earlier Soviet statements. The experiment consisted of Apollo’s blocking out the solar disk while pictures of the corona were made from the Soyuz. According to the magazine, many NASA officials and U.S. scientists “believed privately before the flight that the Soviet experiment would produce only marginal results.” (Av Wk, 26 Apr 76, 11)
The Dept, of Transportation announced that the Federal Aviation Administration had awarded a $125 363 contract to York Univ., Ontario, Canada, for a program to measure ozone and the oxides of nitrogen present in all aircraft-engine emissions in the stratosphere. The program, to begin in the spring of 1977 in cooperation with NOAA’s Aeronomy Laboratory in Boulder, Colo., would use detection instruments lifted by balloons to an altitude of more than 35 km for the first simultaneous measurement of three types of nitrogen oxides and ozone; determining the high-altitude level of nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, and dinitrogen pentoxide would be an important step in finding the role of these oxides in maintaining the ozone balance. The contract would support the High Altitude Pollution Program, started in 1975 as part of DOT’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program; York Univ., which participated in CIAP, had in 1972 provided the first data on the stratospheric density of nitric oxide under the direction of Prof. Harold Schiff, a pioneer in the field. (DOT Release 76-122)
Two NASA laboratories had spearheaded “the most ambitious effort so far to detect radio emissions from distant civilizations,” Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. The project, known as SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), would use a specially constructed device called a multichannel spectral analyzer with various radio telescopes to scan simultaneously a million different frequency bands within a range known to scientists as the “waterhole.” This part of the spectrum lies between the frequencies emitted by hydrogen atoms adrift in space (1420 mhz) and those from hydroxyl, composed of one hydrogen and one oxygen atom (1662 mhz), which combines with hydrogen to form water; the frequency range had been chosen as “a logical rendezvous for intelligent creatures trying to make contact for the first time.” Ames Research Center would have primary responsibility for program management and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use its worldwide network of antennas besides providing instruments for the multichannel system, including a data processor capable of handling 6 million channels. NASA officials noted that the search would not depend on deliberate efforts at communication by other civilizations, citing the detectable radio energy emitted by the earth in normal space operations, television transmissions, and so forth. (NYT, 2 Nov 76, 16)
Three NASA employees were among 16 career federal employees selected as winners of the Natl. Civil Service League’s 1976 career service awards. In ceremonies at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., those honored included former astronaut Michael Collins, third U.S. man to walk in space, selected for his work with the Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum, of which he had been director since April 1971; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC; and Charles F. Hall, Pioneer project manager at ARC, where he had worked since 1942 beginning with NACA. (WStar, 23 Oct 76, C-8; WPost, 19 Oct 76, C2)
Congress’s Joint Committee on Defense Production, inquiring into government-contractor activities involving hospitality or gratuities toward federal employees, revealed that Rockwell International Corp. had entertained Eugene A. Cernan and Ronald E. Evans, NASA astronauts, at a facility on Bimini in the Bahamas, in addition to 11 other NASA employees who had enjoyed hospitality at a hunting lodge in Md. Both Rockwell and Northrop Corp., another NASA contractor, ran hunting lodges on the eastern shore of Md. where 13 NASA employees and one former employee had acknowledged acceptance of entertainment. The DOD had announced it would reprimand its chief of research, Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, and dock his pay, for accepting a similar weekend from Rockwell. (W Star, 19 Mar 76, A-l; WSJ, 17 Mar 76, 17)
NASA announced it would cosponsor a conference 21 Sept, at the Univ. of Conn, on transfer of biomedical instrument technology. The conference, also sponsored by the New England Research Applications Center, the Conn. Dept of Commerce, the Conn. Product Development Corp., and the Univ. of Conn. Health Center, would display technology developed by NASA for the manned space program to manufacturers and show how the technology could be applied to develop improved medical equipment and techniques. Hundreds of improvements based on NASA technology were already in use by the medical community, ranging from bio-isolation garments to a rechargeable cardiac pacemaker. At the conference, medical experts from NASA Hq, JSC, and NASA’s biomedical and technology applications teams would describe the types of technology available to industry and the medical community, and the role NASA could play in helping to commercialize new products. NASA’s program of licensing patents would also be explained. (NASA Release 76-144)
Detente, to be meaningful to U.S. scientists, must include progress toward more intercommunication and openness, said Dr. Bruce Murray of CalTech and Merton E. Davies of RAND Corp. in an article in Science magazine. Noting that for nearly 2 decades the space program of the U.S. and the USSR were bound together through rivalry, competition, and— most recently—cooperation, the authors found it appropriate upon completion of the Apollo-Soyuz mission to review relationships between the 2 countries and focus on areas of possible common interest. The interrelationship with the Soviet space effort had stimulated both societies and had influenced the character of individual programs, the authors said. Future joint activities could take three forms: data exchange, cooperative experiments, and joint operations. Examples cited were exchanges of weather-satellite pictures, lunar soil and rock samples, and limited data on Mars obtained during simultaneous missions in 1971; the U.S. biological experiments carried on Cosmos 782, launched and returned to earth in 1975; and the joint operation of Apollo-Soyuz, which demonstrated the practicality of such missions despite differences in language, institutions, technology, and style. Joint scientiflc progress in space would depend on broader social objectives and activity, supported by popular enthusiasm for intellectual and generally human adventure, the authors said. (Science, 11 June 76, 1067)
Rear Admiral Stuart J. Evans had been named NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Procurement, effective 1 June, NASA announced. Adm. Evans, the Deputy Chief of Naval Procurement, would assume his new post after retiring from the Navy 31 May 1976. He would succeed Rear Admiral Kenneth L. Woodfin (Ret.), present Assistant Administrator for Procurement, who had announced his plans to leave NASA after a year’s service to join a private firm. Adm. Woodfin had been Deputy Chief of Naval Material (Procurement and Production) before coming to NASA. (NASA Releases 76-68, 76-78)
NASA’s aviation safety reporting system (ASRS) received nearly 1500 reports in its first 3-mo operating period, which ended in mid-July, NASA announced. As a result of information in the reports, NASA forwarded 130 alert bulletins to the Federal Aviation Administration. Pilots and aircrew members submitted 62% of the reports, and air traffic control personnel 34%, indicating broad support for the program within the aviation community. About 99% of the reports included reporter identification that would permit NASA to follow up on the data if necessary; follow-up was used in more than 150 cases. Twelve of the reports concerned aircraft accidents and were forwarded to the Natl. Transportation Safety Board and the FAA as required; none of the reports contained information relating to a criminal offense. All other reports had the reporters’ names removed, as specified in the agreement between NASA and the FAA, before the information was forwarded. Review of the information so far had revealed some “less obvious problems” with the national aviation system, NASA said, and analysis would proceed shortly: problems included equipment malfunction, communications breakdown, flight operations, and personnel workloads. (NASA Release 76-177)
An enormous explosion in central Siberia that shook the world 68 yr ago might have been caused by the crash of a nuclear-powered spaceship from an alien planet, according to the Soviet news agency Tass, reported in the Washington Star. Tass quoted scientist Aleksey Zolotov, who had just returned from a survey of a remote river valley at Tunguska. On 30 June 1908, a blast estimated as up to 2000 times more powerful than the first atomic bomb had shaken measuring devices all over the world and had been heard nearly 1200 km away from Tunguska. Trees had been uprooted as far as 50 km from the site, and ground tremors had thrown to the ground horses that were pulling plows as far away as 380 km. Most scientists had attributed the explosion to the impact of a meteorite or comet with a mass of 10 million tons and measuring mor' than 90 meters across. Zolotov told Tass that his survey team had found higher than normal radioactivity in remnants of trees near the site; also taken were samples of permafrost soil. “Our investigation . . . seems to confirm our assumption that what took place in the Tungus taiga was a nuclear explosion,” Zolotov said. “It is from this point of view that we are exploring the possibility of the artificial origin of the Tungus cosmic body.” Tass did not give figures for the radiation study, nor did it identify Zolotov beyond saying he was a “noted Soviet scientist . . . who has been studying the Tungus mystery for years.” (WStar, 15 Oct 76, A-4) 17 October: Two recently published hooks on “the worst disaster in aviation history—the crash of a Turkish Airlines DC-10 outside Paris that killed at least 346 people in March, 1974—” alleged that the disaster was not only preventable but was predicted in detail years before it happened, the Washington Post reported. Destination Disaster, by an investigating team from the London Sunday Times, aimed at inspiring another congressional investigation into “corporate and governmental interworkings that contributed to the disaster,” the Post said; The Last Nine Minutes, by Moira Johnston, was a more subjective and personal account of the same crash. Senate and House hearings in the summer of 1974 had revealed that a technically similar accident in June 1972 had exposed an error in the design of the DC-10: a faulty locking system for the door of the large cargo compartment. The 1972 mishap had resulted in a “gentlemen’s agreement” between the administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and the president of the Douglas Division, McDonnell Douglas, that the lock would be fixed but that FAA would not issue a public and legally binding “airworthiness directive” mandating the repair. After the agreement was reached, the director of product engineering for the Convair Division of General Dynamics, subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas for the fuselage (including the door), wrote a long memorandum expressing concern about the door. Neither this memo nor another Convair memo on the question of liability for the cost of modifications ever reached McDonnell Douglas, the authors said, although evidence existed that McDonnell Douglas was fully aware of the problem nevertheless. Turkish Airlines, which was responsible for maintenance after the DC-10 was delivered, was sharing in liability settlements with McDonnell Douglas, General Dynamics, and the FAA, according to attorneys, who said total liability from the crash would probably set a single-accident record. The Post noted that FAA had issued 147 airworthiness directives in 1973; in 1974, year of the crash, the number was 299; in 1975, the number rose to 445. Private consultant Charles 0. Miller, former chief of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board’s bureau of aviation safety, who had gone to Paris to assist in investigation of the Turkish Airlines crash, said in a recent interview that the Convair memoranda and other documentation that provided background to the technical decisions had been turned up by the liability lawyers rather than by the crash investigators or by congressional investigators. (W Post, 17 Oct 76, A-l, A-12)
Officials of U.S. airlines told Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman, Jr., in an all-day hearing that lack of government help in financing the costs of government-imposed rules for quieting planes could lead to severe setbacks in service, such as wholesale groundings, diminished competition, fuel waste, less relief from noise, and possible loss of the national lead in aircraft technology. The airlines had suggested a plan last spring to set aside a fourth of the 8% ticket tax for replacement or refitting of planes that exceeded the new noise limits. Opposed to this plan was James C. Miller 3d, assistant director of the administration’s council on wage and price stability, who said that he would favor a “pollution tax,” imposed on planes inversely to the amount of noise suppression achieved, rather than “a subsidy from the public purse.” Secy. Coleman said he would make a recommendation to the outgoing Ford administration by the end of Dec. New noise rides promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration, DOT, were to take effect on 1 Jan., setting up a 4- to 8-yr timetable for replacing or refitting aircraft that did not comply with stringent limits on noise. (NYT, 2 Dec 76, 21)
Calif. Gov. Edmund G. Brown, Jr., hailed the advent of the space age at a Space Day gala in Los Angeles sponsored by 11 aerospace companies and the United Bank of Calif. More than a thousand persons attended the exhibit, prelude to the Shuttle orbiter free flight Aug. 12 over the Mojave desert. The program included two space movies, as well as speeches by Carl Sagan on planetary exploration, Gerard K. O’Neill on space colonies, and Jacques Yves Cousteau on spaceflight and the oceans of the world. [WPost, Aug 12/77, A-9)
JSC reported that NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had approved development of a teleoperator retrieval system to be flown no later than Feb. 1980 as a Skylab-revisit mission. JSC would be responsible for integrating the TRS into the Shuttle and for planning and operations. Harold E. Gartrell, assistant manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development office at JSC, would manage JSC activities for the Skylab revisit and would work with the Shuttle program office on integrating that mission with the Shuttle orbital-flight test planners. His office would be responsible for interfaces outside JSC in preparing and conducting the mission. (JSC Roundup, Dec 23/77, 1) •
WFC announced it would officially open a new management education center Sept. 30 with Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, presiding. A unit of the Hq office of professional development, the center would offer short-term residential programs (3-day seminars to 2-wk courses) designed to train future agency leaders. (WFC Release 77-12; NASA Release 77-202)
NASA announced that LaRC had undertaken a program called CLASS (cargo logistics airlift-systems study) to see whether tailoring an advanced air freighter design to an integrated transportation system could mean air-cargo growth and higher carrier profits. NASA had negotiated twin study contracts with Lockheed-Georgia Co. and with Douglas Aircraft Co. to survey air-cargo operations at major airports; to estimate present and future air-cargo demand, based on shipper response to reduced cost and improved service; and to study the need for improved efficiency in air-cargo operations, and for research and technology to support the design of future cargo aircraft. The studies had begun June 1 and would continue for 1 lmo. LaRC would exchange information in the study with government and industry organizations including the Dept, of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Dept, of Defense, and private companies such as airframe manufacturers, air shippers, commercial airlines, and freight forwarders. (NASA Release 77-122; LaRC Release 77-26)
NASA announced the E.S. (Todd) Groo, associate administrator for center operations since 1974, would leave the agency July 23. Ray Kline would succeed him, remaining assistant administrator for institutional management. Deputy NASA Administrator Alan W. Lovelace said Groo had benefited the agency by clarifying the missions of the field centers and instituting training for future managers. (NASA Release 77-134; NASA anno June 29/77)
The Dept, of Transportation reported that the Federal Aviation Administration would demonstrate an advanced all-weather microwave landing system Dec. 5-9 at JFK International Airport using a NASA Boeing 737 to fly a series of curved approaches and automatic landings like those recently flown at other locations, most recently Buenos Aires. The Inti. Civil Aviation Organization had recently tested the equipment as a replacement for 40-yr-old instrument-landing systems. Beginning Feb. 22, the British government would demonstrate a different MLS on the same runway to obtain comparative data on the two systems; similar comparisons would proceed at other locations abroad. In March 1977 the ICAO all-weather operations panel had endorsed the MLS design proposed by the U.S. and Australia, to be considered by the full membership of ICAO meeting in 1978. (DOT Release FAA-118-77)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, reported on a nationwide poll of its members asking what three problems aviation faced today: the government rated first, then fuel costs and air traffic control, including the quality of weather information at airports. Inconsistent policies and the need for regulatory reform were the main complaints. U.S. efforts to control business arrangements for foreign military sales displeased 71%, who said the effort harmed U.S. aircraft manufacturers. Members wanted the U.S. to build an SST and open its airports to the Concorde (by an 84% vote); on subcontracting construction of some aircraft to European nations, to standardize and render interchangeable NATO’s military equipment, the members split 52 to 48% in favor of keeping the business at home. (NAA newsletter Nov 30/77) During November: The USAF reported completion of 40mo of tests in a joint U.S.-Canadian project using an XC-8A Buffalo military cargo plane from Canada with a huge air-filled rubber doughnut for landing gear, to prove the feasibility of an air cushion landing system for large transport aircraft. Tests mostly at Wright Patterson AFB consisted of 84 flights, 34 of them air cushion takeoffs and 39 landings on grass, snow, and hard surfaces, with 25mi of taxiing over the same surfaces and over obstacles. Wallace Buzzard, program manager for the USAF flight-dynamics laboratory, said that besides being able to operate on difficult surfaces the air-cushioned plane “also taxied smoothly over a 30ft-long ramp with a 9in dropoff, crafters 6ft in diameter, and ditches 2ft wide. An aircraft with a conventional landing gear simply can’t do those things; it would be seriously damaged if not wrecked.” The tests included numerous inflight inflations and deflations of the air cushion, and tests of flying quality: the pilot found he could control the aircraft in crosswinds as high as 20mph, letting the pressure assist him in moving it to a particular point although taxiing sideways. Whereas most planes would descend for a soft landing at about 3ft per sec, the air cushion plane could soft-land at a rate of 8ft per sec with a 6° nose angle. The XC-8A weighed 33,0001b during the tests without cargo; Buzzard said it could have tested the same fully loaded, probably becoming more efficient with increased weight. “Outfitting an aircraft weighing more than a million lb with conventional landing gear will be extremely difficult,” he said. “An ACLS could handle aircraft as heavy as 3 million lb and be competitive in weight with conventional landing systems.” (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 77, 1)
The USSR had increased its military use of space, AvWk reported. Killer-satellite systems tested during 1976 appeared operational. The Soviets in 1976 had launched 33 reconnaissance missions (the core of their military space program) and apparently had added to their military comsat system as well. (AvWk, Mar 14/77, 63)
Candidates for the post of NASA administrator, according to the WPost, included Christopher C. Kraft, director of JSC; A1 Kelly and Rocco Petrone, former NASA officials; and Frank Moss, former chairman of the Senate Space Committee and an early Carter supporter. (W Post, Mar 21/77, A3)
Aviation Week reported that President Carter had nominated Langhorne M. Bond, state secretary of transportation for Illinois, to head the Federal Aviation Administration, and Quentin Taylor, FAA director in New England, as deputy administrator. (AvWk, Apr 4/77, 23)
NASA announced that Bradford Johnston, associate administrator for the Office of Applications since June 1976, would resign effective Sept. 30. Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, said that Johnston’s contributions to useful applications of space techniques had made the program more responsive to national needs. (NASA anno Aug 5/77; NASA Release 77-166)
LaRC reported that its plans for a trash-burning steam plant called Project RECOUP [see Oct. 6] had hit a snag when the center opened construction bids Dec. 7. All four bids were higher than expected, the lowest being about $1.4 million more than the government’s estimate, which was about $8 million. Funds available to the center for the plant, including contingencies, totaled no more than $8.4 million. Leo Daspit, LaRC project manager, said he would have to meet with his counterparts in the city of Hampton and at Langley AFB to “explore our options.” (Langley Researcher, Dec 23/77, 3) •
NASA announced that its aviation safety reporting system begun in 1976 for the Federal Aviation Administration had been a success, as evaluated by a NASA Advisory Council subcommittee established in Feb. 1977. During the system’s first year, pilots, air traffic controllers, and others working in national aviation had voluntarily submitted about 5500 safety-problem reports that had been fed into a computer to note trends and monitor corrections. Next evaluation would be in June 1979. (NASA Release 77-137)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher gave the agency’s distinguished public service medal to United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, at a ceremony at the Natl. Air and Space Museum. Dr. Waldheim received the award for outstanding leadership as chairman of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space from 1965 to 1968 and from 1970 to 1971, and for “enduring contributions to the development of a constructive international consensus, during the critical formative years, on the challenging issues presented by man’s first uses of outer space.” (Text of presentation)
Preliminary results of a yr-long energy-conservation study at LaRC had indicated that a family could save money and energy using new technical systems developed in the space program, NASA announced. A family of four that volunteered to live in a conventional house equipped with unconventional technical systems designed to save energy and water, had achieved the following results: total energy used for all purposes, including heating and cooling, was a little less than half the amount used by a conventional all-electric home under the same conditions. Total dollar savings from use of less energy and water had amounted to more than $1200 for the yr, an average of more than $100 a mo. The Technology Utilization House (called Tech House) was a contemporary-style home built at LaRC to test equipment available or to be shortly available. The family of Dr. Charles Swain, professor at Florida State Univ. in Tallahassee, had volunteered to live in the house for a year to test the technical systems under normal living conditions. Swain, his wife, daughter of 18, and son of 13 had moved into the house in August 1977 to live as normally as possible, while many of their actions were monitored, sensed, measured, and turned into computer printouts of data numbers. Early research results had indicated that all the systems incorporated in the Tech House had been put to use. Although some systems worked better than predicted, and others did not work as well, the technical information collected would be useful in redesigning or modifying some of the systems to make them more efficient. Analysis of the experiment data would tell engineers much more about how to customize systems to fit particular kinds of houses, to suit areas of the country with different geographical and climate conditions, or to meet special needs of individuals. One possible “sleeper” system incorporated in the Tech House—the water recycling equipment—might greatly benefit future homeowners if the U.S. continued to experience periodic water shortages. Preliminary performance data from some of the major systems indicated that thermal-design features such as improved insulation and double-door entries had accounted for about 60% of energy savings. Solar collectors on the roof and a solar-supplemented heat-pump system had supplied more than 50% of the energy required to heat the house, amounting to about $300 in energy-cost savings. The Tech House, funded by NASA’s Office of Technology Utilization, had been completed in June 1976 and opened to the public for a yr before the Swains moved in. (NASA Release 78-135)
A Canadian Air Force transport searching for radioactive contamination from a Soviet satellite that disintegrated over northwest Canada had reported a “highly probable” radiation contact, the W. Star reported, first to be discovered since Jan. 24 when the crippled Cosmos 954 satellite powered by a nuclear reactor containing 1001b of highly radioactive uranium 235 had reentered earth’s atmosphere. The occurrence had sparked controversy over hazards of radioactive space debris; the U.S. space program had used radioisotope power systems, but had launched only one fission reactor, that on the Snap 10A test vehicle. Fission reactors such as that on Cosmos 954 would create strontium, cesium, and cerium byproducts potentially lethal if radiation dosages were high or prolonged. The USSR had launched at least 10 reactors on spacecraft like Cosmos 954, 16 with the same operating parameters having flown since Dec. 27, 1967; it had put all the reactor craft except Cosmos 954 in safe high orbit. The Soviet and U.S. governments had kept close contact during the incident. National Security Affairs Assistant Zbigniew Brzezinski, quoted by TASS, said, “I would like to point out two things: first that this incident which, to my mind, is nothing out of the ordinary in the space age, is fully controlled so we believe there is no danger. . . . Second, that the governments of the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other governments concerned cooperated intensively concerning this matter.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 25/78, Jan 28/78; W Star, Jan 26/78, A-l; AvWk, Jan 30/78, 33; Economist, Jan 28/78, 75)
Former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal at a ceremony at NASA Hq on Jan. 30, 1978. Dr. Frank Press, President Carter’s science adviser, made the presentation in recognition of Dr. Fletcher’s “distinguished leadership . . . outstanding scientific and administrative abilities . . . and contribution to the nation’s significant achievements in the exploration of space and utilization of space to manage the earth’s resources.” Dr. Press noted, “His decision to proceed with the development of the Shuttle orbiter exemplified the perceptive leadership which foresaw space as a giant laboratory where men will work to improve the future of all mankind.” Dr. Fletcher, who was NASA administrator from April 27, 1971 until May 1, 1977, was a consulting engineer and vice president of the National Space Institute in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 78-18, Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 1)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch announced that, upon signature by the President of the Inspector General Bill (or on October 1, 1978, whichever was later), NASA would establish an Office of Inspector General consisting of the present NASA management audit office and the NASA office of inspections and security. Pending nomination by the President and confirmation by the Senate of a NASA inspector general, Robert Allnutt would act in that position. (NASA anno Sept 29/78)	,
JPL Universe reported NASA Administrator Robert Frosch had characterized the Pioneer Venus mission as “a superb success” in a message congratulating personnel at NASA centers and in the industrial and scientific communities. Frosch had added: “The precise execution of the multiprobe encounters December 9 and the continuing excellent performance of the orbiter could have resulted only from a well planned and competently executed program . . .” The orbiter would continue its scientific measurements for 243da after Venus encounter; however, three small probes and a larger sounder had plunged into the Venusian atmosphere with destruction expected immediately upon impact. To the surprise of Pioneer Venus scientists, one probe had survived for 67min after impact, sending back information that would help confirm probe findings (particularly a wind experiment) before the 900° Venus temperatures silenced it. (JPL Universe, Dec 21/78, 1)
Av Wk reported the Federal Aviation Administration prediction of an increase in the general aviation fleet from 186 600 active civilian aircraft in 1978 to 310 800 in 1990. Preliminary data indicated that hrs flown in general aviation aircraft reached 38.6 million in FY78, up 5.2% from 36.7 million ih FY77. The FAA also predicted that by 1990 general aviation aircraft would be flying 67.4 million hr, increasing 4.8% yearly to 74.6% over the 1978 total. The lower increase of annual hrs flown resulted from the current emphasis on conservation of resources, FAA said. Operating costs, expected to rise more rapidly than inflation, would affect private flying for pleasure. (AvWk, Dec 11/78, 70)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan Lovelace announced the convening of a review board to determine the cause of the SeaSat failure [see Oct. 11]. Lovelace named Dr. Bruce Lundin, recently retired director of LeRC, to head the review board, with other members to be named shortly. In 1973, Dr. Lundin had chaired the board that had investigated failure of Skylab 7’s solar panels to deploy in orbit. (NASA Release 78-160)
ESA reported results of an attempt to quantify economic returns from its expenditures on space research, by cataloging and quantifying the positive benefits to industrial firms participating in the European space program and by identifying economic spinoffs outside the space effort generated in European industry from ESA contracts. ESA wanted to know what benefits its payments had procured for European firms and what amounts they represented in financial terms. It had asked the Theoretical and Applied Economics Department of Louis Pasteur Univ., Strasbourg, France, to conduct the study. Information collected from ESA contractors had identified and quantified 171 specific cases of benefit: for example, sales of new products, increased sales, maintenance of a production team, reduction of production and R&D costs, and amortization of equipment. The study classified the benefits under four major headings: technology, commerce, organization and methods, and work force efficiency. Benefits obtained outside ESA-member states accounted for 28% of the total, and 68% of the total benefit related to nonspace activities. Analysis showed the benefit/contracts ratio for each country was fairly uniform: for example, Germany 3.2, United Kingdom 2.9, Italy 2.6, France 2.5, and other member states, 2.2.	' This study of secondary economic effects generated by ESA contracts confirmed the agency’s success in promoting European industry worldwide. Moreover, the showing of economic benefits to individual countries demonstrated that they exceeded the amounts governments had invested in space research. A second phase of the study would produce a more precise analysis of the benefits by including economic factors not previously taken into account. (ESA Release Nov 23/78)
The Federal Aviation Administration would demonstrate in Europe and Africa in early 1978 a family of advanced all-weather landing systems, Administrator Langhorne Bond announced. The FAA would airlift three versions of the time-reference scanning-beam microwave landing system (TRSB/MLS) developed by the U.S. and Australia to four overseas sites in Jan. and Feb. to demonstrate the new approach-and-landing aid at various airport environments. TRSB/MLS versions designed for small community airports would be demonstrated Jan. 23 and 24 at Kristiansand’s Kjevik Airport in Norway, and in Feb. at Dakar’s Yoff Airport in Senegal; at the Nairobi, Kenya, airport; and at Gosselies Airport outside Brussels, Belgium. FAA would demonstrate an expanded TRSB/MLS system Feb. 1-3 at the Brussels airport. The U.S. and Australia had proposed TRSB/MLS to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) as the new worldwide standard allweather approach-and-landing guidance system. (FAA Release 3-78)
Av Wk reported that President Carter had signed a policy directive establishing a unified policy for all U.S. military and civilian space programs that would broaden the civilian role in both military and civilian areas. Civilian space programs had not previously benefited from military R&D because of security restrictions; the new policy would reduce restrictions on technology transfer from the military to the civilian sector. Civilian space projects and users of civilian space technology (such as the Dept, of Agriculture) that had not had access to data from military programs (such as imagery from U.S. photoreconnaissance spacecraft) would be able to use in the civilian sector data gathered by military spacecraft. Space programs on weather and climate, land use, and earth resources could now use military data where applicable. The directive had named presidential science adviser Frank Press to head a U.S. space program coordinating committee of users and suppliers of space data. The committee would oversee development and coordination of both military and civilian programs. The policy also attempted to identify and reduce stresses among the four major U.S. space programs: intelligence-community programs using spacecraft such as Lockheed’s “Big Bird” high-resolution reconnaissance satellite; DOD space programs using spacecraft such as the defense satellite communications system (Dscs) vehicles; civilian/government space programs using vehicles such as those flown by NASA and NOAA; and civilian/private-program spacecraft users such as commercial communications-satellite operators, and possibly future commercial remote-sensing companies. (AvWk, May 29/78, 23)
NASA announced two promotions: James Morrison to the position of European representative, and Louis Lushina to director of the information systems division, Office of Management Operations. For the past 3.5yr Morrison had managed the earth resources survey program in NASA’s Office of Applications; before that, he had served for 12yr in NASA’s Office of International Affairs. He had been an F-86 and F-100 pilot and served as a flight commander, operations officer, and squadron commander. As European representative, Morrison would be liaison between NASA and European space agencies. In his new position, Lushina would be responsible for managing agencywide information-systems efforts and ADP resources. He had come to NASA in 1968 from the Army Materiel Command and had served since then as deputy of financial management in the Office of the Comptroller. Previously he was deputy comptroller of the U.S. Army Communications Zone in Europe and of the U.S. Army Supply and Maintenance Command, and assistant comptroller of the U.S. Army Ordnance Corps. He held the NASA exceptional service medal and the Army’s meritorious civilian service medal. (NASA Release 78-23; NASA anno Feb 14/78, Feb 15/78)
Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, announced a reorganization at NASA Hq to significantly restructure organization elements such as Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space and Terrestrial Applications, External Relations, and Management Operations, with lesser changes in the Equal Opportunity, Procurement, and Audit organizations. Frosch’s Feb. 22 approval of the new organization structures had authorized office heads to proceed with final placement of people. In explaining the reorganization, Alan Lovelace, deputy administrator, said: “In keeping with the announced policy of President Carter, each Headquarters employee affected by the reorganization will be made a good-faith offer of a position and to the extent possible the offer will be made at the employee’s current grade level. As I announced previously, there will be no involuntary reduction in force at NASA Headquarters. . . . The classification survey of Headquarters positions has been completed. Based on tentative aggregate findings in the survey thus far, plus the potential impact of the reorganization, Dr. Frosch has asked the Civil Service Commission for authority to delay any demotions for people in the General Schedule resulting from survey results and the impact of the reorganization. NASA was granted such authority on Feb. 22. . . . As to future classification activity, it is important that we maintain a rigorous system for the accurate classification and grading of all Headquarters positions. ... I would like to assure you that we are taking all of the steps possible to provide appropriate job opportunities for all Headquarters employees and, to the extent we can, we shall do our best to avoid adverse impacts.” (NASA special anno Feb 27/78)
The New York Times said President Carter planned to meet with NASA officials to review Shuttle management and funding. The report said NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch would ask for more money to prevent further serious delays in Shuttle production and testing. Estimated Shuttle spending for FY81 would be $1 billion. NASA’s original estimate of Shuttle cost was $5.15 billion in 1971 dollars, to include delivery of two of four of the planned spacecraft; current estimate was $6.1 billion in 1971 dollars, a 20% increase. Rockwell International had delivered only one flight vehicle, now at KSC for preflight checks and installation of insulating tiles. (NY Times, Nov 5/79, A-l)
NASA reported delivery of a second experimental turbofan engine produced by AVCO Corporation for a program called QCGAT (quiet clean general-aviation turbofan) to LeRC for testing. The program aimed at decreasing noise and exhaust emissions while maintaining or reducing fuel consumption, compared with present general-aviation turbofans. The first engine in the program arrived at LeRC last winter from its designer/builder Garrett AiResearch; results of tests on that engine showed noise reduction of about 10 decibels and emission reduction of 54% for carbon monoxide and 76% for unburned hydrocarbons. Preliminary AVCO results showed noise-level reduction of at least 14 decibels compared to the quietest business jet now in service, and emission levels even lower than those of the first engine. Noise reduction in the AVCO engine resulted from improved design of internal engine parts (using soundabsorbing materials to muffle noise from fan, compressor, and turbine) and reduced engine-exhaust velocity. LeRC project manager G. Kenneth Sievers said test results from both engines showed “noise need not be a major constraint” on use of turbofan-powered aircraft for general aviation. (NASA Release 79-137)
MSFC announced that it had issued requests for proposals to design a 25-kilowatt power system to provide supplemental solar power for long-duration Shuttle missions or support free-flying payloads. In early spring of 1980 NASA would award two or more parallel contracts at $1 million each for studies to be completed within 12 months. Development would begin in 1982; the system would fly its first mission in 1984-1985 attached to a Shuttle orbiter carrying a Spacelab, to provide additional power and attitude and heat control. The power system on this mission would carry an experiments pallet and would be left in space (after the orbiter completed its mission) to power the long-duration experiments riding on the pallet. Luther E. Powell, MSFC project manager, said the power system would be forerunner of future large systems in space, such as service platforms and other unmanned large space structures. (MSFC Release 79-103)
DFRC reported that on December 16 Dr. Robert A. Frosch visited it for the first time as NASA administrator, holding an all-hands meeting in the auditorium for an overview of NASA status and a farewell speech. Center director Isaac T. Gillam IV gave Frosch a montage of photographs of DFRC research aircraft. After the meeting, Frosch briefed local reporters on Shuttle status. (FRC X-Press, Dec 19/80, 4)
A panel of the NRC said that the FAA had lost the engineering expertise to say whether airplanes were safe and waited until accidents occurred before seeking regulations that might have prevented them. Both the Washington Post and the Washington Star reported a briefing by panel chairman George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and former deputy administrator of NASA. “The FAA engineering staff today is considerably less competent than the engineering they regulate,” Low told the press. The latest of a series of studies of the crash of an American Airlines DC-10 in Chicago May 25, 1979, that killed 273 people, the panel study was sought by Transportation Secretary Neil Goldschmidt, who said he had ordered an immediate analysis of the panel’s findings “with the intent of putting into effect promptly any recommendations that will improve our procedures.” The Chicago accident was blamed on improper maintenance procedures by American Airlines, but a contributing cause was found to be the plane’s design. The panel said that the FAA relied too much on manufacturers and was performing “only a cursory review” of industry tests; FAA officials charged with supervising manufacturers and airlines had “gotten too close to their industry counterparts, weakening their independence and objectivity.” The panel recommended reassignment of officials on a periodic basis to work with different manufacturers and airlines. It also recommended new licensing and training certification rules for airline and airplane mechanics “more like those for aircraft flight crews;” FAA should require aircraft to be designed to continue flying after any structural failure unless the failure would prevent flight, such as loss of a wing. In the Chicago crash, an engine mount had ripped from the plane, destroying vital controls in the cockpit; the mount, certified as safe, would not have, failed except for maintenance-induced damage. Asked if the DC-10 would have survived if the proposed rule had been in effect, Low replied “Yes.” (W Post, June 27/80, 1A; W Star, June 26/80, A-l)
NASA reported that it would negotiate with the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) to run the student involvement project, a nationwide yearly competition among secondary-school students for scientific and engineering experiments to fly on the Shuttle on a space-available basis. The NSTA would manage the competition to the point of selecting 10 finalists from 20 semifinalists in each of 10 regions; NASA would decide whether to fly a particular experiment. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, noting “The vitality of NASA depends heavily on an infusion of fresh ideas,” said the student connection would be important to the agency program. NASA held a similar competition before the Skylab mission in 1973; it was also considering a program to involve college students. (NASA Release 80-65)
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, NASA’s deputy administrator, submitted his resignation effective this date, but agreed to be appointed agency associate administrator and general manager. Named deputy administrator by President Ford in June 1976, Lovelace had been associate administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) since September 1974. In his new post he would continue the basic management he did as deputy administrator and be acting administrator during the absence of departing administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch from January 20 until appointment of a new administrator and confirmation by the Senate. This arrangement, agreed to by both President Carter’s and President-elect Reagan’s staffs, would give NASA maximum continuity of management. (NASA Release 80-200)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, DOE’s deputy assistant secretary for industrial and utility applications and operations, as associate administrator for space transportation operations, effective July 7. He would be responsible for STS functions including Shuttle, Spacelab, and expendable launch vehicles during transition to the Shuttle. (NASA anno July 2/80) —NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin, deputy director of KSC, as acting associate administrator for external relations at Headquarters effective July 7. He would have responsibility for policy-level management, direction, and coordination of NASA’s Offices of Public Affairs, International Affairs, DOD Affairs, Government/Industry Affairs, and University Affairs, reporting to the NASA administrator. His KSC responsibilities would be given temporarily to senior managers at that center. (NASA Release 80-104; NASA anno July 3/80)
JPL engineers had sent a command August 7 to Viking orbiter 1, switching off its transmitter and ending its four year mission. Viking project manager Kermit Watkins said that its attitude-control gas would have been depleted before it completed another orbit: by commanding it to turn off, instead of allowing it to occur automatically, “we will be sure that the radio transmitter has been shut off.” Confirmation of the switchoff was received at 4:16 EDT August 7. The Viking lander would continue to transmit meteorological and engineering data weekly on command until about December 1994. (NASA Release 80-129; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Aug 11/80; W Star, Aug 5/80, A-2)
Insulation that separated from the Space Shuttle’s huge external fuel tank would delay the long-awaited launch to a time “no earlier than the week of April 5,” NASA announced. Columbia’s maiden flight was already more than two years behind its original schedule because of technical probable causing a series of postponents. The new difficulty was discovered in preflight tests at Cape Canaveral in which over a half-million gallons of supercold liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen were pumped into the fuel tank for the first time. The new delay was “the first substantial” problem encountered since July 1980 and was not related to earlier problems with the Shuttle’s ceramic-tile insulation. During tanking tests, two areas on the external tank—one about 7x8 feet, the other about 4x4 feet—became debonded. The loose insulation would have to be rebonded before launch. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Jan 28/81; NASA Releases 81-15, 81-25; W Post, Feb 3/81, A-7; W Star, Feb 3/81, A-8)
LaRC said that it was conducting, under contract with McDonnell Douglas Corporation, a test program on widebody commercial DC-10 aircraft to measure the effect on fuel efficiency of winglets, small structures attached to the tips of airplane wings perpendicular to the wing surfaces. Winglets would reduce fuel-consuming drag by lessening the effect of vortices, turbulent air swirls forming during flight at tips of all aircraft wings. Developed by aeronautical designer Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, recently retired from LaRC, the concept had been tested on several types of small aircraft but not on a plane as large as the DC-10. Winglets were already in use on the Gates Learjet 55 and Grumman’s Gulfstream III. Wind-tunnel tests showed a drop of about 3% in fuel use, which would mean an annual saving per plane of about 250,000 gallons of fuel, now priced at more than Si a gallon. LaRC said that it was also working on the prevention of stall and spin in light aircraft by using the canard, a miniature wing sprouting from an aircraft’s nose area, first used by the Wright brothers at the turn of the century but neglected since then because of patent and flight-handling considerations. LaRC found that home-built airplane kits that used the canard to increase fuel efficiency also had impressive records of stall-spin safety. Tests of a model in LaRC’s spin tunnel showed that with proper loading the plane was “virtually impossible to spin.” Current tests would document the plane’s aerodynamic efficiency without trying to improve it. Although the canard did reduce a pilot’s area of vision in takeoff and landing, the tunnel data should show whether it could be relocated without sacrificing its safety features. NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program was seeking ways to reduce fuel consumption and improve safety. Four NASA centers were focused on aeronautical research: LaRC, LeRC, ARC, and DFRC. (NASA Releases 81-145, 81-155; LaRC Releases 81-68, 81-75)
NASA Headquarters released an official report on the investigation of the March 19, 1981, accident at KSC that killed two employees of Rockwell International, who went into the Shuttle’s aft compartment while it was filled with gaseous nitrogen. It had been determined that an all-clear signal was given too soon. Primary findings by an investigative board headed by Charles D. Gay, KSC director of expendable-vehicle operations, were that test procedures lacked adequate steps to clear a vehicle or pad for hazardous operations, or to partially or completely reopen the vehicle or pad for resumption of normal work; also, that a breakdown occurred in the operational command/coordination process. The report of more than 400 pages included 19 pages of findings, observations, and recommendations to prevent similar accidents in future. (NASA Release 81-85; W Post, June 20/81, A-5)
Larry Walters of Los Angeles went for a 3-mile-high ride in an aluminum lawn chair borne aloft by 45 weather balloons and ballasted with jugs of water, ending with his unusual craft wrapped around power lines in Long Beach about 20 miles from his starting place in San Pedro. During his 45-minute flight he reached an altitude of 16,000 feet, got so cold he became numb, and had to shoot some of the balloons with a BB gun to make his flying chair descend. He was also sighted by pilots of Delta Air Lines and Trans World Airlines jets. A safety inspector for the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) said that Walters had broken “some part of the Federal Aviation Act, and as soon as we decide which part it is some type of charge will be filed.” Walters later said, “you couldn’t pay me a million dollars to do it again.” (NY Times, July 4/82, 22)
Scientists at ARC said that Pioneer 10 would be nearly 2.8 billion miles beyond the Sun at 2 p.m. PDT, when it passed the orbit of Pluto, traveling 30,000 mph on its way outside the solar system. The first manmade object to reach such a distance, Pioneer 10 might go on for millions of years and carry Earth greetings to another galaxy. Launched March 2, 1972, the craft had functioned “almost with flaw,” said project manager Richard Fimmel. Because of its elliptical orbit, Pluto—usually the outermost planet—at this time was nearer than Neptune to the Sun and would travel inside Neptune’s orbit for the next 17 years. Pioneer 10 would cross Neptune’s orbit June 13, effectively leaving the solar system behind. Radio signals moving at the speed of light needed more than four hours to cross the distance between Earth and spacecraft; even after a decade in space, Pioneer 10 was transmitting data of great value to scientists. Since the date of its launch with a predicted lifetime of 21 months, long enough for a Jupiter encounter, Pioneer 10 signals over vastly increasing distances had remained detectable because of improvements in antenna sensitivity. NASA said that it hoped to track the craft for another eight years, to a distance of 5 billion miles, 2.2 billion miles beyond its present location. (NASA Release 83-57; ARC Releases 83-13, 83-14; W Post, Apr 25/83, A-23)
At 8 a.m. EDT June 13, unmanned U.S. spacecraft Pioneer 10 crossed the orbit of Neptune on the way out of the solar system. The 570-pound robot craft 2.81 billion miles from the Sun and traveling 30,558 mph at the time. (NASA Releases 83-39, 83-91; ARC Releases 83-11, 83-18; W Post, June 12/83, A-l; June 14/83, A-l; NY Times, June 14/83, A-l)
. The prototype Shuttle Enterprise, returning from an overseas tour that included the Paris air show, flew over Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md., early in the morning before landing at Dulles airport in Virginia for public viewing at a distance. “Hundreds of thousands,” according to the Washington Post, came to see the Shuttle, “despite soaring temperatures.” Enterprise, and its Boeing 747 transport jet left for California the next day. (NASA Releases 83-89, 83-93; W Post, June 13/83, B—1; USA Today, June 13, 7A; W Times, June 13/83, LA)
Three U.S. biomedical experiments were flying aboard a Soviet spacecraft, Cosmos 1514, launched today. In an announcement following the launch, Moscow said only that “scientific experimental systems with various biological objects” were aboard and made no reference to foreign collaboration. However, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs disclosed that NASA had provided three pieces of medical equipment that the Soviets incorporated in the scientific payload of Cosmos 1514. Later, NASA said that the experiments had to do with blood system and biorhythm studies in monkeys and fetal development studies in rats. Beggs said that talks that paved the way for the Cosmos 1514 experiments were held “about five years ago.” Cosmos 1514 was recovered on December 19, 1983, and in May 1984 TASS reported that the rats on the flight were developing normally and that Soviet scientists believed the weightlessness did not affect the normal development of embryos. (GSFC SSR; FBIS, USSR, May 9/84; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-15)
NASA said that it had signed a contract with Fairchild Industries for design and development of an unmanned space platform called Leasecraft, to be deployed from the Shuttle to serve commercial and government users. James M. Beggs, NASA administrator, said that the move was consistent with administration plans to promote space exploitation by commercial firms. Fairchild said that the platform, which would measure 15 by 15 by 9.5 feet and carry power and command and data-handling modules with other equipment needed by various payloads, would cost more than $200 million. Payloads would include materials-processing and remote-sensing equipment and scientific experiments. (NASA Release 83-143)
A four-engine Boeing jetliner in a radio-controlled test of an aircraft fuel mixture called “antimisting kerosene” crashed on Rogers Dry Lake, California. A huge fireball engulfed three-fourths of the plane immediately after it crashed. The fireball lasted about six seconds and was followed by an outpouring of black smoke that often accompanies landing crashes. Flames from what officials called a “secondary fire” were visible through the smoke. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and NASA sponsored the $11.8 million crash primiarly to test the new fuel mixture, which was designed to prevent an explosive burst of flames in case of an accident. Safety specialists emphasized that it would take a long time to reconstruct precisely the sequence of events that left the Boeing 720 a much more devastated wreck than had been expected. An initial examination of the plane showed that the interior had been totally gutted by the fire that the crash produced. Despite the outcome, government and industry officials appeared willing to continue efforts to produce a practical way to minimize the fire risk from fuel spilled in accidents. (WPost, Dec 2/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 3/84, A-21; Time, Dec 10/84, 32; WTimes, Dec 3/84, 3A)
President Reagan established a National Commission on Space, to be composed of 15 members appointed or designated by the president; not more than 9 advisory, nonvoting members representing federal departments and agencies; 2 advisory, nonvoting members appointed by the president of the Senate Trom among the members of the Senate; and 2 advisory, nonvoting members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among mnembers of that body. The commission was directed to study existing and proposed U;S. space activities; formulate an agenda for the U.S. civilian space program; and identify long-range goals, opportunties, and policy options for civilian space activity for the next 20 years. It was to submit its plan and any recommendations for proposed legislation to the president and Congress within 12 months. (WH anno, Oct 13/84)
Former NASA administrator James Beggs, General Dynamics, and three executives of the company today pleaded not guilty to charges of plotting to hide cost overruns during development of a prototype of the DIVAD antiaircraft gun [see NASA/Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], the Washington Post reported. "I plead not guilty to each count," Beggs, a former company executive, told U.S. District Court Judge Ferdinand Fernandez. Fernandez scheduled a trial to begin April 8, 1986, although prosecutor Randy Bellows said the case was too complex to be heard so quickly. Bellows said the government had 2.7 million documents to review. Thomas Sullivan, attorney for General Dynamics, told Fernandez that the defendants wanted the trial to begin in the spring because a government suspension of most contracts with the company until the case was resolved had put the defense contractor "in a real serious bind . . . This company could be literally . . . put out of business by this suspension," Sullivan said. Attorneys estimated the trial could take more than 12 weeks, with Bellows saying he would call at least 70 witnesses. (W Post, Dec 17/85, A13)
NASA announced that effective today it permanently established the office of NASA productivity programs to direct, initiate, coordinate, monitor, and evaluate agencywide productivity improvement and quality enhancement initiatives. David Braunstein would continue as the office's director and would report to the NASA administrator. The office was established to ensure NASA's leadership in the development and application of advanced technology and management practices that contributed to significant increases in agency and national productivity. In making the announcement, NASA Administrator James Beggs said that NASA would provide a participative and challenging environment for all employees, and it would develop a team approach with its contractors to achieve the highest levels of productivity. (NASA announcement, May 15/85)
Speaking to a standing-room-only crowd at NASA Headquarters and all NASA centers via closed-circuit TV, former administrator James Beggs said today that federal fraud charges against him were "baseless" [see NASA/Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], that he expected to be cleared, and expressed thanks for an "outpouring" of support, the Washington Post reported. "These charges relate to things that happened in General Dynamics six and seven years ago," Beggs noted and said that he had reviewed the charges and believed, "we acted in an entirely ethical, legal and moral sense." "The charges, therefore, are baseless . . . They are outrageous, ridiculous and I feel confident that once this is brought to trial that I'll be completely exonerated of the charges." Beggs also noted that the suits against defense firms were creating a climate that would blight the work of NASA and of the defense community. "The very adversarial relationship that is being created by the suits against the contractors, the very bad kind of statements that are being made in the press, and elsewhere, is going to make our job in the future much more difficult," he said. "Not just here, but in the Defense Department as well." Earlier, the NY Times reported that all top 27 administrators at NASA and field installations had sent a statement to Congress and the White House endorsing Beggs as "an individual with the highest standards of integrity which have earned him the esteem and respect of his colleagues." The statement said he had revitalized the space program and regretted "the untimely interruption of his work," calling him a man of the "highest integrity, totally dedicated to NASA, an extremely able executive." (W Post, Dec 6/85, A16; NYT, Dec 6/85, A5)
NASA Administrator James Beggs announced that 21 teams submitted proposals to establish centers for the commercial development of space, the objective of which would be to stimulate high-technology research in the microgravity environment of space. NASA expected this research to lead eventually to development of new products that either had commercial potential or would contribute to possible commercial ventures. The research areas proposed by the teams included semiconductor crystal growth, remote sensing, communications technology, and biotechnology. A panel of technical, managerial, and financial experts would review over the next 45 to 60 days the proposals to identify winning proposals. NASA would fund, beginning around mid-September 1985, between three and six of the centers for up to $1 million per year each for a period not to exceed five years. (NASA Release 85-98)
As the lead center for Spacelab 2, MSFC hosted the two-day conference in which numerous science teams shared early data from the mission. The teams represented the science disciplines of solar physics, atmospheric physics, plasma physics, life sciences, technology research, infrared astronomy, and high-energy astrophysics. Among those attending the conference were many of the principal and co-investigators for the 13 experiments, all the payload and mission specialists, some invited members from NASA Headquarters who supported mission work, and a number of MSFC science and engineering team members. Some results thus far, according to Urban, confirmed what scientists had earlier predicted but could not measure, while other results yielded some surprises. For example, the superfluid helium experiment confirmed theoretical predictions of wave behavior of very thin films of super-cooled helium in microgravity. But the infrared telescope surprised researchers when it indicated that the "Shuttle glow" phenomenon observed on past flights was weak in the short infrared wavelength region, where the researchers expected it to be strong. The solar physics experiment also gathered much data, according to Urban. He cited in particular the experiment called SOUP, the Solar Optical Universal POlarimeter, which studied the visible surface of the sun. "We were able to obtain long sequences of high-resolution photos of the solar surface," he said. "We now have the means to study the growth and fading of various solar features like sunspots over long periods of time." An example of the special qualities of Spacelab 2 was the Vehicle Charging and Potential Experiment, VCAP, in which a beam of charged particles from an electron generator passed from the arbiter's payload bay through the ionosphere. "For the first time," Urban pointed out, "we had an interactive experiment with the VCAP in which we could observe the experiment remotely—from the Plasma Diagnostics Package, another experiment we allowed to free-fly and sense environmental conditions. Together the diagnostics package and VCAP found some highly interesting correlations between the man-made electron beam simulations of the ionosphere and naturally occuring auroras. The information will help us understand better how such auroras are formed from beams of charged particles from the sun." (Marshall Star, Nov 20/85, 1)
In a speech today before the National Space Club, President Reagan urged a greater U.S. effort in the commercial development of space and announced establishment of a 14-member National Space Commission, which he said would "devise an aggressive space agenda to carry America into the 21 st century," the NY Times reported. He said Thomas Paine, head of a consulting company on high-technology enterprises and former NASA administrator and president and chief operating office of the Northrup Corp., would lead the commission. Other commission members were Laurel Wilkening, NASA scientist who would be vice chairman; Jeanne Kirkpatrick, former U.S. ambassador to the U.N.; Brig. Gen. Charles Yeager, retired; Neil Armstrong, former astronaut who headed Computer Technology Aviation; Kathryn Sullivan, first American woman to walk in space; Luis Alvarez, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory physicist; Paul Coleman, Space Research Association president and professor of geophysics and space at the University of California, Los Angeles; George Field, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory senior physicist; Lt. Gen. William Fitch, retired, former Marine Corp. deputy chief of staff for aviation; Charles Herzfeld, vice president and director of research and technology at ITT; J. L. Kerrebrock, head of the department of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Gerard O'Neill, president of Geostar Corp.; and David Wfebb, a consultant for space development. President Reagan said the commission would develop long-term goals for civilian space enterprises, but he did not elaborate on the type of commercial space ventures he had in mind. He said only that, "Before the end of the century, many billions of dollars of commercial activity will be taking place in and because of space" and that the U.S. must use the incentives of individual freedom and the profit motive to encourage these commercial uses. (NYT, Mar 30/85, 1 A)
Responding to a suggestion made by President Reagan at a June 19 press conference that the U.S. expand its sky marshal force for use on international flights, Thomas Pyle, speaking for the International Air Transport Association, said security experts found little merit in the suggestion, the NY Times reported. "We're not happy about anybody having guns up in the air," he said. "There's a distinct danger to passenger^ and a bigger danger of damage to the aircraft." Pyle did acknowledge that there might be special occasions, including cases of known threats to particular flights, when marshals would be needed. Richard Lally, security chief for the association representing U.S. airlines and for the Federal Aviation Administration from 1974 to 1982, agreed with Pyle's assessment. "It is not an answer to the problem and introduces an impression that it is. It provides for a very dangerous situation." The views expressed by Pyle and Lally reflected the consensus of security experts that the best place to head off hijackings was on the ground. (NY Times, June 20/85, A20)
Fourteen-year-old Todd Holmes of Fort Smith, Arkansas, unofficially became the youngest person to solo in a glider, the Washington Times reported. According to Federal Aviation Administration regulations, a pilot had to be 14 before he or she could solo in any kind of aircraft and 16 to be licensed in a passenger-carrying glider or to fly a powered aircraft. The agency did not keep statistics on who might have been the youngest person ever to solo. Todd, who got his glider license on his 14th birthday, said, "I could've done it two weeks ago, but I had to wait until I was 14." (W Times, Aug 1/85, 4B)
Air safety experts, flight attendants, and some members of Congress were complaining that the emergency evacuation tests run by airlines had little resemblance to a real accident, the Washington Post reported. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations required that all jetliners pass an evacuation test that showed a planeful of passengers could be evacuated in 90 seconds. Such tests determined how many seats a plan must have in relations to the number of exits. However, flight attendants typically rehearsed several days for the tests in which there was no smoke, no fire, no elderly participants, or children. Federal regulations didn't prohibit manufacturers from using their own employees for the tests, although no "passenger" could rehearse for the evacuation. Although regulations required a certain percentage of elderly persons or children for the tests, FAA officials said they often waived the requirement because of concerns that they might be injured. Rep. James Oberstar (D-Minn.), whose U.S. House public works and transportation subcommittee on investigations and oversight monitored the FAA, said that changes in the FAA's handling of evacuation requirements were long overdue. "We've got . . . no uniformity, just sort of a haphazard approach to rule making and safety, and lives of people are at stake," he said. Rep. Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) of the same subcommittee called the approach to evacuation taken by the FAA and industry "just totally out of touch with the real world." The controversy over the adequacy of evacuation requirements had simmered for months since the FAA permitted the Boeing Co. to eliminate two of ten exit doors on its 747 jumbo jet. Boeing officials convinced the FAA to allow elimination of the two over-wing emergency doors on the plane, because federal regulations required two doors for every 110 seats and none of the 747s with sealed doors would carry more than 440 seats. The FAA's Seattle office, which handled certification of large commercial aircraft, approved the change without a test to see whether passengers actually could evacuate the plane within 90 seconds and instead relied on a mathematical calculation using old evacuation tests. Critics complained that those tests were themselves flawed. (WPost, Sept 6/85, A21)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced it had proposed a regulation requiring that all new transponders installed in aircraft after January 1, 1992, be compatible with the new Mode S, ground-based radar beacon system to give controllers more accurate aircraft position and identification information. In October 1984, the FAA ordered 137 Mode S ground stations from joint manufacturers Westinghouse/SDC-Burroughs and scheduled the first Mode S for delivery in the spring of 1987 to the FAA Technical Center in Atlantic City, In addition to position and identification information, the Mode S had a "selective" address capability, which gave the system its name and provided a channel for automatically transmitting weather and other data between air-traffic control facilities and aircraft in flight. The FAA already required that airplanes operating above 12,500 feet or in designated airport terminal control areas be equipped with a less sophisticated transponder. When triggered by the sweep of ground radar, this equipment sent back a signal that gave controllers a clean and enhanced target on their radar displays and also told them the aircraft's identity and altitude. A limitation of the current radar beacon system, which Mode S would replace, was that ground equipment interrogated simultaneously all aircraft in a given area, often resulting in overlapping and garbled signals on radar displays. Mode S eliminated this problem by addressing each aircraft on an individual or selective basis. The purpose of the proposed rule was to promote early installation of Mode S transponders, although existing transponders would not be obsolete; pilots could continue to fly with that equipment after January 1, 1992, until it needed replacement. (FAA Release 48-85)
NASA announced it signed with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Department of Defense (DOD) a memorandum of agreement to conduct a two-year study of the possible benefits to the nation of the continued development of tilt-rotor aircraft. In particular, the study would assess the broader implications of V-22 aircraft development, including the potential for other versions and sizes, both civil and military; civil certification issues; civil production impact on the defense industrial base; and any indirect technology spin-offs. Tilt-rotor aircraft combined the vertical take-off-and-landing ability of the helicopter with the relatively higher cruising speed and longer range of fixed-wing aircraft. A small proof-of-concept aircraft, the XV-15, was tested successfully, leading to a larger tilt-rotor aircraft, the V-22 Osprey, which DOD was developing. DOD expected the V-22 to bring the tilt-rotor configuration closer to maturity, enabling lower risk development of other versions and sizes, for both military and civilian use. The FAA would certify any civil versions of a U.S. tilt-rotor aircraft and would assess its impact on the national airspace system, airport and heliport development, and other air service needs. NASA acquired a high level of expertise in tilt-rotor technology during development and flight testing of the XV-15, and the agency also had a charter to study use of NASA-developed technology and to assess future research needs. (NASA Release 85-144)
The investigation into the August 12 crash in a remote mountain area of a Japan Air Lines Boeing 747-100SR after it lost most of its vertical stabilizer and rudders focused on damage in the aft pressure bulkhead of the aircraft, Aviation Week reported. Japan's Aircraft Accident Investigation Committee said it was attempting to determine whether the bulkhead damage was caused by a crack or cracks that existed in the bulkhead, by explosive decompression in the cabin, or by the crash impact. The Boeing Co. said inspections as of August 19 of the aft pressure shell of 43 Boeing 747 aircraft showed no evidence of cracks. In addition to cracks in the bulkhead, lower ends of 5 of 18 triangular panels, or gores, were buckled toward the rear. Boeing Co. had replaced 9 of the 18 panels after the aircraft was involved in a hard landing June 2, 1978. Further optional or mandated inspections of the wide-body transport fleet stalled the previous week due to lack of information on damage to the JAL aircraft. Information from Japan was sparse, partly because of restrictions placed on access to the wreckage and because of damage done to some of the vital evidence by members of the rescue team. Rescuers had cut the bulkhead into pieces and removed them to clear the way for rescue. Boeing's accident investigation team had not been able to make a close inspection of the bulkhead by the previous week. One of the few pieces of evidence—damage to the vertical fin—led Boeing to suggest that Boeing 747 operators inspect the fin and rudder structure. And reports that a depressurization occurred prompted the company to suggest inspection of the external and aft portion of the pressure shell structure. The Federal Aviation Administration declined to take action pending receipt of more information. (AvWk, Aug 26/85, 28)
Construction was proceeding at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) toward the October completion of the Shuttle Processing Contract (SPC) logistics facility to house approximately 190,000 items of Space Shuttle program stock, including orbiter fuel cells, various electrical components, tires, brakes, windows, nuts, bolts, and washers then stored in three KSC warehouses and four areas of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, the Spaceport News reported. NASA would consolidate seven Lockheed Logistics Directorate departments and its own Launch Support Services Directorate at the facility, with 500 Lockheed and NASA employees working in 75,000 sq. ft. (about a quarter of the total) set aside for office space. The Lockheed-managed facility would be KSC's first automated logistics warehouse for storage of flight hardware and SPC ground-support equipment. An automated inventory system would interface with the Shuttle Inventory Management System (SIMS) and a manual system. Retrieval procedures would require four roboticized forklifts to find and fetch items, an automatic conveyor, and a manned, three-story high forklift. As part of the SPC agreement, Lockheed selected Austin Co. as the facility's architectural and engineering firm and builder at a basic design and construction cost of about $16 million. (Spaceport News, Mar 1/85, 1)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced rules to permit new two-engine jetliners to fly lengthy remote routes that had required three- or four-engine planes, but each airline would have to prove its aircraft and flight crews met FAA standards. The FAA took the action because of the reliability of modern jet engines and because military and business jets with two engines had flown across the North Atlantic safely for several years. The rules also addressed special provisions for airframe reliability, backup electrical and hydraulic systems, maintenance, cargo-compartment fire protection, and crew training. Under current rules, a two-engine plane could be no farther from an airport than 60-minute flying time on one engine; the FAA proposal would extend that to two-hours flying time on one engine. When the rules became final, they would allow Boeing's two-engine 767 jumbo jet to fly the most fuel-efficient North Atlantic routes, which would take flights far from airports in Greenland and Iceland. Boeing had pushed hard for the rule change, the Washington Post reported, to expand the sales potential of its 767. (FAA Release 5-85; W Post, Feb 7/85, A7)
NASA announced that Thomas DeCair was appointed effective July 3 associate administrator for external relations. In this position, DeCair would be responsible for policy level management, direction, and coordination of the agency's relationships with public and private organizations both domestic and international. This included the news media, other federal agencies, state and local governments, industry, and private individuals. He would also serve as the principal advisor to the NASA administrator and other senior officials on matters pertaining to NASA's external relations activities. DeCair came to NASA from the U.S. Department of Justice where he served since February 1981 as director of public affairs and special assistant to the Attorney General. DeCair was staff assistant in the White House Press Office and then assistant press secretary to Presidents Nixon and Ford after he graduated from Hope College, Holland, Michigan, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa as a junior and received his B.A. degree magna cum laude. (NASA Release 85-102) Review Boards
In remarks at a meeting marking the 25th anniversary of the Gagarin Space Training Centre, Gen. Georgiy Beregovoy, center commander, said that it had become an international space academy where 58 USSR cosmonauts and participants in international space programs from the socialist countries and from France and India trained, FBIS, Tass in English reported. Beregovoy also said results of space research were used in virtually every sector of the national economy, with more than 800 USSR institutions and organizations using the research results. He said that during missions, cosmonauts were concerned with problems of agriculture; radio and electronics engineering; metallurgy; welding; studies of sea currents, offshore areas, and bottom sedimentation in river estuaries; and compiling maps of shoals and coastal areas. In other remarks at the meeting, Leonid Kizim, a participant in the longest space mission, which had lasted 237 days, said that during its 25 years the training center had become a major research institution capable of resolving most of the USSR's complex scientific and technical problems. (FBIS, Tass in English, Apr 9/85)
NASA Administrator James Beggs met with planetary science experts to discuss a plan to develop a spacecraft capable of flying in formation with a comet known as Wild-2 and dropping a probe down onto its surface in hopes of bringing back samples, the Washington Times reported. Space scientists said NASA wanted to launch the $400 million mission in the early 1990s. NASA hoped to get about $30 million in start-up money earmarked for the project in the agency's FY 87 budget. The mission would be an important space first, because none of the previous spacecraft launched toward Halley's Comet would fly alongside that comet, launch a probe, or return to earth after rendezvous. (W Times, Aug 2/ 85, 10 A)
NASA was accelerating design of an unmanned U.S. space mission that would rendezvous with a comet and possibly drop a penetrator to return data directly from the comet's surface, Av Wk reported. NASA officials believed that this first U.S. comet-rendezvous mission using the new Mariner Mk. 2 spacecraft would be a high-priority item in the FY 87 budget. NASA planners would probably select the Comet Kopff or Comet Wild-2 as mission target; FY 87 new-start funding could make a 1991 launch possible. Unlike Halley's Comet flybys, the U.S. spacecraft in a rendezvous mission would spend many months flying in formation with a comet. Mission concept proposed rendezvous well before closest approach to the sun, so the spacecraft could observe the comet while it was in its asteroidal stage and before solar wind would blow large amounts of dust off its surface. The spacecraft would remain in formation during the comet's active phase and possibly the post-solar-encounter phase. GSFC and ARC were examining comet-penetrator concept systems that would return compositional data using a gamma-ray spectrometer. (AvWk, Jan 7/85, 18)
NASA announced its graphics and visual communications system had won the Presidential Design Award, presented January 30 by President Reagan. The National Endowment for the Arts sponsored the award to recognize excellence in federal design and had selected the NASA project, along with 12 others, from among 91 Federal Design Achievement Award winners. The Presidential Design Awards jury chairman, architect I.M. Pei, said in his jury report, ". . . Especially noteworthy is the visual-communications system developed by NASA whose posters, publications, and logotype generally maintain a high standard of design, which truly captures the spirit and vitality of the space program." (NASA Release 85-16) During January: NASA announced it had conferred its Space Act Awards on four Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory personnel for the invention of a medical device based on space and aeronautics technology. The invention, a programmable implantable medication system (PIMS), was a computerized pump intended for implanting in the human body to dispense medicine automatically to treat disease such as diabetes, cancer, and cardiovascular problems. A nonhypodermic device introduced medication to a reservoir located in the PIMS device so that its tiny battery-powered pump could send the medicine into the body via a tube in minute doses precisely timed by one of two clocks within the PIMS. A small computer in the PIMS analyzed its performance and operated an alarm if the device was malfunctioning or about to run out of fluid. NASA technologies employed in the PIMS development were space microcircuitry, titanium welding, and the pump and fluid-handling systems used on the Viking spacecraft and space-program techniques of quality control. Award recipients were Robert Fischell, Wade Radford, Albert Sadilek, and Arthur Hogrefe. (NASA anno Jan 85, 14)
NASA Administrator James Beggs approved the addition of an asteroid 28 Amphitrite-flyby option to the Galileo mission, permitting a December 1986 final flyby decision and changing the Jupiter arrival date from August to December 1988, the JSC Roundup reported. Approval had followed a two-year study by scientific groups, mission designers, and program officials, in which the National Academy of Sciences and NASA's Solar System Exploration Committee identified asteroids investigations as an essential element of a balanced planetary exploration program. The asteroid flyby could not compromise or risk mission objectives. NASA would make the final decision for a flyby after launch based on analysis of spacecraft health, particularly the attitude-control and mission-operations systems. Amphitrite, about 200 km in diameter and one of the larger of the minor asteroids, was in a near-circular solar orbit in the middle of the asteroid belt at 2.5 Astronomical Units (AU) from the sun (the earth's distance was 1 AU or about 150,000,000 km). A specially convened hazards workshop had concluded that, at a 10,000-to 20,000-km flyby distance, hazard to the spacecraft was no greater than flying through the asteroid belt as 2 Pioneer and 2 Voyager spacecraft had done, and measurements analysis and Doppler-tracking data could achieve significant scientific objectives. As Amphitrite had a rotation period of about 5.39 hours, Galileo's mapping spectrometer could photograph and scan most of its surface. Data analysis would reveal size, shape, mass, density, exact rotation rate, pole orientation, detailed surface morphology, and mineral composition, thus indicating whether Amphitrite was a primitive accumulation of solar nebulae condensates or an evolved body that was a fragment or perhaps a core of a broken-up minor planet. With this data, scientists could possibly confirm or refute a hypothesis that asteroids were sources of many of the meteorites that had fallen on earth. NASA had developed a new trajectory containing both Amphitrite and Jupiter, constrained by launch-vehicle energy and the existing launch window, that would result in a Jupiter arrival date delay from August 29, 1988 to December 10, 1988. Since the flyby would require early added-propellant expenditure, NASA would decrease the number of Jupiter-tour orbits from 11 to 10 and lengthen the tour from 20 to 22 months, permitting achievement of all major 11-orbit tour objectives. The delayed arrival and increased tour time would add five months and about $20-25 million in costs to the mission. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 1)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration signed a memorandum of agreement for a fiveyear, $24 million research project to study wind shear detection and avoidance that would cover technology assessment, present position sensor integration, hazard characterization, pilot factors in wind shear, and effects of heavy rain. For pilot training, an environment was created that could mirror wind shear in a flight situation, thus'=0*providing a safe simulation for training. Microburst is the most dangerous type of wind shear for study. It is a small, intense downdraft, often accompanied by heavy rain, which, upon striking the ground, spreads out into a circular vortex radiating an all directions and leaving little time for reaction by a pilot. Between 1965 and 1985, there were at least 26 accidents and 3 incidents involving 626 fatalities and 235 injuries where wind shear was a direct cause or contributing factor. (NASA Release 86143)
For the first time since the January 28 accident, the Space Shuttle's main engine underwent a 11/2 second test for ignition. It was an uneventful and successful run, and NASA officials offered it as a signal that the program was gearing up for a targeted July 1987 mission. (B Sun, Jun 27/86; C Trib, Jun
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that the Nation was in need on a fifth orbiter, the funding for which would need to come from private financing. The claim by NASA's advisory council that the United States was approaching secondclass status in space, he acknowledged, was "on track." Fletcher'70*made a formal request on September 9, the same day that President Ronald Reagan petitioned Congress for the initial $272 million needed to begin work on a fourth Shuttle. (USA Today, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 9/86; B Sun, Sep 10/86)
Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer was appointed Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Office of Commercial Programs, where he would be responsible for advancing the interests and participation of the private sector in the U.S. Space Program. He previously had cofounded businesses in the private sector and had served at the White House. (NASA Release 8679)
NASA officials concluded, and reported to the President's Commission, that the orings in Challenger's right solidrocket motor were indeed the cause of the January 28 accident. They were still unable to cite a reason for failure of the seals, but hoped that tests over the next 10 days would give some clue. NASA also noted that the putty used to protect these seals might shed some light. (WSJ, Mar 24/86; CSM, Mar 24/86)
A localized electrical fire occurred on board the Magellan spacecraft during a power systems check at the Kennedy Space Center's (KSC) Spacecraft Encapsulation Facility (SAEF2). The fire, which occurred while a technician worked within the spacecraft, was quickly extinguished without injuries and with only minor damage to Magellan. The KSC fire department also responded but was not required to enter the SAEF2 clean room environment. The incident was being investigated by NASA. (NASA Releases 88141 and 88153).
This date marked 5 years since the Pioneer 10 spacecraft had left the solar system on its trajectory toward interstellar space. Pioneer 10the most distant humanmade object in existencewas now 4,175,500,000 miles from the Sun, almost 450*times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Radio signals, moving at the speed of light, took 12 hours and 26 minutes to travel from Earth to spacecraft and back, the longest time of any radio communication in history. The spacecraft, launched in 1972, continued to operate extremely well as it collected and transmitted data back to Earth. Its primary mission, originally scheduled for 21 months, was to assess the feasibility of passage through the Asteroid Belt and provide the first closeup examination of Jupiter and its moons. Pioneer 10 accomplished all of its original goals by December 1973. At that point, the mission was indefinitely extended. Scientists reprogrammed the probe to explore the Sun's atmosphere and to look for a tenth planet and gravity waves in the far outer solar system and beyond. Recent improvements in the NASA ground stations were expected to allow communications with Pioneer 10 to continue until the range approached six billion miles, more than twice the prelaunch estimates. Project Manager Richard O. Fimmel expected that NASA would be able to track Pioneer 10 until the power source limited communications, which was expected to occur toward the end of the Both Pioneer 10 and its sister spacecraft, Pioneer 11, carried an easily interpreted graphic message in the event that they encountered any intelligent life forms on their journey. Scientists believed Pioneer 10 and 11 would travel among the stars virtually forever because the vacuum of interstellar space is so empty that the risk of any type of collision would be negligible. (ARC Release
An experimental jetliner being developed by McDonnell Douglas Corporation debuted in a 1hour flight from the Douglas Aircraft Facility in Long Beach, California. The aircraft, with one unducted fan (UDF) engine and one ordinary jet engine, was a forerunner of the planned MD91 and MD92 passenger jets that McDonnell Douglas was actively marketing to airlines. The UDF engine, developed by GE, had demonstrated significant reductions in fuel consumption over conventional jet engines. McDonnell Douglas' MD91 and MD92 airliners were being developed to meet the expected demand among airlines for alternative, fuelefficient aircraft during the latter 1990s. "This is as big a jump in technology as going from propellers to jets," said Walt Orlowski, program manager for the experimental aircraft. "We are at the forefront of aviation technology." (LA Times, Feb 3/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. Fletcher appointed Kenneth S. Pedersen to be Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective immediately. Pedersen would be responsible for congressional, intergovernmental, international, and industry relations, educational activities and relations with educational institutions, and the NASA History Office. (NASA Release 88160)
Six toplevel NASA managers announced their resignations in order to avoid new conflictofinterest restrictions on contract related work by former Federal employees. The new restrictions, effective May 16, 1989, would bar officials who have worked on procurement from assuming any private sector jobs involving the contracts for two years. Some of the resigning managers cited the0*failure of Congress to pass a pay raise for senior executive service (SES) personnel as a reason for leaving. The six NASA officials who announced their resignations were Noel Hinners, Associate Deputy Administrator; James Odom, Director of the Space Station program; Jon McBride, an astronaut and chief of congressional relations; John Thomas, head of solid rocket booster redesign at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC); Bill Sneed, MSFC policy chief; and James Downey, irector of MSFC's payload project office. (NASA Releases 8960, 8961, 8962, Apr 24/89; AP, Apr 24/89; UPI, Apr 24/89; WSJ, Apr 25/89; W Post, Apr 25/89; W Times, Apr 25/89)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher named Dr. Robert Rosen as Acting Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST), effective April 2. Rosen had served as Deputy Associate Administrator, OAST, since March 1986. (NASA Release 8941, Mar 30/89)
Acting NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Samuel W. Keller as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, the thirdranking position in the Agency. Keller had been Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications since December 1977. (NASA Release 8975, May 16/89; LA Times, May 17/89)
NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly announced the establishment of a Space Commerce Steering Group, composed of NASA officials, that would provide an overview of commercial space technology applications. The goal of the Group was to provide coordination of potential commercial capabilities; NASA's Office of Commercial Programs would remain the primary action agent. Truly maintained that NASA "must ensure that [its] technology is transferred to the private sector. The taxpayer's investment in NASA is an investment in the international competitiveness of U.S. industry." (NASA Release 90112)
The Federal Aviation Administration signed a memoranda of understanding with NASA to jointly research problems in aviation. Areas to be investigated were environmental compatibility, human factors, severe weather, integration of cockpit and air traffic operations, airworthiness, and noise. (NASA Release 90131)
would have to return to the hanger for repairs. NASA officials were not sure when the craft would be launched but announced that only eight of the nine planned flights for the year would be flown. (NY Times, June 7/90; W Times, Jun 8/90)
NASA announced that Pennsylvania State University's Center for Cell Research, State College, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had begun a new space program to enable U.S. industry to enhance the purification and processing of cells, subcellular particles, proteins, growth factors, and other biological products. (NASA Release 91-172)
The General Accounting Office (GAO) report on NASA indicated it needed to improve contract oversight to reduce cost overruns and schedule delays. According to the GAO, one in every three NASA contracts experienced cost overruns and two in five experienced delays. The conclusion was based on audits at Marshall, Kennedy, Goddard, and Johnson field centers based on a statistical sample of 317 active or administratively closed-out contracts between 1984 and 1989. (Htsavl Tms, Dec 23/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with senior NASA officials in Washington to discuss Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson's interim viewpoints on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices. Thompson's final recommendations and a proposed implementation plan were to follow in early November. (NASA Release 91-169)
NASA announced the resignation for personal reasons of Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson Jr., an internationally recognized propulsion expert, who served more than 25 years in NASA. (NASA Release 91-149; AP, Sep 17/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; Decatur Daily, Sep 18/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 18/91; Birmingham News, Sep 18/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Sep 19/91; AvWk, Sep 23/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released an internal agency report on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices, prepared by former Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson. Thompson focused on three thrusts: building on NASA field organizations as Centers of Excellence in specific areas of science, technology, and development; a reminder to "stick to basics" in engineering disciplines, and program management and realignments of certain NASA Headquarters office responsibilities to achieve more efficient program execution. (NASA Release 91-190; AP, Nov 15/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly and Secretary of Energy James D. Watkins signed an interagency agreement on cooperation in areas relating to space isotope power. The agreement updated an earlier 1965 pact and delineated authorities of NASA and DOE on research, technology development, design, production, delivery, spacecraft integration, and launch support for radioisotope power systems. (NASA Release 91-119)
A feature article dealt with NASA's management overhaul, which it described as nearly complete and based on recommendations of Congress, the Augustine panel, and the most recent report of former Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson. (W Post, Nov 25/91)
NASA officials George Rodney, the agency's top safety official, and Robert Crippen, head of the Shuttle program, said a special investigating team would spend the summer reviewing the way NASA approved Shuttle components for flight. (W Post, May 31/91)
A Christian Science Monitor editorial commended NASA's work with regard to the Magellan spacecraft's survey of the surface of Venus. However, the editorial deplored the indecision and delays in the U.S. space program resulting from Congressional ambivalence and stressed the need for the administration to achieve a sustainable program. (CSM, Jun 6/91)
AP reported, as quoted in the Washington Times, that the Soviet cosmonauts were waiting to return home, puzzled by home conditions. Their return was postponed after the republic of Kazakhstan claimed ownership of the territory on which they were supposed to land. Furthermore, the Soviet space program was experiencing financial and administrative difficulties. (AP, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter from Norman R. Augustine, former chairman of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, assessing NASA's efforts over the preceding nine months to implement the committee's recommendations. The letter recognized that NASA took "many significant actions" but "much is yet to be accomplished." (NASA Editors' Note N91-60; UPI, Sep 16/91)
NASA announced that a 15-member delegation of Soviet space officials, headed by Oleg N. Shishkin, Minister of General Machine Building, would be visiting NASA headquarters and space centers July 9-16. (NASA Release 91-105)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly presented the Minority Contractor of the Year Award to Consolidated Industries, Inc., of Huntsville, Alabama, and the Minority Subcontractor of the Year Award to Network Solutions, Inc., of Herndon, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-157)
The New York Times reported that Soviet space officials told the White House that the Soviet civilian space program might collapse unless it made large sales to the West. Soviet economic problems were the major cause as well as parliamentary attacks on the space program as wasteful. (NY Times, Sep 3/91; UPI, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 4/91; Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
The wire services reported that NASA managers reaffirmed their previous decision to resume routine Florida Shuttle landings. This occurred prior to the start of a two-day review to clear Atlantis for blastoff around July 23. (UPI, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 12/91)
NASA announced that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel would present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly on March 22. (NASA editors' note N91-19)
NASA also announced that President George Bush would join NASA Administrator Richard Truly in a back-to-school special program for elementary students on NASA Select Television. (NASA Release 91-146)
The House of Representatives rejected President Bush's proposed budget, allowing only a 4.2 percent increase in the space program to keep pace with inflation, instead of the recommended 12 percent increase. (UPI, Apr 18/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Ray J. Arnold as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs. He replaced Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer, who became Deputy Assistant Administrator for Policy and Interagency Coordination. (NASA Release 91-39)
The media quoted Aviation Week and Space Journal magazine as saying that a $70 million cost overrun had doubled the price of two NASA spacecraft being developed to study the interaction between the Earth and the sun. The craft were being built for use in the 17-nation International Solar Terrestrial Physics Program. NASA officials reportedly confirmed the cost increases. (AP, Nov 10/91; W Times, Nov 11/91; Fla Today, Nov 11/91; B Sun, Nov 11/91)
The media covered the unveiling of the Shuttle Endeavour at some length, including its new features outlined by NASA Administrator Richard Truly: "The latest avionics navigation equipment, the finest mechanical systems, a new drag chute, and equipment for longer duration flights." Endeavour has more fuel cells, which generate electricity, allowing it to stay in orbit as long as 28 days. (P Inq, Apr 26/91; W Times, Apr 26/91; NY Times, Apr 26/91; W Post, Apr 26/91; USA Today, Apr 26/91; WSJ, Apr 26/91; B Sun, Apr 26/91; Daily News, Apr 26/91; H Chron, Apr 26/91; AP, Apr 26/91; UPI, Apr 26/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the planned creation of the Office of Management Systems and Facilities. Benita A. Cooper was to be the Associate Administrator for this office which was to enhance total quality management. (NASA Release 91-160)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced two key appointments: Arnold D. Aldrich to be Associate Administrator for the new Office of Space Systems Development and Richard H. Petersen to become Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 91-161; AP, Oct 3/91; Daily Press, Oct 4/91; W Post, Oct 10/91)
An editorial deplored efforts of the Virginia congressional delegation to block NASA's possible closing of its Reston, Virginia, office. The editorial stated that to cut space program costs, which suffer from a bloated management structure, streamlining must occur and the Reston office was a good place to begin. (Space News, Jan 7-20/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of 26 Space Grant State Consortia as a result of Phase II competition. Recipients receive four-year, $150,000-per-year grants to initiate new programs. States receiving such grants were Alaska, Delaware, District of Columbia, Indiana, Kansas, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oregon, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin. Twelve states with limited aerospace activity would receive similar grants to enhance aerospace research and infrastructure. They were Arkansas, Connecticut, Idaho, Louisiana, Maine, Montana, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, South Carolina, and West Virginia. Both grants require partial matching nonfederal funds and would be used in part to sponsor fellowship programs for undergraduate and graduate students. (NASA Release 91-19)
James C. Fletcher, who twice served as NASA Administrator (April 1971 - May 1977, May 1986 - April 1989), died of cancer. (AP, Dec 23/91; W Post, Dec 24/91; NY Times, Dec 24/91; W Times, Dec 24/91)
Pamela Clark, a former NASA employee who teaches chemistry, wrote an article criticizing the lack of support from upper management of the space program. She urged Congress to adequately finance a civilian space program that would recognize America's position of world leadership. (H Chron, Mar 19/91)
NASA announced that the Aviation Safety Reporting System ASRS), which it manages for the Federal Aviation Administration, had prevented many air accidents and saved lives over the past 15 years. ASRS also identified safety issues for the aviation community and released research papers on aviation safety. FAA and NASA celebrated the 15-year anniversary of the program. (NASA Release 91-112; Inside DOT, Jul 25/91)
NASA managers were described as divided over whether Discovery could be safely launched on March 9 or needed to be taken off the launch pad and repaired. (UPI, Feb 27/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the creation of a new Systems Analysis and Concepts Office at NASA Headquarters, in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. James D. Bain, who served as executive secretary of that committee, was appointed Director of the new office. (NASA Release 91-74; SP News, May 20-26/91)
NASA announced crew assignments for the International Microgravity flight, scheduled for February 1992 and the Spacelab D-2 mission, the second German Spacelab flight, scheduled for February 1993. Lt. Col. David C. Hilmers was to be mission specialist on the microgravity flight and Lt. Col. Jerry L. Ross was to serve as Payload Commander on the spacelab flight. (NASA Release 91-57)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of key personnel in the Office of Public Affairs and the Office of Equal Opportunity Programs. Bill Livingstone was appointed Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Sue Mathis Richard was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Lewin S. Warren was appointed Acting Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs; and Oceola S. Hall was designated Acting Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs. (NASA Release 92-94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the expansion of the National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program to include all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The Space Grant Program offers states the opportunity to receive grants to further projects in aeronautics, space, and related fields. (NASA Release 92-112)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced new minority contract goals and the formation of a NASA Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee. He also announced that the Minority Contractor of the Year was Jackson & Tull, Chartered Engineers, of Seabrook, Maryland; B & W Services, Inc., Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 92-158)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Charles J. Pellerin, Jr., to the position of Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Quality. Pellerin was also to serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator for long-range planning. (NASA Release 92-59)
NASA officials said that the last scheduled U.S. shuttle flght this year, a military mission by Discovery, probably would be delayed because of a faulty component in the orbital maneuvering system. A December 2 launch date was subsequently planned. (AP, Oct 15/92; NY Times, Oct 16/92; W Times, Oct 16/92; AP, Nov 2/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Chief of Staff. The Chief of Staff facilitates communications between the Administrator's office and senior staff members, as well as with private sector executives and international visitors. In addition, the Chief of Staff focuses on internal NASA Headquarters management and operations, aiming to increase the efficiency of the organization. (NASA Release 92-58)
A new 5,000-mile-wide radio telescope designed to probe the edge of the universe was near completion in the United States, according to Peter Napier, project manager for the Very Long Baseline Array project. The federally funded project, actually a series of 10 dish-shaped antennas, was expected to begin high-resolution imaging work by December. (W Times, Sept 20/92)
The National Association of Small Disadvantaged Business presented NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin with its Meritorious Award. It was the second time Goldin had received the award. (NASA Release 92-162)
A study conducted for the Federal Aviation Administration by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments concluded that the Washington area could support flights of "tiltrotor" aircraft to New York and Boston. Tiltrotors would be competitive with commercial aircraft within a range of about 350 nautical miles from Washington. To date, tiltrotor aircraft had been developed and flown by the military, which hoped to use the craft for transporting troops. (W Post, Jul 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin endorsed the creation of a Space Agency Forum to coordinate activities among the leades of the world's space agencies to prevent duplication and overlap. (NASA Release 92-143)
The U. S. National Research Council urged NASA to expand study of advanced subsonic aircraft in order to keep U. S. aerospace companies competitive in the face of growing advances made by foreign industry. A council report said NASA should focus on improving aircraft performance and operating efficiency and coordinate the work with industry and academia. (AvWk, Oct 12/92; National Research Council News Report, Fall Report)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of procurement reforms to make NASA the model of excellence for the Federal Government. Goldin said reforms in NASA's procurement process were necessary because 90 percent of the agency's budget is spent through contracts. Major changes in procurement will include the award of new contracts to companies that have demonstrated accountability by delivering quality systems that meet cost, schedule, and technical requirements. (NASA Release 92-123)
The National Research Council said NASA should increase its budget for civil airliner and air traffic control research, even if it means a cutback in NASA's military and space programs. The council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, said the United States status as the world leader in aircraft manufacturing would continue to erode if NASA did not enter into a major cooperative program with industry, universities, and other government agencies to develop a new generation of airliners. (W Post, Oct 1/92)
Astronomers resumed the search for evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) today with simultaneous commands to computers and radio telescopes at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and in the Mojave Desert of California. Although there have been previous limited projects, NASA officials, who are financing and directing the new project, said the planned 10-year, $100 million search would be the most comprehensive and ambitious one ever undertaken to search for signals of life beyond Earth's galaxy. Later, more radio telescopes around the world were to join the search, which NASA has renamed the High Resolution Microwave Survey. The latest SETI project was timed to begin on the 500th anniversary of Columbus' discovery of land in the Americas. (NY Times, Oct 6/92, Oct 13/92; W Post, Oct 5/92; LA Times, Oct 7/92; The Sun, Oct 8/92; Newsweek, Oct 12/92; AP, Oct 10/92, Oct 12/92; UPI, Oct 13/92; C Trib, Oct 10/92; P Inq, Oct 10/92; 13/92; NASA Release 92-160)
NASA started the first flight test in Denver of a laser-based sensor to provide airline pilots with advance warning of "microbursts" that can harbor potentially dangerous windshears. The Federal Aviation Administration has mandated that airlines must select and install an approved microburst detection system on their aircraft by the end of 1995. (NASA Release 92-108)
Deidre Lee was appointed deputy assistant administrator for procurement at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 92-146; Space News, Sept 21-27/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and National Space Council Executive Secretary Brian Dailey left with an interagency delegation to visit the European Space Operations Center in Germany. The delegation planned to proceed on to Moscow to gain a first-hand understanding of Russia's space program. (NASA Release 92-106)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable in Washington, D. C,, that the U.S. government should spin off more new technology to help boost the economy. He also said that the space business sector must move beyond its attempts to sell goods and services to the government to become a real commercial industry. Goldin said NASA's newly created Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology would be given broad authority to pursue innovative ideas, seek out new technologies, and accelerate transfer of the agency's own breakthroughs to industry. (Space News, Nov 16-22/92; AvWk, Nov 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Bill Livingstone as Special Assistant to the Administrator for Communications. (NASA Release 92-71)
Outgoing NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced his support for using space to enhance education and his recommendation to administrator-nominee Daniel S. Golding that NASA fly Barbara Morgan, who was a backup to Christa McAuliffe. (NASA Release 92-40)
In a speech to the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers in Los Angeles, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA was committed to building a culturally diverse workforce as it pursued the exploration of space. (NASA Release 92-170)
The Associated Press reported that two ex-Soviet cosmonauts circling the Earth went on television to reassure the public that they were safe and working hard, despite the many difficulties caused by the turmoil back home. The demise of the Soviet government and independence of the former republics had thrown the space program into disarray, delaying the cosmonaut's return for months. (AP, Feb 15/92)
In the last of a week-long series of talks in California at California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA, its partners, and its contractors, were suffering from a bureaucratic "sickness" and political infighting that had sapped the U. S. civilian space program's will to take risks or to admit mistakes. "We need a complete resurgence of our space program to be bold, to take risks, and accept failure," Goldin said during a lively, two-hour discussion and debate with Carl Sagan, astronomer and founding president of the Planetary Society, based in Pasadena. Sagan agreed that NASA had lost its "sense of direction" and said that the key questions facing NASA were what would be its role in the post-Cold War era and what could it accomplish that was in the national interest in a time of pressing economic problems. (Space News, Dec 14-20/92)
NASA announced that Laurie A. Broedling had been appointed as Associate Administrator for Continuous Improvement. She would report directly to the Administrator and serve as NASA's primary facilitator of Total Quality Management. "This appointment is an important step in bringing a world-class TQM program to NASA," Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-72)
In a broad-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he expected to deal with declining agency budgets by prioritizing and focusing NASA projects. He estimated that a substantial cut had been made in the agency's costs during a review of the last few months--perhaps one-third to one-half of a needed $17 billion in savings--and that new programs would not be multi-billion-dollar projects but would cost in the range of tens to hundreds of millions of dollars. (Aerospace America, Nov 92)
A high-powered panel of space experts appointed by U.S. Vice-President Dan Quayle was scheduled to begin deliberations on October 1 that were intended to lay the groundwork for a revamped U.S. space program. The 11-person panel was to advise on ways to change the space effort in light of the Cold War's end, tight budgets, and rapid technological advancements. (Space News, Sept 28-Oct 4/92)
NASA officials said that tomatoes grown by students and teachers from seeds that had been in space for nearly six years show little or no difference from the fruit of seed that never left the Earth. The tomatoes from a batch of 12.5 million space-borne seed were as healthy as their earthly counterparts, though "findings suggest that the space-exposed seeds germinated slightly faster" and "seedlings had a faster initial growth rate," the officials said. (W Times, Apr 19/92; W Post, Apr 20/92; NASA Release 92-49)
NASA managers said last week that they would refashion the way the space agency conducts its programs, drawing on the results of internal NASA studies now under way and the advice of outside groups. The proposed reforms would serve as a test of whether Administrator Daniel Goldin's vision of faster and cheaper space projects could work in practice. (NASA Release 92-154; Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that his agency had started an intense examination of itself and its programs aimed at setting goals for the nation's civilian space program and controlling costs in the future. Goldin said he had named two teams to undertake an agency-wide analysis of what NASA should be doing and what it could do within the constraints of a limited budget. The self-analysis was organized, Goldin said, after he examined the NASA budgets for the coming years and realized that the agency was committed to programs that could not be funded in an era of tight federal spending. (AP, May 26/92)
The fifth meeting of the Space Agency Forum on the International Space Year (SAFISY) opened in Washington, D. C. The forum is composed of 29 members (national and multi-national space agencies), including NASA, and 10 affiliate members (international, space-related organizations). The meeting was called to review progress of the various SAFISY-sponsored international space year projects and to discuss options for post-1992 cooperation. (NASA Note to Editors N92-76)
Space News praised President Bill Clinton's space plan as a "rational, sound approach that will keep the station alive, head NASA in the right direction, and keep NASA Administrator Dan Goldin around."(Space News, Feb 22-28/93)
A feature in the NY Times about Daniel S. Golden, NASA Administrator, called him a "bold remodeler of a drifting agency." Golden was quoted in the article as saying that he believes "nonlinear thinking" is essential to the rebirth of NASA. (NY Times, Dec 21/93)
David Lux, project manager for the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane, which crisscrossed the globe on Cold War spy missions, said that the plane had a new job helping NASA generate a database to be used by people who do aircraft design.  He said that Blackbird would soon take to the skies to see if it were possible to eliminate or reduce sonic booms for future high-speed airliners. (UPI, Jul 25/93)
NASA negotiated with PRC, Inc. of McLean, Virginia, a sole source contract extension to provide data processing and telecommunications support for NASA headquarters, Washington. (NASA Release C93-o)
Washington Technology reported that at a May 11 appearance before the annual meeting of the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences (NCMS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin emphasized his commitment to NASA's technology-transfer outreach to industry. At the meeting, Goldin announced a memorandum of understanding that allowed NASA and the NCMS to propose joint research projects. (Washington Technology, May 20, 1993)
The House of Representatives passed an amendment to the National Helium Act of 1960. The amendment judged the helium program as a case of government waste and voted to end its monopoly on sales to the space program. The 1996 Act required NASA to buy its helium from the government-run reserve, even though it could be bought for as much as $10 less per 1,000 cubic feet on the open market. The Senate was still considering the amendment.
In a speech to the National Space Symposium, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make the space program relevant to all Americans. He said he wanted everything smaller, faster, cheaper, and more varied. And he wanted to take more risks.
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, who described himself as "an agent of change" in a late-November interview with Government Executive magazine, has set about instituting the "faster, better, cheaper" goals popularized over the past two years by the National Space Council.
The Houston Chronicle  announced that NASA, responding to criticism of its cost overruns and the quality of its projects, had announced major reforms in the way it did business. In addition to other changes, procurement reforms would levy greater penalties on contractors that deliver defective products, continually exceed cost estimates, or fall behind schedule. (H Chron, May 10/93; Federal Computer Week, May 24/93)
NASA reported that the agency was working with the nation's large aerospace companies to determine how NASA computer programs could help industry design and produce aircraft more efficiently. The ultimate goal was to integrate all the factors involved in aircraft design and production in order that aeronautical engineers would be able to design aircraft systems simultaneously rather than separately as is done now. (NASA Release 93-90)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the activities of the Office of Exploration would be absorbed by the Office of Space Science, effective immediately. (NASA Release: 93-54)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the agency had exceeded its 1992 goal of awarding 6.7 percent of the total value of the agency's prime and subcontracts to small disadvantaged businesses. Over $865 million was awarded to minority organizations; this figure represented 7.2 of the total $12 billion awarded during the last fiscal year. (National Black Review, Feb 5/93)
A report released by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA must improve its ability to transfer technology to business. The report included eight recommendations for changing NASA's culture to facilitate technology transfer.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the recipients of the Minority Contractor and Subcontractor of the Year Awards in recognition of minority businesses that had made outstanding contributions to NASA. Hernandez Engineering, Inc., Houston, was named as Minority Contractor of the Year. AJT and Associates, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, was named Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 93-177)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) described innovative new aeronautics research programs that would let airports across the nation and around the world handle more planes with fewer delays while maintaining today's high level of safety. (NASA Release 93-172)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden awarded test pilot A. Scott Crossfield the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contributions to aeronautics and aviation during his career of 50 years.
NASA announced that it had awarded contracts to three U.S. aerospace companies to develop materials and materials fabrication technology for a future U.S. high-speed civil transport. Contracts went to Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, Seattle, Washington; Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Co, Marietta, Georgia; and McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, Long Beach, California.  (NASA Release 93-124)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeff Lawrence, a senior congressional staff aide with experience in space and aeronautics matters, as the agency's Associate Administrator for Legislative Affairs. (NASA Release 93-70; W Post, Apr 21/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that the U.S. space program "is in chaos" because of congressional budget cuts. NASA's five-year budget plan dropped from $106 billion last year to $71 billion. Noting that NASA's budget changed every two or three months, Goldin called on Congress to institute a multiyear budget that would enable the agency to develop a strategic plan. (USA Today, Nov 17/93; W Times, Nov 17; Reuters, Nov 16/93, Nov 17/93; Fla Today, Nov 17/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA had awarded 8.5 percent of its 1993 fiscal year contracting budget to socially and economically disadvantaged firms, achieving a congressionally mandated goal of 8 percent for FY 1994 a year early. (NASA Release 93-214)
A NASA in-house study reported that the agency's technology transfer reputation had been overblown. According to the assessment,"Technology transfer processes are non-integrated, undocumented, and too slow." The report was requested last May by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. (Washington Technology, Jan 14/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, presented Gene Roddenberry, creator of the Star Trek television series, NASA's Distinguished Public Service Medal on January 30. The medal, which was awarded posthumously, was presented to Roddenberry's widow, Majel Barrett Roddenberry. Gene Roddenberry died in October 1991.
NASA awarded the Arlington, Virginia-based Analytic Services Inc. a one-year grant to help study opportunities for cooperation among nations with space programs. (W Times, Mar 9/93)
Representatives from NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and industry described how they had worked together to take windshear advance-warning devices from the drawing board to the commercial aviation marketplace in just five years.  The windshear reports, part of a NASA/FAA conference in Hampton, Virginia, detailed development of microwave radar, laser radar, and infrared sensors that provide up to 40 seconds warning of windshear. Now NASA and the FAA were considering whether pilots should have formal training to interact with these new instruments. (NASA Release 93-270 and 93-171; AvWk, Oct. 18/93)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA was raising the number of contracts it had with small, disadvantaged and women-owned businesses. According to Goldin, $310 million would be set aside under a Determinations and Findings (D & F) to make sure that NASA awarded 8 percent to such businesses. Eight percent was the figure set by Congress. (LA Watts Times, Jan 7/93)
NASA's Inspector General told Congress that NASA is plagued with contractors who overcharge, receive bonus payments while running up huge cost overruns and employ workers who frequently sleep on the job. The agency currently has more than 400 criminal fraud investigations under way, the Inspector General told the House Government Operations Committee. (AP, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 6/93, Oct 7/93; LA Times, Oct 7/93)
In a speech delivered April 2 at the annual conference in Washington of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, outlined what NASA was doing to emphasize cultural diversity within the organization.
According to a USA Today/CNN/Gallop Poll, most Americans now feel the nation should cut or eliminate spending for the space program. Marcia Smith of the Congressional Research Service said that people are concerned about where to cut the budget, and NASA is seen as a discretionary program. The poll also revealed that people were losing faith in NASA's performance. (USA Today, Sep 7/93)
NASA's newly formed Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee met in Washington to discuss their charter and to begin developing an agenda. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who formed the group, charged them with helping NASA respond to a directive from Congress that required the agency to award 8 percent of the total value of the agency's contracts to economically and socially disadvantaged businesses and minority educational institutions involved in key NASA activities.	Goldin pledged in September that NASA would meet its 8 percent goal. In an attempt to meet his pledge. the agency identified 26 procurements that would be set aside for small disadvantaged businesses (SDBs) and for members of the Small Business Administration's 8(a) program for minority-owned firms.
NASA appointed Deidre A. Lee as Acting Associate Administrator for Procurement. She replaced Don G. Bush, who announced his intention to resign in November 1992. Since September 1991, Lee has been serving as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Procurement. Prior to that she was the Executive Officer to NASA's Acting Deputy Administrator. (NASA Release 93-11)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that he had appointed Margaret G. Finarelli to be Assistant for Strategic Planning.  Prior to her appointment, she served as NASA's Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations. (NASA Release 93-132)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that NASA would stop work on the Polar spacecraft and would continue with pre-launch activities on the Wind spacecraft. Work on Polar was to resume only after the Wind spacecraft had operated successfully on-orbit and after a reevaluation of resources needed to complete the program within budgetary limits. (NASA Release 94-75; SP News, May 16-22/94)
In September a conference on space debris was scheduled to be held at Kent University's Unit for Space Sciences in Canterbury, England. Experts from space agencies around the world were to attend the three-day conference. Kent University had become a center of expertise in the study of space debris, having mounted experiments on the subject on several spacecraft. (Times of London, Aug 21/94)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) was pushing ahead with certification of predictive wind shear systems. Robert Passman, FAA associate program manager for airborne wind shear research, said he believed airborne predictive systems worked, based on observing one on a NASA aircraft in Orlando, Florida, in 1993. He noted that the alarms from such a system correlated well with ground-based Terminal Doppler Weather Radar detection of microbursts. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave the commencement address at Tullahoma to 22 University of Tennessee Space Institute graduates. He said Congress had been supportive but the nation needed to decide where it was going. America used to have a vision and be willing to take risks, but it had lost confidence in itself and was willing to settle for mediocrity. He pointed out that the cost of the entire space program "was only a quarter of a percent of the gross national product" so canceling one program would not solve the nation's problems. (Htsvl Tms, May 13/94; Independent, May 14/94)
A study by Loren Thompson, Deputy Director of Georgetown University's National Security Studies Program, was one of several major sources examining the U.S. space industry's growing challenge from competition and domination by foreign governments' expanding space programs and their successes with smaller but cheaper launch vehicles.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced a report by the General Aviation Task Force of NASA's Aeronautics Advisory Committee. The report of the industry-led task force called on NASA to revitalize its general aviation program, make its wind tunnels, laboratories and simulators more accessible to the general aviation community, and better balance its technology program to meet general aviation needs. The four areas on which the report called on NASA to concentrate were: propulsion, noise, and emissions work; aeronautical systems research; structure and materials development; and aerodynamics research. (NASA Release 94-29; Wichita Eagle, Feb 26/94)
While visiting the University of Tennessee, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA had to share responsibility for the failure of the canceled Commercial Experimental Transporter (Comet) spacecraft program. The University of Tennessee Space Institute (UTSI) managed the project, which involved other universities and private contractors. The goal was to provide a lower cost alternative for ferrying private industrial experiments into orbit. Goldin said UTSI was not to blame for the cost overruns that nearly doubled the project's price; in retrospect, NASA should have been more active and offered help to UTSI. (AP, May 13/94)
Drucella Andersen, who served as head of public affairs for aeronautics at NASA, moved to the Federal Aviation Administration as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. (W Post, Aug 19/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was the scheduled keynote speaker for an October 27-28 conference at Auburn University on the past, present, and future of the U.S. space program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 17/94)
NASA announced that in cooperation with the Civil Air Patrol and the Federal Aviation Administration it was hosting a national conference for educators on "Aviation and Space Education: America's Leading Edge" in Norfolk, Virginia, April 6-9. (NASA Release 94-46)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number of management appointments and organization structural changes at NASA Headquarters and various field centers. The changes will affect NASA science, technology, research facilities and major programs, as well as the agency's Advisory Committee structure.
NASA announced the creation of an Office of Policy and Plans at NASA headquarters, with Alan Ladwig as Associate Administrator. Previously, Ladwig had been a senior space policy analyst in private industry. (NASA Release 94-181)
NASA announced that 100 girls, ages nine to 15, were to join the NASA Headquarters workforce on April 28. (NASA Release 94-60; AP, Apr 20/94)
Former CBS news anchor Walter Cronkite was quoted as saying that in view of the lack of a guarantee that money saved from the space program would be used for urgent needs such as health, housing, education, and crime, the United States could not afford not to continue going into outer space. (LA Times, Jun 21/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Brigadier General Elmer T. Brooks, USAF (Retired), as Deputy Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Communications (OSC) at NASA Headquarters. Charles Force, Associate Administrator for Space Communications, commented on the problems facing NASA's use of telecommunications technologies with reduced funding. OSC was responsible for planning, development, and operation of NASA's worldwide communications, telemetry, and data acquisition activities. (NASA Release 94-9)
NASA announced that two companies had been recognized as minority contractor and subcontractor of the year for their outstanding contributions to the space program. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named ERC, Inc., Tullahoma, Tennessee, as Minority Contractor of the Year and BST Systems, Inc., Plainfield, Connecticut, as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 94-163)
An audit report by NASA's inspector general, which was still in draft, noted that NASA could have saved almost $6 million in business travel costs in 1993 by flying available commercial flights instead of using NASA aircraft. As a result, NASA planned to rewrite rules for the use of its planes, according to Laurie Boeder, associate NASA administrator for public affairs. Jack Anderson's column contained a critical account of NASA travel concentrating on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's use of NASA aircraft in the six-month period from October 1, 1992 through March 31, 1993, which reportedly cost taxpayers $514,000 more than if he had flown a commercial airline. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; W Post, Dec 19/94)
A biographic account of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stressed his enthusiasm for sending humans into space combined with a tremendous work ethic. As an administrator at aerospace manufacturer TRW, he developed strong ideas about what was wrong with the space program and how to fix it. Space advisers to President George Bush found NASA unresponsive to change and decided to offer the NASA Administrator's job to Goldin. Among his management tools, Goldin said, was the creative use of chaos. (W Post, Jul 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin paid a 90-minute visit to Rocketdyne's main factory in Canoga Park. He said the company had made some progress in correcting quality control problems that caused two shuttle launches to be aborted seconds before liftoff and two other scheduled flights to be postponed. (LA Times, Apr 1/94)
The pressure on California's space firms to adapt to a new mission, survival, in view of congressional budgetcutting and constant funding problems was highlighted. The role of commercial firms in the space industry as opposed to NASA was raised as was the fact that the space program no longer revolved around competition with the Soviet Union. (LA Times, Jul 6/94)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced their joint sponsorship of a general aviation design competition for students at U.S. aeronautical and engineering universities. Teams of graduate and undergraduate students, working with faculty advisers, were to develop a multidisciplinary design for a general aviation aircraft. (NASA Release 94-102)
Another article in the same newspaper commended NASA for having learned the secret to getting along with Congress: humility equaled stability. NASA had done its homework prior to submitting its budget request and got almost everything it asked for. The writer gave most of the credit to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin whose mantra of "cheaper, better, faster" had forced NASA staff to wake up to reality. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)
In a written statement, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said the Department of Energy had told his office that NASA was "involved in the sponsorship or co-sponsorship of some human experiments to determine the effects of radiation" during the 1960s and 1970s. Goldin did not say what experiments had taken place. He promised a full public accounting. "There is no place in this agency for human medical experimentation conducted in secrecy or without full respect for human dignity of each and every participant," the statement said.
NASA announced the appointment of Robert E. Whitehead as Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release 94-23)
NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Services Inc., Vienna, Virginia, to provide Information Resources Management Support at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release C94-gg; Federal Computer Week, Oct 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had an extensive interview with US Black Engineer (USBE) Magazine on his past and current experience, commitment, and achievements in promoting minority advancement in the aerospace field. He detailed how in his long career in rising through the field he had worked for minority progress.
NASA, together with the U.S. Department of Energy, the U.S. Department of Defense Information Systems Agency, AT&T, and Foxworth & Dinkins, a Washington, D.C.-based marketing firm, sponsored a three-day conference at Clark-Atlanta University November 7-9 that brought representatives of the 117 historically black colleges and universities to explore the opportunities for minority students in science and mathematics. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was one of the conference speakers. (Atlanta Business Chronicle, Nov 11-17/94)
Galileo�s tape recorder, which had been balky, is again working. Scientists will avoid using the magnetic tape near either end of the reel to reduce the power needed to operate the recorder. (NASA Releases 95-168, 182, 188 & 193; NY Times, Oct 21/95; W Post, Oct 13/95, Oct 23/95 & Oct 29/95; Fla Today, Nov 5/95; Space News, Oct 16/95, Oct 23/95, Oct 30/95 & Dec 11/95; AvWk, Oct 23/95, & Oct 30/95; Science, Oct 27/95)
A new generation of air traffic control tools are being field tested at the Denver International Airport. The Center-TRACON Automation System (CTAS) became its primary traffic management tool the day it opened on February 28. CTAS was designed with the involvement of the ultimate users, the controllers and the pilots. It consists of three software systems: the Decent Advisor (DA), an air/ground datalink system, and advanced cockpit automation. The DA has routinely met its goal of reducing arrival time prediction accuracy to under 20 seconds. In addition to reducing traffic controller workload, CTAS will increase aircraft fuel efficiency and reduce delays. The field tests are jointly conducted by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) which contemplate more such fruitful partnerships in the future. (NASA Releases 95-66, 198 & 150; AvWk, Jul 31/95, Aug 21/95 & Oct 30/95)
An internal NASA review team has produced proposals that include sweeping management and organizational changes to cut spending an additional $5 billion by the end of the decade. (NASA Releases 95-65, 73, 123 & 132; NY Times, May 20/95)
An early goal of NASA�s proposed New Millennium program is to test highly sophisticated space hardware to prove that scientific spacecraft can be built more than 30 percent smaller without sacrificing performance. The first New Millennium spacecraft will explore a comet, an asteroid, or some combination of them. Three deep space missions are to be flown by the year 2000. (NASA Releases 95-100 & 155; Space News, Feb 13/95, Jun 5/95 & Sep 4/95; AvWk, May 15/95 & Sep 25/95)
�National Leadership/National Partnership� is NASA�s theme at the Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) Fly-In Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition July 27-August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin. A featured exhibit identifies unique partnerships formed between government, industry, and academia to revitalize the general aviation industry in areas ranging from modernizing cockpits to reducing aircraft weight and cost. Highlighted are activities of selected companies developing general aviation technology through the NASA Small Business Innovation Research (SBIRP) program. (NASA Releases 95-119, 128, 129 & 174)
Supersonic Laminar Flow Control (SLFC) experiment may apply to High-Speed Civil Transport (HSCT) which could fly twice as fast as today�s typical airliner. SLFC is a special structure mounted on the wing of an F-16XL. (NASA Releases 95-124 & 184; Interavia, Jan/95; AvWk, Oct 23/95)
The Chicago Fire Department has signed a Space Act agreement to explore ways space technology can be used to enhance emergency services. Candidate activities include: locating firefighters within a 2,400 foot area; monitoring the vibration signature of a burning structure to determine when the firefighters must be evacuated; checking into the feasibility of using liquid oxygen in a new breathing apparatus; identifying the location of an emergency 911 call made from a cellular phone; and warning hearing impaired drivers of an approaching emergency vehicle. (NASA Releases 95-51 & 116; Space News, Apr 24/95; C Trib, Apr 20/95)
NASA appointed Samuel L. Venneri as Chief Technologist at NASA Headquarters, reporting directly to Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. The appointment placed Venneri in charge of all of NASA’s technology policy initiatives and programs. Venneri had served at NASA since 1981, after working as an aerospace consultant for Swales and Associates and as an engineer for Fairchild Space Electronics.(NASA, “Venneri Named NASA Chief Technology Officer,” news release 96-240, 15 November 1996.)
NASA announced the selection of eight proposals for its newly inaugurated Advanced Concepts Research Projects (ACRP) program. NASA had received more than 100 proposals for the program, founded in September 1995 to identify and support new ideas and technologies that might eventually improve the U.S. space program. The ACRP program, allowing up to US$250,000 in support for each selected proposal, included proposals covering a wide spectrum of technologies and fields, such as: “fusion-based space propulsion, optical computing, robotics, interplanetary navigation, materials and structure, ultra-lightweight large aperture optics, and innovative modular spacecraft architectural concepts.”(NASA, “Innovative Space Concepts Selected for Negotiations,” news release 96-28, 12 February 1996.)
A group of astronomers announced that they had used NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer to observe a black hole “literally dragging space and time around itself as it rotates.” The discovery confirmed the existence of frame dragging, an extrapolation of Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity. According to the findings, the black hole had such a massive gravitational field that nothing nearby, not even light, could escape its pull. To make the discovery, the team of researchers brought together academic scientists from Italy and the United States, as well as NASA personnel. By studying x-ray emissions, the astronomers were able to find a pattern of forces that clearly revealed the strength of the black hole’s gravitational pull. Alan N. Bunner, Director of the Structure and Evolution of the Universe Program at NASA Headquarters, called the discovery “exciting work,” encouraging scientists to test the findings. Before the discovery, frame dragging persisted as one of the last unverifiable theories of relativity, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to observe. Popular press reports touted the breakthrough as another victory for Einstein.(NASA, “First Observation of Space-Time Distortion by Black Holes,” news release 97-258, 6 November 1997; K.C. Cole, “Finding Backs Einstein’s Theory of Gravity,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Score Another One for Einstein,” Washington Post, 7 November 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin publicly acknowledged for the first time that the ISS would cost more than originally proposed, with a revised cost of US$21.3 billion, and would take longer to assemble than was initially planned, with a revised completion date of December 2003. Since 1993, NASA had consistently reported that the cost of the ISS would be US$17.4 billion, and had targeted a 2002 completion date. The revised cost was 200 percent more than the original US$8 billion estimate in President Ronald Reagan’s 1984 proposal.(Larry Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun Now Pegged at $6 Billion,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 March 1998. 436 NASA, “New Global Surveyor Data Reveals Deeply Layered Terrain, Magnetic Features and Genesis of a Martian Dust Storm,” news release 98-45, 13 March 1998.)
At the 13th annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented five aerospace companies with the 1998 George M. Low Award, NASA’s highest “quality and excellence” award for contractors and subcontractors. The companies, representing both large and small businesses, were ILC Dover Inc. of Frederica, Delaware; Allied Signal Technical Services Corporation of Lanham, Maryland; DynCorp, Johnson Support Division of Houston, Texas; BST Systems Inc. of Plainfield, Connecticut; and Advanced Technology Company of Pasadena, California. Administrator Goldin said, “these companies exemplify excellence and outstanding achievements that prove beneficial to NASA and the [n]ation’s industry.” Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory added, “each of these companies has definitely made a positive impact on NASA’s performance goals.”(NASA, “NASA Awards Five Firms the George M. Low Award,” news release 98-74, 1 May 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Lori B. Garver as Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Policy and Plans, effective immediately. Garver had served as Acting Associate Administrator since September 1998. She had begun working for NASA in 1996 as Special Assistant to the Administrator. Before joining NASA, she had been Executive Director of the National Space Society, since 1987, and a president of Women in Aerospace. Goldin remarked that Garver’s experience inside and outside NASA had “proven invaluable,” and that she had demonstrated the management skills and policy leadership that her new position required.(NASA, “Garver Named Associate Administrator for Policy and Plans,” news release 99-6, 25 January 1999.)
Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell, at NASA’s JPL, announced the resumption of the spacecraft’s observations. Cassini had operated without any problems, since scientists had reactivated its reaction-wheel system on 21 December.(Associated Press, “NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter,” 28 December 2000; NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Cassini Passes Through Asteroid Belt,” news release, 28 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=4 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
NASA named award-winning broadcast journalist Bob Jacobs as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters. Before joining NASA, Jacobs had served for four years as Projects Manager for the Washington-based Broadcast Technology Division of the Associated Press, where he helped to develop and implement newsroom management technology. Clients had included the British Broadcasting Corporation, ESPN, National Public Radio, and CBS News. Jacobs had won an Emmy award and other regional honors for excellence in journalism.(NASA, “News Chief Named at NASA Headquarters,” news release 00-150, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-150.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, 1976 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physiology and Medicine, as Senior Advisor to the Administrator, effective immediately. While continuing in his position as Director of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute, Blumberg would also provide guidance to NASA’s newly created Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR), an interdisciplinary effort combining research in biology, physics, chemistry, and engineering. Goldin also announced that NASA would begin a search, headed by Blumberg and NASA Chief Scientist Kathie L. Olsen, to fill the position of Associate Administrator for the new OBPR and other key positions. Olsen would serve as Acting Associate Administrator until NASA had filled the position.(NASA, “Nobel Prize Laureate Appointed as Senior NASA Advisor,” news release 00-164, 16 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-164.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would merge the Office of the Chief Technologist and the Office of Aero-Space Technology, to better facilitate NASA’s technological advancements. According to Goldin, placing a range of issues, from IT operation to technology-based research, under the domain of a single leader would promote IT compatibility. Goldin appointed Chief Technologist Samuel L. Venneri to head the new Office, giving Venneri the responsibility of developing a long-term strategy to keep NASA at the forefront of technological development. Goldin also tasked Venneri with forging new relationships with companies using technologies similar to the type that NASA developed and used. Venneri had been NASA’s Chief Technologist since 1996.(NASA, “Goldin Names Venneri To Head Merged Technology, Aero-Space Office; New Chief Engineer Appointed,” news release 00-21, 7 February 2000.)
Shuttle Endeavour returned safely to Earth after a successful 11-day voyage. The scientific community and the public greeted the Shuttle’s return with even more fanfare than usual, because the crew had obtained stunning images of Earth. Endeavour’s six-person crew had worked nearly around the clock, keeping radar antennas running to compile the data for three- dimensional digital maps of Earth’s surface. The crew had gathered more than 300 digital tapes of radar data during the mission, which NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called “one of the most challenging, difficult missions we ever undertook.” The mission had successfully mapped 43.5 million square miles (113 million square kilometers) of Earth’s terrain. NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency expected that transferring the data into readable maps would take between one and two years. NASA had obtained the images primarily for the U.S. Department of Defense, to improve the accuracy of missiles and to assist in navigation for military planes and troops.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Returns with Dazzling Images of the Home Planet,” 22 February 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Astronauts End Earth-Mapping Work,” 22 February 2000; Chicago Tribune, “Mission: Map the Earth,” 22 February 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recognized members of the Space Shuttle’s ice and debris inspection team for their work on 10 October, leading to the discovery of a stray 4-inch (10- centimeter) pin near the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, hours before the scheduled launch of STS- 92. In response to the find, NASA had delayed the launch for 24 hours to allow the team to retrieve the pin, thereby preventing the damage that would have ensued if the pin had been sucked into the Shuttle’s thermal protection system or into a main engine. Goldin awarded employees Gregory N. Katnik and Jorge E. Rivera NASA’s Exceptional Achievement Medal, an honor recognizing significant contributions to the mission of NASA through substantial and significant improvements in operations, efficiency, service, financial savings, science, or technology. United Space Alliance employees Michael Barber, John B. Blue, and Thomas F. Ford received NASA’s Public Service Medal, an award given to individuals who are not government employees but make exceptional contributions to NASA’s mission.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Inspection Team Rewarded for Its ‘Eagle Eyes’,” news release 00-165, 18 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-165.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin began an official visit to Morocco to discuss space cooperation. He planned to meet with several Moroccan officials, particularly in the fields of scientific research and advanced technology, and to visit facilities in Morocco capable of launching Space Shuttles.(BBC, “Morocco: NASA Official Visits for Talks on Space Cooperation,” RTM TV (Rabat, Morocco), 9 August 2000.)
The National Partnership for Reinventing Government (NPR) released the results of a survey indicating that NASA employees had the highest level of job satisfaction among federal government employees. NASA employees rated very favorably in the categories of employee job satisfaction, customer orientation, making reinvention a priority, management communication, and employee participation in cross-functional teams. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the survey’s findings, stating, “I am incredibly proud of these results. They represent a strong statement of the top-to-bottom excellence of the NASA team.” NPR and the Office of Personnel Management administered the survey to understand employees’ perspectives on “reinvention and workplace issues.” When informed of NASA’s outstanding score, Keith Cowing, the editor of Nasawatch.com remarked, “I’m not at all surprised. I used to work there. I loved my job.”(NASA, “Survey Shows NASA Employees Among Most Satisfied Federal Workers,” news release 00-52, 31 March 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and H. Fisk Johnson, President of the Wisconsin-based private venture-capital company Fisk Ventures Inc. (FVI), signed an agreement to “explore a new frontier in biotechnology.” Johnson had approached NASA regarding its efforts to commercialize space activities, suggesting a partnership. NASA and FVI agreed to use NASA’s bioreactor to develop commercial medical products. The bioreactor technology creates a near- weightless environment enabling cells to grow three-dimensionally. When raised in a traditional Petri dish, growing cells are flat. FVI had formed a joint venture with In Vitro Technologies Inc., called StelSys LLC, to focus on commercializing microgravity research in areas related to biological systems. StelSys paid NASA a US$100,000 licensing fee and a royalty of 5 percent of the company’s profits, capped at US$2 million, for the rights to 13 patents for the bioreactor technology for five years. NASA planned to use the bioreactor on the ISS, and StelSys intended to use it to research infectious diseases and to develop a liver-assist device for patients in need of transplant surgery. Goldin remarked that the agreement was “a symbol of the success that can be achieved when government, private industry, and academia work together on the exploration of new frontiers for scientific, technological, and economic growth.”(NASA, “Landmark Commercial Agreement Gives Biotechnology Research a New Dimension,” news release 00- 143, 14 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-143.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Laura Heinauer, “NASA Signs First Major Contract for Private Biotech Development,” Wall Street Journal, 14 September 2000.)
NASA named Daniel R. Mulville as Acting Administrator, to serve until the U.S. Senate had officially confirmed a new Administrator. Mulville was to replace previous NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin while Sean O’Keefe―President George W. Bush’s nominee for the position―was awaiting Senate confirmation. Before becoming Acting Administrator, Mulville had served as Associate Deputy Administrator for NASA since the beginning of 2000. Mulville, who had a PhD in structural mechanics, had begun working at NASA in 1986.(NASA History Division, “Biographies of NASA Administrators: Daniel R. Mulville,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/mulville.htm (accessed 19 December 19, 2008).)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Sean O’Keefe as NASA’s Administrator. With the confirmation, O’Keefe replaced Daniel S. Goldin as Administrator and, at the age of 45, became the youngest person ever to lead NASA. Before becoming NASA’s Administrator, O’Keefe had served as Deputy Director of OMB, a post he had held since March 2001. O’Keefe had also served as Secretary of the Navy under former President George H. W. Bush.(Kristen Mack and Mark Carreau, “Senate Approves O’Keefe as NASA Administrator, Hammond as NEA Head,” Houston Chronicle, 21 December 2001.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced his selection of an independent task force to assess the productivity and priorities of the research produced by NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) and to provide a report to the NASA Advisory Council. O’Keefe expected the task force, designated the Research Maximization and Prioritization Task Force (ReMAP), to recommend strategies the OBPR could use to achieve its research goals and still remain within President George W. Bush’s requested budget. In addition, O’Keefe requested the task force to offer assessments and recommendations to guide NASA in maximizing the scientific returns of the ISS’s missions and of its other programs. O’Keefe selected Rae Silver, the Helene L. and Mark N. Kaplan Professor of Natural and Physical Sciences at Columbia University, as the chairperson of ReMAP.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names Task Force To Review Biological and Physical Research Programs,” news release 02-61, 29 March 2002.)
The Research Maximization and Prioritization Task Force (ReMAP) presented the executive summary of its external review to the NASA Advisory Council. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had created ReMAP in March 2002 to recommend strategies that NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) could use to achieve its research goals within budgetary limits. Among its recommendations, ReMAP suggested that the ISS include a chief science officer on board, and that NASA increase the ISS’s equipment, the ISS crew’s work time, and the frequency of Shuttle flights, to enable the crew to conduct first-rate research aboard the station.(NASA, “ReMaP Task Force Recognized by NASA Administrator and NASA Advisory Council Chair,” news release 02-123, 10 July 2002; Warren E. Leary, “Panel Asserts Reduced Space Station Plans Will Limit Scientific Work,” New York Times, 11 July 2002.)
The White House informed NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe that it was withdrawing Major General Charles F. Bolden as its nominee for NASA’s Deputy Administrator. According to a White House spokesperson, President George W. Bush had withdrawn the nomination so that Bolden could serve the military in the war on terrorism. At the time of the nomination, Bolden, a former astronaut, was the commanding general for the Third U.S. Marine Aircraft Wing, which had nearly 11,000 U.S. Marines in Afghanistan as part of Operation Enduring Freedom.(NASA, “Deputy Administrator Nomination Withdrawn,” news release 02-49, 13 March 2002; Mark Carreau and Bennett Roth, “Nomination Is Withdrawn for Deputy’s Post at NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 14 March 2002.)
Citing terrorism concerns, NASA officials stated that NASA planned to change the manner in which it released information about launch times to the public. NASA officials said that NASA would no longer publicize launch times until 24 hours before liftoff, at which time NASA would announce a 4-hour time slot during which liftoff would occur. The change was a reversal of NASA’s previous practice of announcing specific launch times months in advance of liftoff.(Steve Siceloff, “NASA To Withhold Shuttle Launch Times,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 March 2002. 64)
NASA selected the National Consortium for Aviation Mobility (NCAM)a consortium of more than 100 public and private entities involved in transportation issuesas its partner in a joint venture to develop air-mobility technologies for small aircraft and small airports. By mid-2005 NASA and NCAM intended to create a flight demonstration, called a proof-of-concept, of NASA’s Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS). Engineers planned for the system to provide on-demand, point-to-point transportation with 4- to 10-passenger aircraft operating from nearly 5,400 public-use landing facilities. NASA officials hoped SATS would improve the affordability, efficiency, reliability, and safety of small aircraft servicing small communities throughout the United States. However, NASA wanted to determine the project’s feasibility and to share its costs through partnerships with public and private entities. NASA expected that funding from the Department of Transportation and other federal agencies, along with its own contributions, would total nearly US$40 million for research over four years.(NASA, “NASA Selects Partner for Aviation Research,” news release 02-89, 14 May 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Jeremiah F. Creedon, Director of NASA’s LaRC, as the new Associate Administrator for the Office of Aerospace Technology at NASA Headquarters. Creedon had begun working at LaRC in June 1963 as an engineer, eventually succeeding Paul F. Holloway to become LaRC’s seventh director. Delma C. Freeman Jr., LaRC’s Deputy Director, became its Acting Director.(NASA LaRC, “NASA Administrator Names Langley Director Associate Administrator of Aerospace Technology,” news release 02-037, 14 May 2002; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
GAO released a report examining NASA’s established mechanisms for learning lessons from past failures. The report, “NASA: Better Mechanisms for Sharing Lessons Learned,” noted that NASA’s investigations of its past failures and its evaluations of its programs had led it to establish various mechanisms to ensure that NASA’s personnel had learned from past successes and failures and had applied their knowledge to future programs and projects. These mechanisms included a Web-based database of lessons learned, program reviews, and the development of a business strategy called knowledge management. However, GAO’s report also noted that, according to interviews with NASA managers, NASA’s established policies, procedures, and systems were not facilitating the use of lessons learned. GAO indicated that this was largely because managers faced challenges, such as lack of time to note, submit, and share lessons learned, and cultural barriers, such as reluctance to discuss mistakes for fear of their colleagues’ disapproval. Among the report’s main recommendations were that NASA develop a strong managerial commitment to sharing knowledge and create technological systems capable of facilitating access to this information.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA: Better Mechanisms Needed for Sharing Lessons Learned” (report no. GAO-02-195, Washington, DC, January 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02195.pdf (accessed 31 July 2002). 181 NASA, “Aging NASA Spacecraft To Reenter Earth’s Atmosphere,” news release 02-16, 29 January 2002; NASA, “EUVE Spacecraft Re-enters Earth’s Atmosphere,” news release 02-19, 31 January 2002; NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “EUVE Guest Observer FacilityThe Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Mission,” http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/euve/euvegof.html (accessed 30 July 2002).)
NASA announced the selection of 15 organizations from industry, government, and academia to carry out 22 propulsion-technology research proposals in five areas of the In-Space Propulsion Program: aerocapture, advanced chemical propulsion, solar-electric propulsion, space-based tether propulsion, and solar-sail technologies. The goal of the program, under the management of the Office of Space Sciences at NASA Headquarters, was to make exploration of deep space more practical, affordable, and productive.(NASA, “NASA Selects In-Space Propulsion Innovations for Research,” contract release C03-q, 16 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03Q.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
In response to the anticipated recommendations of the CAIB, NASA announced its plans to create an independent NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) at NASA’s LaRC, providing a central location to coordinate engineering and safety assessment for all of NASA. The NESC, expected to draw on the talents of 250 staff throughout NASA to conduct analysis and share technical information, would report to Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. Bryan D. O’Connor, Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, would have responsibility for policy. NASA intended for the NESC to provide independent assessment and testing of engineering, in support of critical NASA projects and programs; to conduct reviews and evaluations of engineering and safety; to provide a central location for trend analysis; to provide a structure to support engineering collaboration for problem resolution; to provide central coordination of engineering and programmatic lessons learned, technical standardization, and development of technical discipline expertise; and to provide independent inspection and validation of activities to ensure the constant maintenance of NASA safety standards.(NASA, “NASA Announces Independent Engineering and Safety Center,” news release 03-239, 15 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03239_safety_center.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Warren E. Leary, “In Response to Panel, NASA Plans Safety Center,” New York Times, 16 July 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of David A. King as the new Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, effective 15 June. NASA would reassign Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson, in preparation for his planned January 2004 retirement from NASA. King had been MSFC’s Deputy Director since November 2002, assisting Stephenson in managing a range of propulsion, space science, and materials research, as well as development work. NASA had also dispatched King to Lufkin, Texas, within hours of the Columbia disaster, to serve as the senior on-site NASA official in the search-and-recovery effort. In that capacity, he had created critical, initial work processes; established effective working relationships among federal and state government agencies; and set the foundation for the two subsequent NASA officials who would share responsibility for leading effective recovery efforts. Before serving as Deputy Director of MSFC, King had been Deputy Director of Shuttle Processing, Launch Director of six Shuttle missions, and Director of Shuttle Processing at NASA’s KSC. As Director of Shuttle Processing at KSC, he had managed and coordinated all Space Shuttle processing, launch, and landing operations and had made the final determination to launch during the three-day countdown process.(NASA, “David A. King Named Marshall Space Flight Center Director,“ news release 03-181, 23 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/03181_king_msfc_director.html (accessed 20 November 2008); Patty Reinert, “Marshall Space Flight Center Chief Will Leave Post in January,” Houston Chronicle, 21 May 2003.)
NASA announced the replacement of its Mishap Response Team with the newly formed NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT), which would continue to support the CAIB. NASA had formed the Mishap Response Team within hours of the Columbia disaster on 1 February but had drawn criticism for the team’s composition, which included staff that had directly overseen the Shuttle’s mission. Linda Ham had led the Mishap Response Team, even though, as a senior Shuttle program manager, she had assisted in making key decisions during the 16-day Columbia mission. NASA and the CAIB intended for the NAIT to support the CAIB, and they had organized the NAIT to mirror the CAIB’s structure, with three subsections: materials, operations, and engineering. NASA had appointed Deputy Director of JSC Randy Stone to chair the NAIT.(NASA, “NASA Columbia Accident Support Activities Reorganized,” news release 03-113, 21 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03113.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Robyn Suriano, “New Team Created To Help with Shuttle Probe,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 March 2003.)
U.S. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN), senior Democrat on the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, introduced H. R. 2450, the Human Space Flight Independent Investigation Commission Act, in an effort to ensure that future investigations of human spaceflight accidents would remain independent and “free from any perception that [NASA] is hiding something.” Gordon had wanted President George W. Bush to appoint an independent commission, free of any NASA personnel, to investigate the Columbia disastersimilar to the commission that had investigated the Challenger accident in 1986. Instead, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had to revise the charter of the CAIB three times before the Board had attained a measure of independence. Moreover, the Board still included one NASA official and relied on NASA staff, an arrangement that Gordon feared would undermine the credibility of the CAIB’s final report. H.R. 2450 proposed that, in the event of another disaster, the investigative panel would follow the Challenger model, requiring a 15-member commission, with the chairperson of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) serving as a member and the President of the United States appointing the other 14. Under the terms of the Act, commission members would have diverse backgrounds, although some would also have spaceflight and accident investigation experience. The resolution also stipulated that NASA personnel could not serve, either on the investigative panel or on its staff. The commission would have subpoena powers and would report its findings simultaneously to the President, Congress, and the public.(Leonard David, “Lawmaker Calls for Independent Space Accident Investigations,” Space.com, 16 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_gordon_030616.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
ESA’s Science Programme Committee approved a proposal to extend the operation of the Ulysses spacecraft―a joint project of ESA and NASA―until March 2008. NASA had already approved continuing the spacecraft’s operations. The two space agencies had designed the spacecraft to study the heliosphere, a region of space influenced by the Sun and its magnetic field. Scientists of the agencies hoped that the continued operations of Ulysses would help them better understand the Sun. Since the 1990 launch of Ulysses, ESA and NASA both had launched additional fleet of solar and heliospheric spacecraft: NASA’s Cassini, ESA’s four Cluster satellites, and another collaborative project between ESA and NASA, the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO).(ESA, “Ulysses Mission Home: Ulysses Mission Extended,” http://sci.esa.int/science- e/www/object/index.cfm?fobjectid=34647 (accessed 4 February 2009).)
NASA’s Genesis space capsule returned to Earth but experienced a problematic landing, which NASA officials feared might have damaged the capsule’s scientific cargo. NASA had launched Genesis in August 2001 to collect particle samples from solar winds, samples that scientists hoped would provide information about the solar system’s chemical composition during its formation stages. To return Genesis to Earth, NASA had designed the capsule to release a rectangular parachute, which helicopters would grab, gently lowering the spacecraft to Earth. However, the parachute failed to deploy, and Genesis crashed into a desert area of Utah at nearly 200 miles per hour (322 kilometers per hour). Although NASA officials were uncertain about the extent of damage to the spacecraft’s cargo, their initial prognosis was that researchers could still use some of the samples in scientific analyses.(Guy Gugliotta, “Spacecraft Crashes with Solar Data,” Washington Post, 9 September 2004; NASA JPL, “Genesis: Mission History―Launch,” 23 June 2008, http://genesismission.jpl.nasa.gov/gm2/mission/launch.htm (accessed 7 May 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe submitted his resignation in a handwritten letter to President George W. Bush. In his resignation, O’Keefe stated that he would continue serving as Administrator until Bush had named a successor, but that he would prefer to leave by February 2005. O’Keefe cited family commitments and his interest in pursuing better economic opportunities as the reasons for his resignation. Major media speculated about candidates to replace O’Keefe, but the White House provided no details about its choice for a successor. Before becoming NASA’s Administrator in December 2001, O’Keefe had worked for the OMB.(Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Chief Formally Steps Down,” Washington Post, 14 December 2004; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Leader Cites Finances and Submits His Resignation,” New York Times, 14 December 2004.)
During its 179th meeting, held at the European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt, Germany, the ESA Council elected Sigmar Wittig as its Chair, effective 1 July 2005. Wittig, head of the German delegation to ESA and the Chair of the Executive Board of the German Aerospace Center (Deutsche Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt), replaced Per Tegnér of Sweden, whose term of office was ending on 30 June 2005. The ESA Council is ESA’s governing body and provides policy guidelines for ESA’s space programs.
The National Research Council (NRC) released a study of civil aeronautics research and technology priorities that NASA and other government agencies should pursue in the coming decade. The U.S. Congress and NASA had requested the NRC to produce a report identifying aeronautics technologies that would support and improve the U.S. air transportation system. In its report, the NRC stated that NASA and other agencies should pursue aeronautics research and technology that advances the U.S. air system’s capacity, safety, reliability, efficiency, and performance, and reduces the system’s energy consumption and environmental impact. The report also suggested that civil aeronautics R&T should support the U.S. space program and take advantage of synergies with defense. In addition, the NRC outlined five areas of high-priority aeronautics R&T, areas that researchers at NASA and other U.S. agencies should pursue to attain the identified strategic objectives. Those areas included 1) aerodynamics and aeroacoustics; 2) propulsion and power; 3) materials and structures; 4) dynamics, navigation and control, and avionics; and 5) intelligent and autonomous systems, operations and decision making, human integrated systems, and networking and communications.(National Research Council, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006).)
The National Research Council Space Studies Board released its study, An Assessment of Balance in NASA’s Science Programs, concluding that NASA “does not have the necessary resources to carry out the tasks of completing the ISS, returning humans to the Moon, maintaining vigorous space and Earth science and microgravity life and physical sciences programs, and sustaining capabilities in aeronautical research.” Study chair Lennard A. Fisk, University of Michigan space scientist and former NASA Associate Administrator, stated that the study committee was “particularly concerned that the shortfall in funding for science has fallen disproportionately on small missions and on funding for basic research and technology. These actions run the risk of disrupting the pipeline of human capital and technology that is essential for the future success of the space program.” The conference report (H. Rep. No.108- 792), which accompanied H.R. 4818 (Pub. L. No.108-447), the bill appropriating FY 2005 funds for NASA, had mandated the study.(Guy Gugliotta, “ NASA Underfunded, Panel Reports,” Washington Post, 5 May 2006; National Academy of Sciences, Office of News and Public Information, “NASA Lacks Resources To Sustain Vigorous Science Program,” news release, 4 May 2006, http://www8.nationalacademies.org/ onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=11644 (accessed 16 March 2010); National Research Council, Space Studies Board, An Assessment of Balance in NASA’s Science Programs (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), 29, http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php? record_id=11644 (accessed 16 March 2010).)
Boeing completed a developmental heat shield for NASA’s Orion CEV. In 2006 NASA’s ARC had awarded Boeing Advanced Systems a contract to develop a demonstration Thermal Protection System (TPS) Manufacturing Demonstration Unit (MDU) for the Orion capsule. Thomas Andrews, Boeing TPS Program Manager, stated that the TPS MDU had met NASA’s risk-reduction objectives “to move the Orion heat shield program toward full-scale development in preparation for CEV missions.” Boeing had fabricated the TPS MDU from Phenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) material. With PICA’s proven performance on NASA’s Stardust spacecraft heat shield, NASA was considering the material for Orion’s heat shield. Boeing’s integrated concept for the TPS MDU used multiple PICA components, with each piece sized significantly larger than the typical Space Shuttle tiles, greatly reducing the number of the shield’s parts, as well as its complexity.(Boeing Company, “Boeing Completes Prototype Heat Shield for NASA Orion Spacecraft,” news release, 13 November 2007, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2007/q4/071113a_nr.html (accessed 12 November 2010). 169 William Harwood, “Harmony Module Detached in Critical Relocation Operation,” CBS Space Place, 14 November 2007; Patrick Peterson, “Live in Orbit: 16 Bolts Driven, Mating Permanent,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 November 2007.)
The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) published a final rule, effective 5 June 2007, governing experimental permits for launching reusable suborbital rockets for space tourism. Under the rules, which the U.S. Congress had mandated in the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492), a single experimental permit would cover multiple vehicles of a particular design and allow an unlimited number of launches. The FAA would identify the type of design changes that it would permit the licensed launch company to make without invalidating the permit; renew the one-year permit after conducting a review; prohibit companies conducting test flights covered by an experimental permit to carry passengers for compensation or hire; establish criteria for the physical area in which a company could operate a vehicle with an experimental permit; and require a vehicle developer applying for a 47 permit to provide a program description, flight-test plan, and operational-safety documentation.
STS-118 Mission Specialist Richard A. Mastracchio and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson undertook the third EVA of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours and 28 minutes, the pair relocated the S-band antenna subassembly from the P6 truss to the P1 truss, installed a new transponder on P1, and retrieved the P6 transponder. The spacewalk ended early when Mastracchio’s spacesuit was damaged. The suit had a cut in the left thumb of the glove. Mission Control instructed Mastracchio to return to the ISS airlock as a precaution against further damage that could potentially allow air to rush out of the suit. Anderson quickly finished the task he had been working on and followed Mastracchio to the airlock.
NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale and Canadian Space Agency (CSA) President and Chief Executive Officer Laurier J. Boisvert signed the official agreement defining the terms of cooperation on the JWST, an international cooperative effort among NASA, CSA, and ESA. As the successor to NASA’s HST, the JWST would investigate the origin and evolution of galaxies, stars, and planetary systems. Under the agreement, NASA would build the spacecraft, the telescope, and the platform hosting the instruments. NASA would also be responsible for the overall management and operations of the mission. CSA would provide the fine-guidance-sensor instrument, which would give the JWST the stability needed for capturing sharp images.(NASA, “NASA and Canada Sign Agreement for Future Cooperation,” news release 07-155, 16 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07155_jwst_csa_mou.html (accessed 9 June 2010).)
likely broken into pieces too small to detect. Thomas C. Duxbury, EPOXI Project Manager,
NASA announced the appointment of Thomas B. Irvine as the new Deputy Associate Administrator of the Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, to assist Associate Administrator Jaiwon Shin in developing, managing, and planning NASA’s aeronautics research. Irvine had previously held positions as Deputy Director of the Aeronautics Test Program at NASA Headquarters; Chief of the Facility Management and Planning Office at NASA’s GRC; and Director of the Mission Support Office for the Directorate at NASA Headquarters. Irvine had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for sustained contributions to NASA’s aeronautics and spaceflight missions.(NASA, “NASA Names Irvine Deputy Associate Administrator for Aernautics,” news release 08-197, 4 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08197_Aero_Deputy.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
After the SST entered standby mode at 3:11 p.m. (PDT), NASA announced the end of its primary mission and the start of its “warm” mission. NASA had designed SST to conduct a two- and-a-half-year mission to detect infrared light from cool cosmic objects, a mission that required maintaining the telescope’s three instruments at -456°F (-271°C), the coldest temperature theoretically attainable. SST’s liquid helium, used as cryogen, had lasted twice as long as projected—more than five-and-a-half years—but Spitzer’s supply of the coolant had finally depleted. The telescope would remain cold, at -404°F (-242°C), but that temperature would be too warm to allow Spitzer’s infrared spectrograph and its longer wavelength, multiband imaging photometer to detect cool objects in space. SST Project Manager Robert K. Wilson at NASA’s JPL remarked that, with its coolant depleted, Spitzer would be “reborn,” with a mission to tackle new scientific pursuits. During its so-called warm mission, Spitzer would continue to see through the dust that permeates our galaxy, blocking visible-light views, and two channels of one of its instruments would continue to operate at full capacity. Spitzer’s two infrared-array camera detectors with short wavelengths would continue to function as designed, picking up the glow from a range of objects, such as asteroids, dusty stars, planet-forming discs, gas-giant planets, and distant galaxies. Spitzer’s new projects would include refining estimates of Hubble’s constant; searching for galaxies at the edge of the universe; assessing how often potentially hazardous asteroids might impact Earth; and characterizing the atmospheres of gas-giant planets that astronomers expected NASA’s Kepler mission would discover.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Telescope Warms Up to New Career,” news release 09-099, 6 May 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-099_Spitzer_Warms_Up.html (accessed 20 June 2011); NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Spitzer Space Telescope Mission Status,” JPL news release 15 May 2009, http://www.jpl. nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-086 (accessed 30 June 2011).)
NASA announced the restructure of its Advisory Council (NAC). During the NAC’s 29 October 2009 meeting at NASA’s ARC, NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. had added four new committees to the council: the Commercial Space, the Education and Public Outreach, the Information Technology Infrastructure, and the Technology Innovation. Bolden stated that these four new committees reflected NASA’s evolving mission under the Barack H. Obama administration. Bolden appointed Bretton Alexander, Executive Director of the Commercial Spaceflight Federation, to lead the Commercial Space committee, which would help NASA gain greater insight into the entrepreneurial marketplace. He appointed Albert J. Edmonds, former Director of the Defense Information Systems Agency, to lead the Information Technology Infrastructure committee and to advise NASA on cybersecurity issues. Bolden appointed Miles O’Brien, former CNN anchor and space correspondent, to chair the Public Outreach committee and Esther Dyson, a space travel enthusiast and investor in major commercial space firms, to lead the Technology Innovation panel.(NASA, “NASA Announces Advisory Council Chairs and Committee Structure,” news release 09-256, 2 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-256_NAC.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Debra Werner, “Bolden Adds New Voices to NASA Advisory Council,” Space News, 30 October 2009.)
