Pravda article stated that the day was “not far distant when a Soviet human being will rocket into space.”
Israel fired a multistage solid-propellent Shavit (Meteor) II rocket to an altitude of 80 kilometers, releasing a sodium-cloud meteorological payload.
Atlas booster 111-D, to be used for Ranger I, was erected on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral.
First Italian launching of scientific sounding rocket in cooperative program with United States, a Nike-Cajun launched from a range in Sardinia to a height of over 100 miles, and released a cloud of sodium vapor visible for many miles.
USAF fired a Blue Scout rocket from Point Arguello, Calif., aimed at a point some 27,600 miles out in space and over the South Pole, to measure low-energy protons originating from the Sun.
Power run completed the test series on the Kiwi B-1A reactor system being conducted at the Nevada Test Site by AEC’s Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Fourth in a series of test reactors in the joint AEC-NASA nuclear rocket propulsion program, Kiwi B-lA was disassembled for examination at the conclusion of the test runs.
NASA Aerobee research rocket with University of Michigan payload shot to 252-mile altitude from Wallops Station.
Enormous reception for Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov in Red Square, Moscow. That evening at a Kremlin reception, Premier Nikita Khrushchev made an impromptu speech in which he asserted that the Soviet Union could construct a rocket with an explosive warhead equivalent to 100 million tons of TNT.
Static test of 111 seconds’ duration of Saturn booster was successful, the final SA-1 flight qualification test of the S-I stage.
NASA selected Vitro Engineering Co. for negotiation of a design contract for an engine maintenance and disassembly building, one of the facilities to be a part of the National Nuclear Rocket Development Center.
Swedish scientists fired a U.S. Areas rocket to 55.8-mile altitude from Arctic Circle test range at Vidsel.
NASA announced that a complete F-l engine had begun a series of static test firings at Edwards Rocket Test Center, Calif.
NASA fired Nike-Asp rocket carrying aluminum thermite and sodium pellets to an altitude of 34 miles, one of a series of sodium cloud firings in connection with similar launchings in Italy.
NASA Bios (biological investigation of space) payload launched by Argo D-8 booster rocket from Pacific Missile Range, but veered sharply off course 57 seconds after launch.
F-l rocket engine tested in first of firing series of the complete flight system.
Mercury-Redstone booster for MR-4 flight was erected on pad 5 at Atlantic Missile Range.
First of four scheduled Skylark rocket firings was launched from Woomera in the joint United States-Australian ultraviolet survey of the southern skies.
Development time schedule for Dyna-Soar was reduced when DOD authorized the USAF to move directly from B-52 drop tests to unmanned and then manned orbital flights. This eliminated the previous interim stage of suborbital flights to be powered by the Titan II booster. USAF announced it was canceling the Titan II development contract held by the Martin Co. and negotiating a new contract for a larger booster.
NASA Nike-Cajun rocket launched from Wallops Station, carrying 60-pound payload ejecting explosive charges, which fired at intervals from 20- to 80-mile altitude to provide data on density of the atmosphere.
announced that it had fired new, powerful carrier rocket more than 7,400 miles to within less than five-eighths of a mile from its Central Pacific target.
Successful test of a new way to steer large-size rockets was announced by United Technology Corp., an experimental method called liquid thrust vector control (TVC), in which a gas or liquid is sprayed into the exhaust path of a rocket engine, deflecting the exhaust and thereby turning the vehicle. The test was made with a 450,000-pound-thrust solid-fuel engine.
NASA bidders conference on a contract to produce the booster (S-I) stage of the Saturn vehicle was held at the Municipal Auditorium, New Orleans.
USAF Atlas E missile made successful 5,000-mile flight at Atlantic Missile Range. The payload included the guidance equipment for the Centaur rocket, radiation sensors, and a nose cone intended for the Minuteman. Data capsule was recovered.
Solid-propellent rocket motor generating nearly 500,000 pounds of thrust was fired in a static test of 80-second duration by United Technology Corp. at Sunnyvale, Calif., under USAF contract.
NASA fired a four-stage solid-fuel Trailblazer rocket from Wallops Station, Virginia, in the first of a series of reentry tests. Two stages boosted the rocket to 167 miles; then the other two drove the nose cone down through the atmosphere at 14,000 miles per hour.
Small liquid-fuel rocket was fueled and fired while floating in ocean off Point Mugu in Aerojet-General demonstration of this launching technique.
Small rocket lift device demonstrated publicly for the first time at Fort Eustis, Va., a rocket belt developed by Bell Aero-systems, which lifted Harold M. Graham in a controlled free flight to an altitude of 15 feet and "a standup landing 150 feet from his starting point.
Aerojet-General test-fired large solid-propellent rocket motor which generated a half million pounds’ thrust, at Sacramento, Calif.
Army successfully fired a Nike-Zeus antimissile missile from White Sands Missile Range in the first flight test of all three rocket motors. During November: Studies by General Electric’s Space Sciences Laboratory, under NASA contract, disclosed that the heat barrier encountered by vehicles returning from deep space will be at least 2% times more severe than previously estimated. During November: Textron’s Bell Aerospace Corp. completed 81 flight tests with cold gas one-man propulsion system in USAF C-131 aircraft flying “Keplerian trajectories.”
Iris rocket, new solid-propellent single-stage sounding rocket, failed to attain programed flight from Wallops Island, reaching only 86 miles’ altitude instead of 160 miles.
U.S.S.R. announced that third flight of current series of Pacific tests of new multistage carrier rocket was successful.
Two experiments to measure atmospheric winds, temperature, and density in relatively high altitudes conducted from Wallops Island in two four-stage Argo D-4 rocket launches. Sodium clouds were released at near 120 statute miles and again at 228 miles in first launch, and at 118 and 230 miles in the second launch. French scientists participated by using special optical instruments to observe the brilliant orange and yellow clouds which stirred a rash of public inquiries to newspapers from hundreds of miles around.
Republic of China announced plans to initiate a rocket research
The Soviet Union announced it had fired fifth multistage rocket 7,500 miles into the Central Pacific, with all stages functioning perfectly and with the nose cone landing in the target area with a high degree of accuracy.
Army Nike-Zeus antimissile rocket with active second stage successfully fired at Point Mugu, Calif.
Plans to launch a Japanese Kappa 6 sounding rocket within a year announced by Yugoslavia.
NASA announced that Government-owned Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans would be the site for fabrication and assembly of the first stage of Saturn as well as for making stages for larger booster.
launched fourth multistage rocket 7,500 miles into the Pacific.
Navy barge Compromise, carrying first Saturn booster, stuck in the mud in the Indian River just south of Cape Canaveral. Released several hours later, the Saturn was delayed only 24 hours in its 2,200-mile journey from Huntsville.
Reported that Navy had been launching telephone poles with rocket boost in test of floating launching requirements.
NASA selected United Aircraft to make feasibility study of ion rocket application for long space flights.
AEC-NASA jointly announced plans to negotiate with an industrial team for a first-phase contract for the development of the Nerva nuclear rocket engine. Team selected for the Nerva part of Project Rover consisted of Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Electric Corp.
announced completion of its series of Pacific rocket tests with a successful shot of 7,500 miles. Since series began on September 13, Tass had announced a total of eight shots, emphasizing the accuracy of what was described as a “fundamentally new type of guidance system.”
NASA announced that instrumented Venus probe to be launched next year would be launched by an Atlas-Agena B rather than a Centaur rocket as originally planned.
Army Nike-Zeus fired from White Sands Proving Ground met all test objectives, including controlled high-velocity in the atmosphere and evaluation of solid-fuel rocket motors and guidance system.
Navy YFNB barge was obtained by NASA to serve as a replacement for the Palaemon in transporting of the Saturn booster to Cape Canaveral.
NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office invited industry to submit proposals for participation in development of Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application), a part of Project Rover initiated in 1955 by USAF-AEC.
First Saturn (SA-1) booster began water trip to Cape Canaveral on Navy barge Compromise after overland detour around Wheeler Dam.
NASA announced that Ira H. Abbott, Director of Advanced Research and Technology, would retire in January after 32 years service with NACA and NASA. Beginning with the Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929, Abbott became internationally known for his aerodynamic research, in more recent years as supervisor of X-15, supersonic transport, nuclear rocket, and advanced reentry development programs.
NASA selected GE’s Space Sciences Laboratory and Avco Corp. for negotiation of contracts to study feasibility of magneto gas dynamic electric rocket or thermal arc jet rocket engines.
Plans for the development of a two-man Mercury capsule were announced by Robert Gilruth, Director of NASA's Manned Spacecraft Center. The two-man capsule, to be built by McDon-nel Aircraft Corp., would be similar in shape to the Mercury capsule but slightly larger and two to three times heavier. Its booster rocket was announced to be the USAF Titan II, scheduled for flight test early in 1962. One of the major objectives in the two-man capsule program would be a test of orbital rendezvous, in which the two-man capsule would be put into orbit by the Titan II and would attempt to rendezvous with an Agena stage put into orbit by an Atlas rocket. Total cost for a dozen two-man capsules plus boosters and other equipment was estimated at $500,000,000. Program name later announced as Gemini.
Segmented solid-propellent rocket engine fired by United Technology Corp. at Sunnyvale, generating over 200,000 pounds of thrust in 80-second firing. Developed under NASA contract, center section of engine contained over 55,000 pounds of propellant, the largest single piece yet manufactured in the United States.
Army launched Speedball rocket successfully from the island of Roi-Namur on Kwajalein atoll in the Southwest Pacific, the first target rocket to be used in Nike-Zeus development.
Aerojet-General Corp. announced first successful underwater launching of a liquid-fueled rocket, an Aerobee fired from a water test basin at Azuza, Calif.
Titan II, an advanced ICBM and the booster designated for NASA’s two-man orbital flights, was successfully captive-fired for the first time at the Martin Co.’s Denver facilities. The test not only tested the flight vehicle but the checkout and launch equipment intended for operational use.
Soviet Marshal Kiril S. Moskalenko, chief of rocket forces, declared that 95 percent of all Soviet rockets fired reached their targets. (Article in Red Star timed to coincide with first firing of new rocket series in the Pacific.)
NASA fired first seven-stage Trailblazer rocket from Wallops Station, first three stages firing meteorite to 175-mile altitude and next four stages back through the atmosphere in a high-speed reentry experiment.
NASA Argo D-4 rocket was launched from Wallops, reaching an altitude of 585 miles and landing 817 miles out in the Atlantic, to gather data on the density of electrically charged helium atoms in the upper atmosphere.
