nasa witnesses testified before a subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee that Centaur rocket development administration had in recent months been streamlined. Problems in the program were attributed to too austere a budget at the start, “growing pains” of a new organization, and unexpected technics difficulties in utilizing high-energy liquid hydrogen as a rocket fuel.
In an interview with fourteen American newspaper editors, the text of which was released, Premier Nikita Khrushchev asserted that showing of documentary film on the Soviet antimissile missile to the Communist-sponsored Peace Conference last week had been overruled by those who felt its showing “might have been misunderstood” as a warlike gesture. “Had the people been shown this film,” Khrushchev said, “they would have seen what kind of a machine it is. You can say our rocket can hit a fly in outer space.”
Second joint U.S.-Sweden sounding rocket launched from Kronog&rd site in project to gather data on noctilucent clouds, the Nike-Cajun rocket sending instrument-packed nose cone 43.4 miles (70 km.) high before it parachuted back to earth.
usaf would undertake “development program to advance the technology of large solid propellant rocket motors” under recent nasa-dod agreement, dod announced. Program was designed to “keep open the possibility of expedited development” in case large solid-propellant motors should be required for future space boosters. Principal effort would be devoted to providing techniques for and proving feasibility of manufacturing, handling, transporting, and firing motors measuring 260-in. diameter and capable of about six million lbs. thrust.
NASA-supplied Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by Swedish Committee of Space Research at Kronog&rd, Sweden, in experiment to study auroral event in progress, the rocket performing as predicted but payload failing to separate.
nasa launched Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, its 256-lb. payload lofted to 92-mi. altitude and 60-mi. distance. Efforts to recover the payload were not successflli, but scientists were able to analyze data telemetered during flight about performance of an attitude control system as well as four scientific experiments: to measure solar flux in two llitra-violet spectral regions; to measure radiation emerging from the top of the earth’s atmosphere; to obtain llitraviolet photographs of Venus from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and to study distribution of atmospheric atomic hydrogen and Lyman Alpha radiation. Also flight-tested was an experimental, transistorized telemetry system.	_	_
President Kennedy gave the order to resume nuclear testing in the atmosphere, to be conducted by Joint Task Force 8 under the command of Maj. Gen. A. D. Starbird. April #5:’'Saturn (SA-2) booster rocket was successfully launched from ame in its second flight test. Like the first Saturn vehicle launched on October 27, 1961, the Saturn fired only the first-stage engines, generating 1.3 million lbs. of thrust. Dummy second ana third stages filled with water were detonated at 65 miles altitude (Project High Water) and the water ballast formed an artificial cloud. Maximum velocity was slightly more than 3,700 mph. Modifications to decrease the slight fuel sloshing encountered near the end of the previous flight test were apparently
nasa launched Aerobee research rocket with 213-lb. payload containing four scientific experiments from Wallops Station. Reaching an altitude of almost 125 statute miles, the nose cone was recovered by an S-62 helicopter some 52 miles down range.
An astronautics ship together with a floating drydock has been proposed as a launching platform for icbm’s and large space boosters, including Saturn. LCdr. Burton Edelson (usn), writing for the Bureau of Ships Journal, contended that a 10,000-ton ship, such as the seaplane tender Curtiss, could be specially" outfitted as an integrated astronautics ship and could handle all solid-fuel launchings, including Minuteman. An accompanying floating drydock could handle large liquid-fuel rocket launchings up to and including Saturn.
A four-stage nasa Scout rocket carried P-21A probe payload 3,910 miles into space and 4,370 miles downrange from Wallops Station, Va. In 97-minute flight measurements were taken of the ionospheric electron density profiles, ion density, and types of ions, data needed to improve communication between earth and space.
Saturn SA-3 reached 104-mi. altitude in ballistic flight from Cape Canaveral, the fully-fueled S-I stage performing as planned. Upper stages were filled with water simulating weight of live stages. At peak altitude, rocket was detonated by radio command and the ballast water was released into the ionosphere, forming massive cloud of ice particles several mi. in diameter. From the cloud experiment (Project Highwater II) scientists hoped to gain data on atmospheric physics. This was third straight test-flight success of nasa’s Saturn and first flight with maximum fuel onboard. Vehicle generated 1.3 million-lb. thrust on flight of 4 min., 55 sec.
Aerojet-General Corp. proposed a booster two to three times larger than Nova, to be launched from the sea. Two-stage Sea Dragon with takeoff weight of 20 to 100 million pounds would be assembled in existing drydocks, towed to point of launch, and launched from the water without gantry cranes or launch pads. Both stages would be recovered in the water by hydrodynamic deceleration.
nasa indicated it would begin series of flights with an inflatable paraglider in mid-1963. Flights would provide information on frequency and size of micrometeoroid particles in space and allow post-flight laboratory study of impacts caused by such particles. Paraglider would be launched by Aerobee research rocket from White Sands Missile Range (wsmb) to height of 700,000 ft., and would descend to earth at speed of mach 5. Its re-entry path would be almost straight down—at an angle of 82°. Inflated paraglider would be 14-ft. long with span of 18 ft.; it would weigh 170 lbs. during launch and 85 lbs. during re-entry.
Maj. Robert M. White (usaf) was awarded the Flying Tiger Pilot’s Trophy in recognition of his record 314,000-ft.-altitude flight in the X-15 rocket research aircraft.
Indonesian scientist Dr. Hadinoto said Indonesia hoped to launch her first space rocket in 1964 for scientific purposes, with aid provided by U.S.S.R.
nasa launched rigidized Echo-type balloon on Thor booster to 922 mi. in inflation test. Nicknamed “Big Shot,” the 13-story balloon was inflated successfully and was visible for 10 minutes from Cape Canaveral. Movie film capsule parachuted into sea northeast of San Salvador was recovered by three pararescue men of the Air Rescue Service. This was the largest manmade object sent into space, the previous record being held by the 100-ft ECHO i.
Nike-Zeus antimissile was shot outside earth’s atmosphere and successfully maneuvered with controlled blasts of rocket exhaust, in test over the pmr.
Sixth and final powered test of Kiwi BAA ground-test reactor for Project Rover was successful at Jackass Flats, Nev. Newsmen were permitted to watch this test from a mile away, the first test to which outside observers had been allowed. Kiwi B-4A, looking more like a flyable engine than some of its predecessors, was mounted on a remote-controlled railroad flatcar, consumed tons of liquid hydrogen in the half-power, five-min. test. Part of the joint aec-nasa program for development of a nuclear-powered rocket, the series of ground reactors tested different reactor designs, fuels, metals, and accessories.
Second successful test of usaf Titan II rocket, 5,000-mi. flight from amr. Second generation ballistic missile with storable liquid fuels will be used as a booster in nasa’s Project Gemini.
Reginald Lascelles, personal assistant and spokesman for Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Lovell was afraid the new radiation belt would “seriously affect space exploration by radio astronomy.” September mariner ii, 1.2 million mi. from earth on its voyage to vicinity of Venus, successfully swung a yard-wide antenna around and focused it on earth, sending radio beam back to scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The antenna maneuver was performed on command of on-board timer and was first of two in-flight maneuvers crucial to correcting the probe’s path to within 10,000 mi. of Venus; after scientists evaluated results of antenna orientation, nasa Goldstone Tracking Station would send radio command to fire rocket aboard the 447-lb. craft.
Atlantic Research Corporation introduced new Archer solidpropellant sounding rocket for use during International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), 1964-65. Archer successfully completed its initial flight to 75-mi. altitude carrying 35-lb. payload, at Pt. Mugu, California. Flight testing would be completed early in
Two gsfc scientific sounding rockets launched from Wallops Station. An Iris research rocket launched with test instrumentation did not achieve programed altitude and landed 175 statute miles downrange. A four-stage Argo D-4 launch vehicle carried 78-lb payload to an altitude of almost 530 statute miles to record the intensity and distribution of radio noise above the ionosphere at extremely low frequencies.
nasa announced that sea damage to Wallops Station, Va., occurring earlier in the month was not extensive, and that rocket firings would be resumed in a few days. Although launch pads and some tracking gear on the island itself had been damaged by water, the more important tracking and data acquisition facilities on the mainland were undamaged.
nasa fired a Scout rocket from Wallops Station, Va. The rocket flew 135 miles high and about 800 miles downrange in a re-entry test reaching speeds of 19,000 mph.
30th sounding rocket launched by three-man team at McMurdo Station, Antarctica, the program calling for 60 Areas rocket launchings at rate of one a week. Purpose of launchings was to obtain information on sudden warming of upper atmosphere that occurs during Antarctic spring.
nasa launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which detonated 12 grenades from 25 to 57 mi. altitude. Fifteen minutes later a Nike-Asp sounding rocket was launched. It released a cloud of sodium vapor from 26 to 144 mi. altitude in a study of wind velocities and upper-atmosphere densities.
Naval Ordnance Laboratory announced use of Loki launch tube attached to the barrel of a 5-inch/54 naval rifle to launch the Hasp (high altitude sounding rocket) for weather soundings from ships anywhere at sea.
United Technology Corp. fired 35-ton segmented solid booster for a duration of 130 seconds, developing thrust of slightly more than 100,000	lbs for the entire burning time.
Soviet Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, executed in 1937 on Stalin’s orders and exonerated in 1956, was honored in the official military newspaper, Red Star. It was pointed out that in 1932 Tukhachevsky insisted on the development of rocket engines and that he persisted in this effort until purged.
Japanese Foreign Ministry announced it had filed protest with U.S.S.R. against Soviets’ establishing of restricted areas in the Pacific for its rocket tests. Japan said barring ships and aircraft from the areas violated rights of other nations to the open seas.
Third successful static-test firing of “Old Salty”—an H-l engine that had been submerged in salt water for four hours before each of its test runs. Purpose of tests was to determine feasibility and costs of recovering, rebuilding, and reusing booster engines as opposed to cost of new engines. Early results indicated that engines could be recovered and rebuilt at a cost of about 10% of new engines.
nasa-aec designated the Jackass Flats area of the aec Test Site as the Nuclear Rocket Development Station. Placed under management of the joint nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), the new station has been used since 1959 for ground tests of Kiwi reactors.
Franco-American scientific sounding rocket launchings coordinated when two U.S. launchings were made from Wallops Island while France launched one from Algeria and failed to launch one from France. First U.S. rocket (Nike-Cajun) fired at 5:57 AM carried a Langmuir probe to determine electron density and the temperature of the “E” layer of the ionosphere (50-100 miles altitude); the second (Nike-Apache) launched at 6:15 AM, released a sodium vapor cloud to 106-mi. altitude which spread over 100 miles of the eastern seaboard. “Sporadic E” regions of the ionosphere have electron density that reflects much higher radio frequencies, and may result from wind shears. On November 7, gsfc scientists undertook the first sounding rocket _ firings to examine correlation between “E” region and wind shears.
Sweden launched U.S. Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, first of series of U.S.-Swedish cooperative program for peaceflli exploration of the upper atmosphere, the rocket reaching 68-mi. altitude after launch from KronogSrd range in northern Sweden. Fifteen minutes after launch, canister containing sample cloud particles was recovered; particles would be analyzed to provide information on composition and origin of noctilucent clouds.
usaf Titan II rocket flew 5,000 miles in its third success of five test launchings. All test objectives were met on the 30-min. flight from Cape Canaveral to target area near Ascension Island in the South Atlantic Ocean.
High-altitude nuclear test over Johnston Island in the Pacific failed when Thor rocket and the thermonuclear device were destroyed by the safety officer “because the tracking system was malfunctioning.” Debris fell into the ocean well within the 520-mile-radius safety area around Johnston Island.
' Joint U.S.-Japanese sounding rocket launching at Wallops Station, Va., was postponed because of high winds.
16th of Project Firefly series of high-altitude rocket launchings was conducted at Eglin afb, Fla., the two-stage Nike-Cajun rocket releasing chemicals at about 50-mi. altitude. Chemicals caused formation of artificial cloud which ground stations tracked to determine upper atmosphere movements.
Four German scientists, including Eugen Saenger, former director of Stuttgart Institute of Physics, West Germany, were reportedly employed by Egyptian government to direct Egypt’s new rocket design and development program.
Prof. G. V. Petrovich, Soviet rocket specialist, wrote in Komsolakaya Pravda that within a few decades the solar system wlli seem no more forbidding than once-formidable Antarctica does today. When the solar system is conquered, man wlli be able to undertake interstellar flignts. Noting that the rockets boosting vostok iii and vostok iv into orbit were 20,000,000 horsepower, he predicted that during the Twentieth Century rocket liners would be built with engine capacity greater than 1,000,000,000 horsepower.
U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, meeting in Geneva, set up a ten-nation working group under the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee to examine international exchanges of scientific information on outer space. Takeo Hatanaka of Japan was named chairman; other nations represented were the U.S., U.K., U.S.S.R., Belgium, Chad, France, Hungary, Romania, and the United Arab Republic. Another group, chaired by W. A. Sarabhai of India, was set up to examine the U.S. proposal of an international research rocket range to be established near the Equator.	...	.
Titan II underwent a successful 20-second full-power captive firing at Cape Canaveral and was considered ready for its first flight test in about a week. usAF-developed Titan II produced 430.000	lbs. thrust in its 1st stage; the 2nd stage would add another 100.000	lbs. thrust; compared with 400,000 lbs. for the Atlas E and 380,000 for Titan I. Titan II, already selected as booster for nasa’s 2-man Gemini capsule, burns storable fuels that emit a stream of hot, clear gases rather than flame.
Dr. Marvin H. Gold, manager of Propellant Chemicals Div. of Aerojet-General’s Solid Rocket Plant, was awarded Navy Meritorious Public Service Citation by onr for his contributions to high energy rocket propulsion for advanced Polaris.
First of a series of 80 rocket probes to determine wind patterns over Cape Canaveral initiated by nasa with launch of a single-stage Nike to 80,000 ft. where it laid down a white smoke screen for subsequent photographic study.
nasa announced the advanced version of liquid -hydrogen/liquid-oxygen rocket engine had completed its preliminary flight rating tests. In the test program, the 15,000-lb.-thrust engine underwent 20 static-firings for a total of 2,820 sec. of firing; it also passed humidity and vibration tests.
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, told conference of Manufacturing Chemists’ Association that nuclear rocket fuel “. . . may eventually make it an attractive matter to bring lunar ore to the earth for processing. . . .” Nuclear fuel would reduce the cost of each pound of payload.
Testimony before the Joint (Congressional) Committee on Atomic Energy revealed management difficulties on Project Pluto nuclear-powered vehicle, to fly at 2,000 mph within the atmosphere. Dr. Leland Haworth, member of aec, testified that aec was “awaiting a firm decision” from dod on whether the project would be continued. Reactor for nuclear ramjet rocket, under development since 1956, had been successfully ground-tested in Nevada. Dr. Harold Brown, director of dod research and engineering, said dod hoped that a decision could be reached “within a month.” An estimated $500 million would be required to continue the project through flight-test phase.
An Australian rocket with five cameras was launched from Woomera as tiros iv passed overhead. The rocket’s camera took photographs of clouds from 80-mile altitude while tiros iv made simultaneous photography of cloud cover from 400-mile altitude.
Nevada (Extension of the aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo) became operational, with Robert P. Helgeson as Chief. Located at Las Vegas, the Nevada Extension assumed financial and contract responsibilities for construction and operation of facllities at Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), which will conduct static ground testing of nuclear rockets.
aec—dod high-altitude nuclear test failed, the safety officer of Joint Task Force 8 destroying the Thor booster and nuclear payload within minutes after liftoff because of booster’s malfunctioning. This was third failure of four attempted high-altitude tests in the current Pacific series.
Metal fragments resembling top of gasoline drum, thought to have fallen from the MA-7 Atlas booster, were discovered near Barkly East, South Africa.
dod announced successful static firing of the Thiokol-developed acceleration rocket for usaf’s X-20 manned space glider. X-20 previously known as Dyna Soar.
nasa signed three letter contracts with naa’s Rocketdyne Division for further development and production of the F-l and J-2 rocket engines. The contracts provided: (1) $1 million for long lead-time items in F-l engine r&d; (2) $3.4 million for early production effort on 55 F-l engines; and (3) $1.7 million for early production work on 59 J-2 engines. Ultimate value of the final contracts, extending through 1965, would be about $289 million.
Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey ruled unanimously that Thiokol Chemical Corporation, producer of the rocket engines for the X-15, was liable for property damage caused in testing the engine. The Court ordered $25,605 damages to be paid to 15 home owners near the Picatinny Arsenal, Rockaway Township, for cracked foundations, floors, walls, chimneys, and fireplaces. Thiokol stated that it would have to pass these costs on to the Federal Government, since it had a cost-plus contract.
aec and nasa announced that the Catalytic Construction Co. had been selected as construction contractor for nuclear rocket development facilities for Project Rover at the aec Nevada Test Site near Las Vegas, Nev.
Navy launched solid-propellant Terrier-Asp IV sounding rocket from Point Arguello in successflli first flight test.
Aerobee 150A launched from nasa Wallops Station, the rocket reaching 117-mi. altitude in experiment to measure absolute intensity of the spectrum of stars with 50 angstrom resolution and to measure ultraviolet fluxes. No usable data were received because rocket failed to despin as planned.
Announced that Georgia Nuclear Laboratories’ nuclear reactor had been licensed by aec to operate at one megawatt. Laboratories would participate with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. in development of nasa’s Rift rocket stage.
X-15 No. 3 flown by Major Robert White (usaf) in stability test at speed exceeding mach 5, with lower tail-fin absent and with nose raised to 25° angle above the horizon. Successful flight was the 75th by the rocket research airplane.
X-15 No. 1 piloted by Cdr. Forrest Petersen (usn) made its first forced landing in 47 flights when its rocket engine failed to ignite in mid-air after two attempts. X—15 was brought down without incident at Mud Lake, Nevada.
United Technology Corp. experimented with hypergolic ignition system, spraying highly reactive fluid into nozzle end of solid-propellant rocket motor. Fluid immediately ignited the motor, which developed more than 100,000-lbs. thrust in the test.
Because of unnamed technical difficulties, flight test of X-15 rocket research aircraft was postponed minutes before X-15 was to be dropped from its mother ship.
U.S. transferred to Dominican Republic its rocket tracking station at Sabana, D.R. Formerly used to track missiles launched from Cape Canaveral toward Ascension Island, the facllity would be used as a training center.	_	_
Filth attempt to launch nasa’s Centaur space booster was canceled at the last second at amr. Engines on the Atlas first stage had been ignited when an automatic detection device spotted a malfunction and shut off the engines.
In a speech to the American Ordnance Association, Dr. Glenn Seaborg, aec Chairman, said that nuclear energy provided the most feasible means of accomplishing long voyages in space: “To perform long-range, manned missions, it is essential that we increase the specific impulse (amount of thrust per pound of propellant) of the propulsion system well beyond the values that can be achieved with chemical combustion. . . .” He stated that a hydrogen-fluorine rocket system, now in research phase, can provide up to approximately 475-lbs. thrust per pound of propellant (kerosene-oxygen—300 lbs.). A nuclear rocket, which utllizes hydrogen (through its heat exchanger system) could provide highest specific impulse of 800 and above. He reviewed progress of Project Rover and Nerva.
usaf announced that it had begun negotiation with United Technology Corp. for development of solid-fuel motors for use in Titan III space booster.
Pakistan made its first space experiment, the launching of a Rehbar I sounding rocket from a site near Karachi. Part of a cooperative program between nasa and the Pakistan Upper Atmosphere and Space Research Committee, the Rehbar I was a Nike-Cajun rocket supplied by the U.S., carrying a sodium vapor payload to an altitude of about 80 miles to measure upper-altitude winds. Several more such launches are programed for the next few months. Prior to the launches, Pakistani scientists and technicians were given training in nasa research and launch centers.
usaf selected proposals submitted by United Technology Corp. for the 120-inch solid motor and stl-arma for the guidance efforts to be placed in Titan III which wlli serve as a large space booster. Contracts were contingent upon final program approval.
General Dynamics/Convair reported developing a new laser with increased pulse rate. When perfected, new laser would be able to machine and trim any material with greater speed and accuracy than available by any other means. Ocober 12: usaf Titan II rocket achieved all test objectives in flight from Cape Canaveral. This was fourth success in six test launchings of the rocket, a modified version of which will be used in nasa’s Project Gemini beginning in 1964.
nasa fired a Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which released a sodium vapor cloud between 25 and 74 miles altitude. Rays of the setting sun colored the sodium cloud red, instead of sodium vapor’s normal yellow.
100-inch diameter, 53-foot long, solid-fuel rocket static-fired for 98 seconds and developed 600,000 pounds of thrust by Aerojet-General, the largest solid rocket fired to date.
X-15 No. 2 flown at 3,511 mph and to about 73,000 feet by Major Robert Rushworth (usaf) with 103 seconds of rocket power in heat resistance test. Temperature of tail surface was reported to have reached near 1,250° F.
Four-stage Journeyman rocket carried 145-lb. payload to 1,058-mi. altitude, from nasa Wallops Station. Primary experiment was measurement of the intensity of RF energy at medium frequencies; secondary experiment was measurement of electron densities in the upper ionosphere and investigation of possibility of using ionosphere as a focusing medium in future radio astronomy mapping experiments. Payload landed about 1,323 mi. from launch site in the Atlantic Ocean.
Second successful high altitude U.S. nuclear test in Operation Dominic was conducted near Johnston Island in the Pacific, a low-yield explosion at altitude of between 20 and 30 mi. Specially-built rocket with Sergeant motor was used to loft the nuclear warhead.
Rocketdyne Division of naa announced plans to expand its Canoga Park, Calif., facilities to manufacture F-l and J-2 rocket engines for nasa’s Advanced Saturn launch vehicle.
nasa launched three-stage, solid-fuel Ram-B (Radio Attenuation Measurement) rocket from Wallops Station, Va., all contact with the vehicle lost 11 sec. after second-stage ignition. Project Ram was designed to provide information on communications blackout during space vehicle re-entry.
U.S.S.R. delegate to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space expressed approval of a subcommittee’s recommendation to establish an international sounding rocket launching base on the geomagnetic equator. U.S. delegate Plimpton welcomed the Soviet position.
nasa launched Aerobee sounding rocket from Wallops Station, the 259-lb. instrumented payload reaching 106-mi. altitude in test to map sources of photons in specific wavelengths in the nighttime sky. Payload landed about 61 mi. downrange, with recovery not attempted.
nasa selected Sverdrup and Parcel of St. Louis as contractor for the design criteria and initial master planning for the Mississippi Test Facility, the 13,500-acre site that would eventually contain 6 or more static test stands for testing booster stages of Saturn and Nova vehicles.
U.S. and Japan launched a joint sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va. nasa furnished the Nike-Cajun rocket, launch facilities, data acquisition, and a langmuir probe to measure electron temperature. Japan furnished instrumentation, a device designed to measure electron temperature and density simultaneously, functions which up to now have required two separate instruments. Height of the flight was 75.6 mi.
aec-dod jointly announced that repair work on launch facilities at Johnston Island would delay further high-altitude nuclear tests for some weeks. Damage occurred July 25 when Thor rocket and its nuclear warhead were deliberately destroyed on the pad.
Sparobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station with 90-lb. payload to measure electron and neutral particle temperatures at 75 to 225-mi. altitudes. Vehicle reached peak altitude of 214 mi. and payload impacted in Atlantic Ocean about 217 mi. away. Secondary objectives were measurement of ion and neutral particle density and flight testing of newly designed Thermosphere Probe system. Experiment was joint project of University of Michigan and nasa Goddard Space Might Center.
dod and nasa signed an agreement that neither agency would begin the development of a launch vehicle or a space booster without the written acknowledgment of the other.
Titan I liquid-fueled engine strapped to the side of a 175-ton solid-fuel rocket engine and the configuration test-fired by Aerojet-General Corp. to evaluate the compatibility of liquid and solid engines for the usaf’s Titan III space booster. The configuration generated 700,000 lbs. of thrust.
Rehbar II sounding rocket launched from site near Karachi, a continuation of U.S.-Pakistan joint program. First launching of Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying sodium vapor payloads was June 7.
afcrl scientists launched a second artificial meteor by means of a multistage rocket fired from Wallops Island. The meteor traveled at a re-entry speed of 12 kilometers per second, exceeding that attained in the previous experiment of April 21, 1961.
Atlas rocket for manned orbital flight MA-8 was static-fired successfully for 11 seconds at Cape Canaveral.
First successful reactor tests using liquid hydrogen as coolant were performed by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory at the Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), Jackass Flats, Nev. “Cold flow” series of reactor tests involved operation of Kiwi-B reactor, previously conducted only with gaseous hydrogen. Liquid hydrogen as a propellant is planned to power the Nerva nuclear engine being developed for Projects Rover and Rift.
Joint U.S.-Norwegian-Danish Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Andoeya, Norway, with instrumented experiment to probe the ionosphere and the Northern Lights. Third in a series, the sounding rocket reached an altitude of near 68 mi.
India offered to provide launching base for U.N. international rocket probes in session of U.N. Committee for Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. India’s proposal was related to a proposal that 1964 be designated International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), and include equatorial sounding rockets to gather data above the earth’s Equator. Southern part of India lies within 10° of the Equator and would provide suitable launching site for the project.
nasa announced that Lockheed Missiles and Space Company had been selected for negotiation of a contract for the design, development, fabrication, and testing of the Rift (reactor-in-flight-test) stage. The Rift vehicle is intended to flight test the Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application) being developed jointly by nasa and aec.
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station to measure high-altitude winds and temperatures, the payload consisting of 12 special explosive charges which were ejected and detonated at intervals from 24- to 57-mi. altitude.
High-altitude nuclear test in U.S. Operation Dominic was made in Pacific test area, the sub-megaton device carried by Thor rocket to estimated altitude of 30 to 40 miles, aec reported two Soviet nuclear explosions also occurred, one a high-altitude test over central Asia and the other an atmospheric test over Soviet Arctic.
Thor booster carrying nuclear warhead for atmospheric test (Operation Dominic) was destroyed on pad at Johnston Island; reportedly there were “no injuries to personnel” and “no hazard from radioactivity.”
National Rocket Club announced the establishment of the Dr. Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award, an annual competition in the history of rocketry and astronautics, the first such competition in the field of history.
nasa announced that the first Centaur launch was due no earlier than April 20. Postponement on April 11 was caused by too low calibration of a transducer, which gave a false indication of the pressurization of the fuel systems in the Atlas booster.
Fuel tank of the Atlas booster of Ranger III was repaired from inside in 48 hours, first such repair while booster was upright on the pad. Effort of General Dynamics/Astronautics crew was necessitated by fuel leak.
nasa launched 2-stage Aerobee sounding rocket from Wallops Station to an altitude of 130 miles to obtain planning data for future solar physics projects.
House of Representatives passed a bill (H.R. 9485) to amend the Space Act of 1958 to designate March 16 as National Goddard Day, commemorating the date in 1926 when Dr. Robert H. 114 Goddard launched the first successful liquid-fuel rocket. The bill was then referred to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences.
nasa announced appointment of Bob P. Helgeson as Chief of the Nevada Extension of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo-n), effective August 1. As Chief of the Nevada Extension, Helgeson will direct construction and operation of Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), national site for testing nuclear rockets.
Two-stage Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island with 95-lb. payload to 89-mile altitude with gsfc experiment to measure electron density and electron collision frequency in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions.
usn announced tests conducted at U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, Calif., had included successful free-flight of a new type of rocket propulsion system called “Hybrid” because of its use of combination liquid and solid propellant in single motor.
Ranger III lunar shot postponed because of technical difficulties with Atlas booster rocket.
NASA’s F-l rocket engine first fired at full power (more than 1.5 million pounds of thrust) for full duration at Edwards, Calif.
International Association of Machinists (iam) workers struck at Lockheed Aircraft Corp. in California, Florida, and Hawaii. President Kennedy, invoking Taft-Hartley Act, created three-man board of inquiry to investigate the dispute; board’s recommendations, due Dec. 3, would contribute to President’s decision whether to request Federal court order barring strike for 80-day period. Included in Lockheed production items are Agena second-stage rocket, used by usaf and in nasa Ranger and Mariner programs.
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., in nasa experiment to gather data on solar radiation intensity in ultraviolet region. Rocket carried spectrophotometer package to 124-mi. altitude. Preliminary experimental results: “High voltage arcing in the instrumentation prohibited collection of scientific data ... .”
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru told Indian Parliament that India had agreed to have a rocket launching station on her territory under TT.N. auspices for international use.
nasa announced that Mercury Mark II spacecraft would be named “Gemini,” after the third constellation of the zodiac featuring the twin stars Castor and Pollux. Gemini would be a two-man spacecraft used in development of the rendezvous technique, would be 50% larger than the Mercury capsule, and launched into orbit by a Titan II booster.
nasa launched a Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which released an 80-mile-long sodium-vapor cloud to measure air density and wind direction in the upper atmosphere.
Reported that nasa had drafted for review by other Government agencies a policy statement on measures being studied for the prevention of rocket booster parts surviving re-entry, possibly injuring life and property on earth. Fragments of MA-6 booster had surprisingly survived re-entry. Measures, as reported, included programed booster destruction, perhaps at the cost of payload weight.
tiros v launched into orbit by Thor-Delta booster from Cape Canaveral, faulty guidance system placing it into elliptical orbit (apogee: 604 mi.; perigee: 367 mi.; period: 100.5 min.) instead of 400-mi. circular orbit. Cloud-cover pictures transmitted to tracking station at Wallops Station on early orbits were of excellent quality, tiros v was expected to chart the origin, formation, and movement of hurricanes, typhoons, and other storms during the August-September peak tropical storm period.
nasa launched first two of six tests of the performance of the Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket. The first carried a payload to an altitude of 58 miles above Wallops Station, the second reached 62 miles altitude.
aec announced that U.S. would begin “rocket borne” nuclear tests at an altitude of “tens of kilometers” shortly after nightfall on June 1 at the Johnston Island test area.
Unnamed nasa official said that a four-stage rocket probe would be launched in October or November to check the strength of the radiation belt created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion over the Pacific on July 9, 1962.
Reported in Tass that a Soviet expert on rocket propulsion, not mentioned by name, had said: “The creation of powerful rockets has been full of pitfalls. Our investigations and experiments have not always been successful—far from it. There have been difficulties ...”
