dod announced “clearest data yet obtained of the ionosphere and the dynamics of its formation and dissipation” had been obtained by afcrl scientists, who matched experimental data from positive ion detector aboard a Thor rocket with theoretical data based on laboratory studies, within error of only two per cent, (dod Release 388-63)
First birthday of alouette i (“topside sounder”) satellite, built by Canada and launched by nasa into orbit Sept. 28, 1962. alouette was still functioning well and transmitting ionospheric data to 13 telemetry stations around the world. nasa launched four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket with instrumented payload to 645-mi. altitude from Wallops Station, in experiment to compare rocket-borne measurements of ion and electron temperatures and densities with similar data obtained by alouette. Measurements were taken by the rocket payload in the ionosphere 10 min. before alouette passed through the region and made its measurements. Data were telemetered to ground receiving stations and no recovery operation was involved. Flight was follow-on to similar experiment conducted July 2, results of which indicated close agreement in measurements. During the first year of operation, alouette i orbited the earth 4,981 times, executed 12,900 commands, and provided 2,060 hours of telemetry transmissions, (gsfc Historian; nasa Release 63211; Wallops Release 63-87; Goddard News, 9/23/63,1)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station with 230-lb. instrumented payload to measure intensity of light from stars. Equipped with four scanning photoelectric spectrophotometers, payload reached 115-mi. altitude, impacted in Atlantic Ocean 68 mi. downrange. (Wallops Release 63-68)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to an estimated peak altitude of 185 mi. from White Sands, New Mexico. Objective of the experiment was to measure the absolute alpha radiation resonantly scattered by atmospheric atomic hydrogen at night. Instrumentation included eight ion-chamber nodules and two aspect photometers, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 4/4/63)
Joint U.S.-U.K.-Australian Project Dazzle to study behavior of objects re-entering atmosphere would be conducted at Woomera Rocket Range in Australia, dod announced. ILK. would provide Black Knight rockets and re-entry payloads; U.S. would provide instrumentation for test, (dod Release 1088-63)
A gimbaled integral nozzle (gin) was sucessfully tested on the Lockheed “Char” motor by experts at the AF Rocket Propulsion Lab, designers of the exhaust system. Partially submerged in the aft section of the rocket case, the flanges and actuating components were shielded from the exhaust gases by the case itself. The concept would lead to a gimbaling system requiring less operating power than present operational swivel-type nozzles. A heavy, high-temperature-resistant silicone grease was used to lubricate the ball-and-socket gimbaling system. {M&R, 2/17/64, 21)
West German Cabinet approved West German participation in two European rocket and space projects—development of three-stage rocket by 7-nation eldo and development of space probe by 11-nation esro. (NTT [West. Ed.], 7/11/63)
usaf announced launch of space probe using Blue Scout, Jr., booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 3/18/63,11)
AF Cambridge Research Laboratories terminated flight of 54-ft. mylar balloon after 28-day journey across Pacific Ocean. Launched May 19 from Chico, Calif., superpressure balloon had reached point 500 mi. south of Kamchatka (Siberia) peninsula when afcrl destroyed it by radio command from Chico. This was third successful balloon flight in afcrl series to evaluate superpressure design. (OAR Research Review, 9/9/63, 2) Jwne 17: Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched to peak altitude of 113 mi. from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Purpose was to obtain positive information on gyro drift and general control characteristics. The aspect instrumentation on the rocket included two cameras, two Adcole digital sun sensors, a fine tracking Ball Brothers System and a Whittaker three-axis gyro package. All of the instruments worked exceptionally well. Good control, stabilization, and maneuver accuracy was demonstrated, but the target accuracy was less than expected, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 7/2/63 & 7/19/63)
Upper stage (S-IV) for Saturn SA-5 rocket arrived at Cape Canaveral aboard modified Stratocruiser aircraft. To be test-flown late this year, SA-5 would be first Saturn testing live upper stage.	(Marshall Star, 9/25/63,1)
A second Aerobee-Hi research rocket in the NASA-French joint program investigating propagation of very low frequency waves in the ionosphere was launched from Wallops Station. The 193-lb. payload went to an altitude of 115 mi. and yielded seven minutes of telemetry data before impact. The first experiment in this series was conducted on Oct. 17, 1963. (Wallops Release 63-98) 741-623 0—64--27
usaf announced award of formal contract to Martin-Marietta Corp. for design, development, fabrication, and delivery of Titan III Standardized Space Booster. Martin-Marietta was serving as systems integration contractor, with Aerojet General producing liquid propulsion systems and United Technology Corp. the segmented, solid-propellant engines, (dod Release 256-63)
Estimated 200 German scientists and technicians were working in Military Factory 333, Egyptian rocket center outside Cairo, according to Washington Post's magazine Parade. {Parade, 5/5/63)
usaf announced that Cape Kennedy would be open to the general public for three hours every Sunday beginning on December 15th, to allow for “public drive-through.” Only on Armed Forces Day in 1961 had the general public previously been allowed within the rocket and space launching complex, (upi, NYT, 12/8/63,A4)
West German rocket firm, Weapons and Aviation Armament Corp. of Hamburg, test-fired four solid-fuel rockets to 90,000-ft. altitude and announced signing contract to deliver missiles to an unnamed foreign country. {Wasli. Post, 12/6/63)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., but sustainer engine failed to ignite, destroying vehicle and payload containing a gfsc nebular spectra experiment, (gsfc Historian)
Preparations continued for nasa-cnes launching of U.S. instrumented payload with French Centaure rocket from Colomb-Bechar, Algeria, next February. {M&R, 12/2/63, 8-9)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Assistant to dod Director of Defense and Engineering, said in address to National Rocket Club in Washington that dod viewed X-20 (Dyna Soar) and Gemini projects as “insurance” against uncertainties of future military manned clarify man’s possible role in military space missions. {M&R, 8/26/63, 12, 14)
Atlas booster, first stage of Centaur space launch vehicle, arrived at Plum Brook Station to begin series of structural tests in E-Stand, (lrc Release 63-64, Lewis Chronology, 7)
X-15 No. 3 was flown to 89,800 ft. and 3,310 mph (mach 4.94), by nasa pilot Milton O. Thompson. This was Thompson’s second flight m the X-15 and was intended to familiarize him with the extreme altitude control of the rocket research aircraft. (M&R, 12/9/63,10; X-15 Project Office)
Activities of Amateur Rocketeers of America (aha) at National Amateur Missile Analysis Center (namac) near Indianapolis were described in National Observer, namac was built by ara, national organization of high school-age rocket enthusiasts, and put into use in autumn 1962. Completion was planned for summer 1963. {National Observer, 4/22/63)
Attempt to launch two-stage Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station failed with first stage of the vehicle failing to perform properly. This was nasa’s first attempt to launch the Astrobee, and purpose of test was to evaluate the rocket’s performance as a nasa test vehicle. (Wallops Release 63-36)
A. O. Tischler, nasa Launch Vehicles and Propulsion Assistant Director (for Propulsion), quoted as saying combustion instability 262 problem of F-l rocket engine was now “under control,” in Missiles and Rockets. Installation of mechanical isolator separated oscillations in engine pump from oscillations in fuel system. “Since that time the engine has been tested under the most severe conditions and there has been no evidence of combustion instability.” (M&R, 7/1/63) ...	.	.
usn disclosed new Subroc antisubmarine missile, a submarinelaunched, rocket-propelled, inertially-guided nuclear depth bomb, would be operational in 1965. Launched from standard torpedo tube, Subroc is powered by solid-fuel rocket motor which ignites underwater and propels missile up and out of the water. Rocket booster is automatically separated from depth bomb payload, which continues on ballistic trajectory until impacting water, where it sinks and detonates, (dod Releases 1536-63 and 1537-63)
Reported that dot cost study of Titan III launch vehicle concluded total development cost of Titan III “exclusive of mission payload adaptations” would be $808.3 million. Study concluded the military space booster would repay its development costs over three or four years of operation—conclusion based on predictable and expectable payload launchings within booster’s capability. (Space Bug. Dally, 7/1/63)
Atlas booster for Project Mercury manned flight MA-9, scheduled for mid-May, arrived at Cape Canaveral from General Dynamics/ Astronautics, San Diego. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/20/63)
nasa launched Scout rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with rfd-i (re-entry flight demonstration-1) payload for aec. 480-lb. mockup nuclear reactor traveled 800-mi. suborbital trajectory and reentered southwest of Bermuda, but initial recovery attempts were not successful. Purpose of flight was to obtain data for designing space nuclear reactors that, disintegrate upon atmospheric re-entry. This was first of series of aec flight tests to evaluate safety of aerospace nuclear power systems in operation. (Wallops Release 63-49; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/23/63)
France successfully launched a cat into space onboard a Veronique rocket and brought it to a safe landing. (Reuters, Wash. Post. 10/19/63, 4)
General Dynamics was proposing combination of fluorineandiiquid-oxygen Atlas and Centaur upper stage as a cheaper substitute for Titan III booster for usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), Missiles and Rochets reported. (M&R, 12/23/63, 9)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., sending a 156-lb. payload to an altitude of 137 mi. Payload was a photospeciroineler to measure ultraviolet light emissions from atomic oxygen at various altitudes in the upper atmosphere to learn more about the amounts and properties of the oxygen atoms. (Wallops Release 63-101; NYT, 11/13/63, 29)	■
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that, within past 18 months, four F-l rocket engines had been damaged or destroyed in static firings and that another 12 firings had ended with premature shutdowns. F-l was under development by Rocketdyne for use in Saturn V launch vehicle. (Av. Wk., 2/4/63, 26)
Flight of X-15, with Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) as pilot, canceled minutes before scheduled drop from mother ship because of mechanical troubles in the rocket aircraft, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/19/63)
Soviet Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, writing in Izvestia, claimed that Soviet icbm’s “in many respects exceed both quantitatively and qualitatively” the strategic rocket potential of any other nation. The new-model tests in the Pacific in the spring of 1963 had produced “fabulous super-sniper accuracy” over a range of 8,000 mi., he said. Among characteristics of Soviet icbm’s, the Marshal listed “unlimited range,” relative ease of operation, combat readiness “within minutes,” and capability of launching from mobile field installations having no preliminary engineering work. (NYT, 11/17/63, 39)
France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales announced France would send a cat into space from rocket launching site in Sahara. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/24/63)
238-lb. instrumented payload to measure intensity of light from stars was launched with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station to altitude of 110 mi. Telemetry data obtained during flight would be compared with data from similar experiment conducted July 19. (Wallops Release 63—71)
207-lb. instrumented payload carried 125 mi. high by Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched at Wallops Island, Va., by nasa and Australian scientists. Designed and built by Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, experiment was designed to measure vlf radio noise above E region of ionosphere and was similar to experiment conducted under nighttime conditions April 12. (Wallops Release 63-48; nasa Release 63-99)
Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Co. announced successful demonstration of new method of cooling high-pressure hydrogen rocket-engine chamber, p&w spokesman said that “successful demonstration of cooling during this company-sponsored firing was a research breakthrough on high-pressure hydrogen rocket engines .... The high pressure concept is the next step in increasing the performance of hydrogren fueled rocket engines.” p&w is producer of RL-10 liquid hydrogen rocket engines for Saturn S-IV stage and Centaur upper stage booster. (Space Bus. Daily, 9/9/63, 356; Hartford Courant, 9/9/63)
Unidentified space probe employing Blue Scout, Jr., booster was launched by usaf from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 2/11/63,13)
28-nation U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space approved Indian progress report on plans to sponsor an international rocket base at Quilon for launchings in space above the equatorial regions. Italian delegate reported that the San Marco floating launching facility would be completed in time for use in the iqsy. {L.A. Times, 2/26/63)
Atlantic Research Corn, announced development of solid rocket propellants containing beryllium to provide increased thrust Studies leading to this development were sponsored by dod. (NYT, 5/20/63, 46)
nasa launched Scout rocket with flight experiment to test re-entry heat shield material for spacecraft, but Scout veered off course and had to be destroyed before it left vicinity of Wallops Station launch area. Cause of malfunction was being investigated. (Wallops Release 63-69)
nasa announced it would negotiate contract with Pratt and Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for continuation of RL-10 rocket engine development. Contract would complete the RL-10 qualification program; it would specify improvements to be incorporated in the liquid-hydrogen engine as well as certain support services to be provided to Centaur and Saturn vehicle systems. RL-10 engines were being used to propel the Centaur upper-stage launch vehicle and the S-IV stage of Saturn I launch vehicle. (nasa Release 63-189)
mit announced that a laser had been used to observe meteoritic dust at heights of 35 to 85 mi., with the dust seeming to concentrate at 50 to 75 mi. It was suggested that the lower layer might be related to the noctilucent clouds, since last year’s rocket launchings from Sweden suggested that noctilucent clouds found at that altitude could be ice-covered particles of meteoritic dust. The higher layer might be at the level where meteors break into dust on entry into the earth’s atmosphere. (NYT, 10/16/63, 2)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with experiments to measure winds and temperatures and to derive densities and pressures up to 90 km. was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada. Twelve grenades ejected and exploded successfully at altitudes from 39 to 91.3 km. A simultaneous launching with Wallops Island was achieved. ( nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 3/11/63)
usaf solicited proposals from industry for development of solidpropellant space booster capable of up to six-million-lb. thrust. usaf action stemmed from dod-nasa agreement of December 1962 to advance the technology of large solia-propellant rocket motors. (dod Release 53-63; AP, Wash. Post, 1/16/63)
Two usaf U-2 aircraft have been used at amh for more than three years in a program gathering data on infrared characteristics of the exhaust plumes of ballistic missiles, according to Aviation Week. The program had been sponsored by Aeronautical Systems Div. of afsc. Known as Smokey Joe, it was coordinated with arpa’s Project Tabstone, which includes aircraft-user programs Lookout (using rcaf CF-lOO’s) and ramp (Radiation Air Borne Measurement Program). One of the U-2’s was equipped with 400-lb. radiometer, the other with spectrometer. One or both covered 80% of am:r launchings, flying at 60,000 ft. to observe the plume of the rocket as it passed on its upward flight. Data was forwarded to agencies concerned with ballistic missile defense. (Av• Wk., 11/18/63,53)
French government report recognized the direct and indirect economic benefits to the French economy from space and nuclear work. Of 13,000 persons employed in rocket development, 5,000 were in electronics, 5,000 in chemical-metallurgy. Of 14,000 working at the Pierrelatte nuclear center, 92% are employees of private industry. {MdcR, 11/18/63,9)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched to 126 mi. altitude from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Payload contained experiments to study the solar corona and extreme ultraviolet radiation—studies which would later apply to the Oso-B (S-17) ex
usaf launched Thor-Agena D space vehicle with unidentified payload from pmr; launch occurred several hours after another booster exploded. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64; NTT, 6/12/63)
Soviet Chief Marshal of Aviation Konstantin Vershinin was quoted as saying that air-launched missiles had become basic form of weapon for Soviet aircraft, replacing bombs. (Av. Wk., 1/7/63, 25) Cape Canaveral, and usaf was conducting study to determine cause of the advanced Minuteman’s malfunction. This was second flight of new, more powerful Minuteman model, (dod Release 25-63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/63) Early January: United Technology Center made first U.S. test-firing of cluster of large segmented solid rocket motors. Four rocket motors consisting of six segments each were fired for 14 sec., producing 140,000 lbs. of thrust. Test was to demonstrate techniques for ignition of clusters “which appear applicable to the simultaneous ignition of clusters of solid booster rockets producing millions of pounds of thrust.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63; Av. Wk., 1/14/63,33)
On 10th anniversary of first successful Redstone missile launching, Army fired Redstone rocket at White Sands Missile Range in successful test by Redstone Field Artillery unit. {M&R, 8/26/63, 14)	.	.	,
usaf launched Thor rocket with delta-wing re-entry payload from amr, first flight test in Project Asset (Aerothermodynamic-Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests). Payload reached 35-mi. altitude before re-entering atmosphere at 10,900 mph speed and landing about 1,000 mi. southeast of Cape Canaveral. Recovery efforts were not successful. Good data on temperatures and pressures of the payload were obtained during the 20-min. flight; the various materials of the payload were subjected to re-entry heat up to 4,000°F. (AP, NYT, 9/19/63, 8)
nasa successfully launched explorer xvm, the Interplanetary Monitoring Probe (Imp), from amr on a Thor-Delta booster. Intended to have an apogee of 173,000 mi. and a perigee of 125 mi., explorer xvm was tracked as having an apogee of 122,800 mi. and a perigee of 120 mi., with an orbital period of about four days, and an inclination of 33.3°. Essentially a continuation of the series of energetic particle spacecraft and similar in design and in some experiments to the earlier explorers xn, xiv, and xv, its 35 lbs. of instruments would measure the major magnetic field phenomena in space, including the interplanetary magnetic field, interactions of the streaming solar plasma and the geomagnetic field, galactic and solar radiation, (nasa Releases 63-249,261; Wash. Post, 11/27/63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa WTallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to altitude of 100 mi., in experiment to measure electron density profile, electron temperatures, and solar radiation in the ionosphere. Secondary objective of the flight was to check out hardware to be flown from Ft. Churchill, Can., during solar eclipse in July. (Wallops Release
usaf was reported by Aviation Week and Space Technology to be planning an expansion of its ballistic missile early warning system (bmews) to cover the southern approaches to the U.S. and possibly also to detect launches from submarines. Named Project Red Mill, the proposed system being developed by Raytheon Co. under usaf contract would use high-frequency ionospheric radar bounce techniques to detect changes in the ionospheric critical frequency made by rocket exhaust. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63, 23)
Nike-Apacbe sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carrying experiments (1) to determine upper atmospheric winds and diffusion coefficients by means of triangulation photography of sodium vapor trail, and (2) to determine atmospheric temperature from photoelectric measurement of emission line width. The flight was part of an international effort to measure winds at widely separated geographical locations, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 6/14/63)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara visited Boeing Co. in Seattle, Wash., and nasa Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, Tex., for briefings on X-20 (Dyna Soar) and Gemini projects. In Houston, McNamara said to press: “In the last six months the Department of Defense has completed with nasa an agreement on joint planning for the nasa Gemini program. We want to see how Gemini and the X-20 can be fitted together to make the best program for both military and civilian purposes. “The Gemini program provides for two men to be placed in orbit in 1964. The X-20 program proposes to place one man in orbit at a later date. While the X-20 would be in orbit less time than proposed in the Gemini program it would provide more recoverable payload because it would use a larger booster. The two programs are therefore not entirely comparable. “But because they do have similarities and are both very costly, I believe this trip to Seattle and to Houston, Texas, to visit the Manned Spacecraft Center where the Gemini program of nasa is underway is extremely important. “We will have spent about $350 million on the X-20 by the end of this fiscal year. We are requesting Congress to authorize an additional $125 million in the next fiscal year (1964) . . . .” (dod Release 334—63; msc Space News Roundup, 3/20/63, 1, 7; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/15/63)
Soviet news agency Tass announced test program of “improved types of rocket carriers for spacecraft” would be conducted May 15-July 15 in specified regions of the Pacific. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 5/12/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
Sodium-vapor experiment to measure high-altitude winds and diffusion rates was launched on Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va. Sodium vapor trail, ejected from 27 to 127mi. altitudes, was visible for several hundred miles from launch site. (Wallops Release 63—51; AP, wash. Post, 5/24/63)
Titan II was launched 5,700 mi. down amr in test of vibration levels Sri or to its employment as a booster for Gemini manned space ights. Also along on the flight was a pickaback capsule of instruments to study the exhaust plume of the missile, (upi, NYT, 11/2/63, 9)
Dummy S-IV stage for Saturn I rocket arrived at Cape Canaveral from Douglas Aircraft Co. via converted Boeing 377 Stratocruiser, marking first use of aircraft for transporting major nasa rocket components from West Coast, (upi. NYT. 7/14/63, 64)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, nasa-Director of Electronics and Control, said in address before Fourth International Electronic Circuit Packaging Symposium: “Electronics and its associated disciplines constitute the brain, nerves and senses of flight vehicles. It is estimated that about 40 per cent of our booster costs, 70 per cent of our major spacecraft dollars, and 90 per cent of our tracking and data acquisition funds go into electronics. Unfortunately, in the same context approximately 90 per cent of our flight failures, not to mention flight delays, arise from electronic failures. Success in this area is obviously a major factor in over-all mission accomplishment since a dead or unintelligent vehicle is useless if it cannot measure data and send it back to earth .... “nasa electronic research must satisfy the following requirements : “Undertake, under contract and in-house, advances in the electronic art to meet the requirements of future space flight. “Guide industry and university sponsored research, in space electronics, into channels useful to both nasa and the sponsoring industry. “Provide facilities to verify the performance of advanced electronic equipment developed for space use, irrespective of source of funding. “Conceive, develop, ground test, flight test and interpret data for nasa flight experiments designed to prove advanced electronic equipment fin-use.’ ” Dr. Kelley then described the functions of the proposed Electronics Research Center, which would be “the focal point of our electronics research efforts.” (Text)
usaf fired Titan II icbm in 5,800-mi. flight down the Atlantic Missile Range, the missile carrying malfunction-detection system similar to the one to be incorporated in Titan II Gemini booster. The Titan II also carred scientific pod containing instruments to study radiation in the missile’s exhaust plume. (NYT, 8/22/63, 22; M&R, 8/26/63, 14)	_
nasa and aec announced revision in Project Rover, canceling development of Rift (Reactor-In-Flight-Test) stage and deferring flight objectives of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application). Rover’s Kiwi ground reactor program was unchanged. Work towards development of flight systems was deferred until technology learned from Kiwi and Nerva is “satisfactorily established.” Revision was expected to save as much as $180 million of planned and programed funds in FY 1964 and FY 1965. nasa and aec now will concentrate on ground reactor and experimental engine research, development, and testing “with particular emphasis on analyzing and understanding power levels, temperatures, operating life, and problems of frequent and reliable restarts.” (nasa Release 63-285)
Italy launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket to 126-mi. altitude for atmospheric studies. Launching was first from island of Sardinia, (upi, NY T, 5/22/63,34)
Franco-Italian project to develop “Iris'’ rocket capable of delivering mail to any European city was reported by Associated Press. Powered with mixed solid-liquid fuel, the rocket is being designed to deliver 65 lbs. of mail more than 400 mi. away. Rocket would be launched vertically to predetermined altitude—around 72,000 ft.—then guided by radio to delivery point. 30 mi. from target, engine would be shut off, allowing rocket to glide; retrorockets M ould be fired to point its nose up, then Iris would descend backwards to earth. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star. 12/4/63)
J-2 rocket engine first successfully test-fired, at simulated space altitude of 80,000 ft. The one-sec. test was conducted in specially designed vacuum chamber at naa’s Rocketdyne Propulsion Field Laboratory, (msfc Historian, 5/22/63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station with 95-lb. instrumented payload to measure “ion and electron density and conductivity in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions,” and to measure solar ultraviolet and x-ray fluxes. Rocket reached 96.7 mi. altitude and for the first time “both ionization in ‘D’ region and solar rays causing it” were observed. This was the very process that formed the ionosphere, (nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching; Astro, and Aero. Eng., July 1963,9)
14-16 months’ additional slippage of Rover nuclear rocket program due to engineering and materials problems in Kiwi nuclear reactor reported by Missiles and Rockets. Dr. Harold B. Finger, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), was quoted as saying procurement difficulties were encountered because Rover lacked DX priority. No decision would be made to request a DX priority, he said, until results were obtained from the component test and evaluation program. (M&R, 3/11/63, 14-15; R-2, Stein and Morgan)
Two-stage sounding rocket instrumented to observe ionosphere was successfully launched to 215-mi. altitude by Japanese scientists near Kagoshima, Japan. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/21/63)
First technical description of U.A.R.’s Pioneer rocket appeared in Cairo newspaper Akher Saa. Article said Pioneer multistage rocket has range of 625 mi., is powered with liquid oxygen and another unnamed liquid, and is intended as space research vehicle. (AP, Houston Post, 8/2/63)
nasa announced signing $980,488 contract with Pratt and Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. to conduct research in use of fluorine/hydrogen and fluorine-oxygen/hydrogen as rocket propellants. Objective of 13-month research project was to demonstrate feasibility of a complete engine system using the two mixtures, (nasa Release 63-158)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director, said in speech before National Rocket Club in Washington that suggestions of U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint lunar landing program were impractical. Such exchange of manpower, knowledge, and funds could be of some benefit, he said, “but I tremble at the thought of the integration problems we could expect .... I really have mixed emotions, but I’m speaking only as an engineer, not as an international politician . . . .” (NYT, 9/18/63, 11; nbc Release)
usn announced Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory facilities destroyed by fire in April would be rebuilt “to provide support for current rocket motor development programs and those already planned for the next year.” (AY,Wash. Post, 5/7/63)
Rocketdyne had completed test firings of the X-8 experimental engine, one of a series of experimental rocket engines being designed and tested by Rocketdyne for usaf’s Ballistic Systems Div. in a search for advanced propulsion techniques. The X-8 engine had tested the feasibility of using liquid hydrogen as coolant for the thrust chamber. The tests showed liquid hydrogen to be a remarkably good coolant. An X-12 engine would now be built to test the possibility of achieving an increase of four to five times the pressure in the thrust chamber using coolant. This would not alter thrust at sea level but would give considerably increased thrust at altitude. {Av. Wk.. 11/11/63,99)
Solid-propellant rocket motor for Titan III test-fired for first time at United Technology Center, burning for about two min. and producing more than a million lbs. of thrust. Two such motors would be used in first stage of Titan III. (M&R, 7/29/63, 15)
usaf and Martin Co. engineers reportedly adopted a tight engineering review system in the number and types of changes in the Titan II missile to the man-rated Titan II booster for Gemini flights. System is intended to improve reliability by holding changes down to fewest possible and seeing that each of these contributes to overall reliability. Modifications that have been made include the necessary structural changes to accept the Gemini capsule, redundancy in certain key systems, and a malfunction detection system that would alert the flight crew to possible trouble. {Space Bus. Daily, 10/3/63, 20)
In first altitude test of aec’s Project Sand (Sampling Aerospace Nuclear Debris), Honest John-Nike rocket carried nuclear sampler payload to 36-mi. altitude where it was jettisoned and parachuted back to earth. Launch was conducted from Tonopah Test Range, Nev., by Sandia Corp. for aec. Project Sand was designed to determine amount of nuclear debris in atmosphere 23 to 43 mi. above earth and to develop techniques for predicting its dispersal in this region. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/27/63, 300)
Details of Soviet antimissile missile were disclosed for the first time, by Hungarian Communist Party newspaper Nepsza-badsag. The two-stage rocket has range of between 2,500 and 3,750 miles, can operate effectively against target missiles at altitudes from 20 to 200 miles. Weapon is part of long-range radar system that automatically feeds data of approaching missiles into computers; data are passed automatically to antimissile missile stations, which take over tracking; then, when approaching missile is within 600 miles, antimissile missile is fired automatically. (upi, Wash. Post, 12/8/63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched at twilight from nasa Wallops Station in the second of a series of comet experiments. At 95-mi. altitude the 100-lb. payload produced flames visible from earth and combustion products that lingered after burnout as a faint luminous cloud somewhat similar to a comet. The cloud effect was visible for a surprising five minutes, compared with less than one half minute the night before. The simulated comet was photographed from three ground positions. (Wallops Release 63-92)
usAF-sponsored solar hydrogen rocket engine (sour) was successful in series of ground tests, producing up to one pound thrust in runs of several hours. Scale-up to 10-lbs. thrust now appeared feasible. Built by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., sohr uses large, lightweight solar concentrators to focus solar energy into a cavity absorber containing a heat exchanger using hydrogen. The heated hydrogen provides thrust as it is accelerated through a nozzle. One sohr generating one to two lbs. thrust could move a 6,000-lb. payload from a 300-mi. orbit to a 22,400-mi. synchronous orbit in 20 days, compared with half a day for a chemical powerplant and 45 days for an electrical one. Specific impulse of sohr is 800 sec., compared with 400 sec. for chemicals, 1,200 for arc jets, and 5,000 sec. up for ion rockets. {M&R, 11/18/63,35)
West German Government announced that it disapproved of its citizens assisting the United Arab Republic on military rocket projects, and said that there was no proof that any West Germans were so engaged. The Israeli Parliament had appealed to Chancellor Adenauer on March 20 to take action against German scientists assisting the U.A.R. in developing military potential. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/22/63, A2)
nasa Plum Brook Research Reactor, Sandusky, Ohio, reached full power for the first time. 60,000 kilowatts of thermal energy were produced at end of two-month-long approach to power. The reactor is scheduled for basic research experiments associated with nasa’s plans to develop a nuclear rocket for interplanetary exploration. (Lewis Chronology, 2; lrc Release 63-20)
Titan II icbm flown 6,500 mi. down amr with heaviest payload ever to travel that far on a U.S. rocket vehicle. This was first Titan II launch conducted by an all-usAF crew, (dod Release 166-63; upi, Wash. Post, 2/7/63, A2; M&R, 2/11/63,13)
nasa launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Station. Payload was a 77-lb. package sent to 84-mi. altitude to measure mechanical and thermal stresses on a scientific payload during launch. (Wallops Release 63-99)
A nasa Hq press conference confirmed that the combustion instability that had plagued the 1.5 million-lb.-thrust F-l rocket engine had been corrected, nasa had assembled a team of the best propulsion experts in the country to work on the problem. The nature of the corrective action was redesign of a part of the engine behind the injector, so that fuel and oxydizer were no longer subject to surging as they entered the thrust chamber. Further redesign was underway to simplify the rather complicated series of baffles in the new part. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/19/63)
nasa Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station failed to boost scientific experiment to desired altitude because of launch vehicle malfunction. Experiment was to have studied spectral emission lines in upper atmosphere to help in determining “distribution of certain molecular and atomic species in the upper atmosphere.” (Wallops Release 63-8)
Deputy Commander of Soviet Strategic Rocket Troops, Col. Gen. Vladimir Fedorovich Tolobko, said in Krasnaya Zvezda that U.S.S.R. had perfected 100-megaton nuclear warheads for its missiles and had succeeded in creating antimissile defenses. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/21/63, A21)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket carried instrumented payload to 101-mi. altitude in experiment from nasa Wallops Station to measure density and conductivity of electrically charged particles in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions. Except for failure of solar aspect sensor, experiment was considered a success. The 80-lb. payload impacted in Atlantic Ocean 77 mi. from launch site. (Wallops Release 63-38; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
nasa simplified its launch vehicle terminology for the Saturn space booster series: Saturn C-l became “Saturn I”; Saturn C-lB became “Saturn I-B”; and Saturn C-5 became “Saturn V.” (MA, Holmes)
X-15 No. 1 flew to an altitude of 77,800 ft. and a speed of 2,834 mph (mach 4.21), as Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf) made his first flight in the research rocket aircraft, (nasa Release 63-224; Chic. Trib., 10/8/63)
Monorail rocket sled attained mach 5 speed along missile test track at Holloman afb in recent test, afsc announced, highest known speed ever reached by a monorail sled. Fired in two stages with Cajun and Cherokee rockets, the test vehicle reached 3,753 mph before being stopped near end of seven-mile track. Attachment of “flow separation spike,” similar to needle on nose of jet fighter aircraft, reduced air resistance and thus increased speed. To brake the sled, spike was flipped away from front of sled when peak speed was attained, thus increasing air drag by a factor of four. Sled was then caught by several lengths of tied-down nylon restraining straps. Major test objectives were accomplished, (afsc Release 37-74—72)
Second birthday of Michoud Operations, nasa facility in Louisiana used for fabrication of Saturn I, Saturn IBj and Saturn V rocket stages. To date, nasa had awarded $739 million in contracts which will be carried out primarily at Michoud, and some $41 million had been spent on rehabilitation and modification of plant and construction of new facilities. More than 7,800 persons are now working at Michoud, most of them employees of nasa contractors. (Marshall Star, 9/11/63,1,2)
U.S. launched an unidentified probe using Blue Scout booster. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Chief of the U.S. 14th Coast Guard District in Honolulu, Capt. George D. Synon, was quoted as confirming that a U.S. cutter had entered the Soviet rocket-test zone “by accident” earlier in the month. This was in reply to accusation by the Soviets that the U.S. had observed rocket tests on May 18 and 25. Capt. Synon stated that the cutter “did not do any observing.” (AP, Wash. Post, 5/31/63')
U.K. completed first static-firings of Blue Streak rocket planned as first stage of three-stage booster for eldo. Tests were conducted at Woomera, Australia. {M&R, 12/23/63, 9) During December: nasa’s trend toward more incentive-type contracts was outlined in Commerce Clearing House report, pointing out that in early 1962 nasa had no incentive-type contracts, by end of June 1963 nasa had awarded 10 large incentive contracts with others in negotiation, and by June 1964 the number of incentive contracts was expected to be increased by a large margin. Incentive-type contracts were expected to lower costs and improve work performance, in place of cost-plus-fixed-fee type. (Goodman, Wash,. Post, 12/18/63)
Dr. G. A. Tokaty, former chief of the aerodynamics laboratory of the Zhukovsky Academy and later chief rocket scientist of the Soviet Government in Germany (1946-47), published an article on “Soviet Space Technology” in Spaceflight, magazine of the British Interplanetary Society. Article submitted that the “Soviet Government have manifested their keen interest in the [spacej field throughout the entire history of their existence [since 1917J” and reviewed this history in interesting detail to 1961. (Spaceflight, 3/63,59-64)	.
Three-stage Nike rocket launched from Eglin afb, Fla., fourth in series of ten high-altitude probes to test methods of slowing reentry vehicles. Parachute was deployed when 500-lb. Cree payload reached peak altitude, and cameras in payload photographed action of parachute as it deployed and descended with payload. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/9/63)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was fired by nasa from White Sands Missile Range, N. M„ the 235-lb. payload to take observations of ultraviolet light and the sun’s corona, (gsfc Hist.; AP, Wash. Post, 10/2/63)
usaf launched unidentified payload with Blue Scout booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {Wash. Post, 2/20/63, Al; M&R, 2/25/63,11)
Skylark rocket launched at Woomera, Australia, reached 123-mi. altitude with experiment to measure electron densities in upper atmosphere. Secondary experiments were measurement of distribution of positive ions, x-ray spectrum of the sun and distribution of atomic hydrogen in upper atmosphere. (MdcR, 3/11/63,
Dr. Franklin A. Gifford, Jr., was awarded Dept, of Commerce’s Gold Medal for Exceptional Service for his “major contributions to science and administration, for extremely significant research and outstanding leadership in the study of turbulent diffusion in the atmosphere, and for highly distinguished authorship in the field of meteorology.” Dr. Gifford is Meteorologist in Charge of che Weather Bureau Station at Oak Ridge, Tenn. (Dept, of Commerce Release WB 63-1) Mid-February: AF Cambridge Research Laboratories conducted atmospheric-density experiment by dropping instrumented mylar sphere to earth from 160-mi. altitude. Aerobee rocket carried inflatable sphere to desired altitude from Eglin afb, Fla., the sphere’s telemetering equipment transmitting linear accelerometer data measuring atmospheric drag on the sphere, (dod Release 35-63)
usn launched Hydac sounding rocket, built by Douglas Aircraft and Lockheed, from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 12/23/63, 10)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev, opening session of World Woman’s Congress in Moscow, warned that third world war would “be a rocket nuclear war of extermination, . . . [destroying] much of what we generally call civilization.” Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova was stellar attraction at Communist-dominated congress. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/24/63 A-20)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 70-lb. instrumented payload to 106-mi. altitude, payload impacting in Atlantic Ocean 87 mi. downrange after 6 min., 40 sec. flight. Payload contained instrumentation to determine altitude and intensity of electric current systems in the ionosphere. New method of altitude determination during rocket flight was also tested. Flight was in preparation for electrojet program to be conducted from India later this year. (Wallops Release 63-81; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
nasa announced signing of formal contract with Boeing Co. for development and production of Saturn V first stage, largest rocket unit under development in U.S. Contract worth $418,820,967, largest ever signed by nasa, called for design, devel-' opment, and manufacture of 10 flight boosters and one ground test booster, as well as assistance to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center in portions of ground test program. Preliminary development of the vehicle stage, powered by five F-l rocket engines, had been in progress under interim contract since December 1961. (nasa Release 63-37)
Soviet news agency Tass announced improved types of rocket carriers for spacecraft were launched successfully from Soviet Union to central Pacific during June and July, and area was no longer off-limits for navigation of ships and aircraft. (Tass, Komso-molskaya Pravda, 7/11/63,3, afss-t Trans.)
