Scout rocket launched by usaf from Pt. Arguello, Calif., exploded in flight. {M&R, 7/6/64, 8)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with instrumental payload to obtain evidence of hypervelocity micrometeoroid impacts, samples of low-velocity cosmic dust, and measurements of electron densities. Flight failed when'rocket’s propulsion system malfunctioned and the rocket attained only 6.25-mi. altitude. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched its first Project Luster payload from White Sands, N. Mex., on an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket. Primary objectives of flight were to evaluate engineering performance of Luster micrometeoroid-sampling instrument and to collect meteoritic debris during the peak of the Leonids meteor shower. The Aerobee 150 reached 97mi. altitude, and performance of both the rocket and the instrumentation was considered “very good.” Nose cone did not fully retract, so the data collected during the flight were lost in re-entry heating and atmospheric contamination. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
U.S. airmail stamp honoring Dr, Robert H. Goddard was released at Roswell, N. Mex. Stamp was first U.S. stamp with rocket motif since Fort Bliss stamp of 1946. U.S. stamps also had been issued for Project Echo (1961) and Project Mercury (1962). (NASA Historian)
A report from GAO to Congress charged that usn had spent $13.3 million to put rocket launchers on fighter planes and then had taken them off again because they created too many problems. The rockets had caused the fighters to pitch upward, and in many cases a plane would overtake and collide with a rocket it had launched. The GAO report said that the Navy could have saved about $4 million if it had gotten information available before the launchers were ordered, (upi, Houston Chron., 7/18/64).
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched in U.S.-Pakistan project from Sonmiani reached 124-mi. altitude. Sodium vapor trail ejected during ascent was photographed by ground cameras to measure atmospheric wind directions and speeds. Launch was part of cooperative program between NASA and Pakistan’s Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee, (nasa Rpt. srl)
More than 20 Martlet rockets were launched from Barbados site during first year of the high-altitude research project conducted by Canada’s McGill Univ., New York Times reported. Fired from 16-in. naval cannon, Martlet has motor that ignites once the rocket is in flight, sending rocket to altitudes between 60 and 100 mi. It lands about 100 mi. southeast of Barbados in the Atlantic. 200 shots, financed by U.S., were planned for 1964. (AP, NYT, 1/11/64)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumbs Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (nasa Rpt. srl)
The Soviet Union marked Rocket Day, a new observance, by warning the West of the “stupendous power,” great range, and pinpoint accuracy of its missiles. Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, chief of the rocket forces repeated the Kremlin’s claim that it had antimissile missiles. (upi, NYT, 11/20/64, 27)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to an altitude of 117 mi. The payload contained three experiments, the most important of which involved the measurement of the composition of the neutral atmosphere in the altitude region of 62-155 mi. All three experiments operated satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
msfc Director Dr. Wemher von Braun discussed Saturn IB/Centaur launch vehicle at Michoud tour and said that “there will be money to develop the booster in the FY ’66 space agency budget.” Dr. von Braun said he believed Saturn IB/Centaur would compete on cost-effectiveness basis with Titan III; with the contemplated missions, cost of $20 million per launch was possible. Dr. von Braun also disclosed NASA studies indicating manned circumlunar flight with Gemini spacecraft was feasible. Such a mission was not being seriously considered at this time, however. (M&R, 5/18/64,17)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska instrumented payload attained 96-mi. altitude. Experiment objective was to obtain data on visible aurora in three wavelengths and data on vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was to be supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Payload also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors. Good telemetry signal was received for 383 sec., but door covering instrumentation apparently came off at about 20,000-ft. altitude and most of the sensors were damaged by the severe environment. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Rice Univ. payload was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 94-mi. altitude. Two photometers, two scintillators, three Geiger counters, and two magnetometers made coordinated measurements of light intensity and particle fluxes. (NASA Rpt. srjl)
Cape Kennedy celebrated its 14th anniversary as a missile and space vehicle launching base. The first missile from the Cape was a hybrid Bumper (V-2) booster with an Army Wac Corporal second stage, launched on a 200-mi. trajectory on July 24, 1950. Since then more than 1,400 launches had been made. Since its establishment in 1958, NASA had been responsible for 84 flights. (Marshall Star, 7/29/64, 9)
Astrobee 1500, most powerful of U.S. sounding rockets, was flight-tested from NASA’s Wallops Island, Va., launch site, its second stage carrying 156-lb. instrument package to 1,212-mi. altitude before impact in the Atlantic Ocean 1,326 mi. from launch site. This was second flight test of the solid-propellant rocket; adequate performance data were not achieved in first NASA flight test (April 1963) because nosefairing failure ended the flight only 16 sec. after launch. In today’s flight, 27 min. of telemetered data were received on acceleration, vibration, temperatures, and pressures, and from preliminary examination the test appeared successful. (Wallops Release 64-76)
NASA announced it had selected General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics Corp. to perform preliminary work, estimated to be worth about $1.7 million, on development of advanced type of nuclear reactor for use in powering spacecraft. Company would conduct studies on use of tungsten to contain uranium fuel in compact high-powered reactor that might power a rocket. Work would be performed for Space Nuclear Propulsion Office operated jointly by NASA and aec. (nasa Release 64-173; WSJ, 7/15/64)
First flight tests of new 16-in. rocket motor in Project Harp (High-Altitude Research Project) were expected in May at Barbados Is., B.W.I., Missiles and Rockets reported. Static tests on the motor were now underway. The rocket motor would be used to boost gun-launched payloads in the McGill University-U.S. Army project. The May series would include some 30 firings of the rocket vehicle and new versions of the Martlet-series missile. Project sources indicated use of multiple staging with new rocket motor could make possible the orbiting of 50-70 lb. payloads into 60-100 mi. earth orbit. (M&R, 1/27/64, 22)
NASA and Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research announced agreement for joint scientific sounding rocket project. Under the agreement, four Nike-Apache sounding rockets carrying sodium vapor payloads would be launched from Coronie, Surinam, near the equator next autumn. Netherlands would provide scientific payloads and launch site, as well as other support facilities in Surinam. NASA would provide the rockets and launching device and train Dutch launching personnel, (nasa Release 64-197)
NASA announced that usns Croatan had completed its successful shakedown cruise off the Virginia-North Carolina coast during which a number of sounding rockets were launched for NASA. Electronic equipment and operational procedures were checked out in preparation for using the usns Croatan as a mobile launch platform early in 1965. During this three-month NASA expedition, forty or more scientific experiments would be launched from the usns Croatan as part of NASA’s sounding rocket program in connection with the International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY), 19641965. (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Release 64-294)
U.S.S.R.’s unsuccessful attempts to send payloads to Venus Feb. 26 and Mar. 4 were reported in the U.S. press. Failures were attributed by U.S. military officials to difficulties with upper-stage rocket supposed to send the spacecraft out of parking orbit and onto its interplanetary course., (Av. Wk., 3/30/64,15; Finney, NYT, 4/1/64,1, 10)
Flight-rating test for F-l rocket engine was delayed from mid-year to end of the year, and tests leading up to the qualification would begin in September. {M&R, 5/25/64,9)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill with grenade payload to obtain atmospheric temperature, wind, density, and pressure data. The rocket attained 86.5-mi. altitude and all but the first of the 12 grenades detonated. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumba Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Group Achievement Award presented to Centaur “E” Stand Project personnel at NASA Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station for their “significant contributions resulting in the successful completion of research testing of the Atlas 116 D booster under simulated loading and environmental conditions and [for] providing data vital to the first flight of the Centaur vehicle.” (lrc Release 64-56)
Two NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and returned good data. The first attained 95-mi. altitude, its instrumented payload measuring light intensity and particle fluxes. Rice Univ. payload included two photometers, one scintillator, three Geiger counters, One Geiger tube, and two magnetometers. The second rocket reached 117-mi. altitude with instrumented payload to obtain data on charged particles responsible for the visual aurora and on those responsible for auroral absorption. (NASA Rpts. srl)
West German government issued denial that any West German firm was producing missiles suitable for military application. Denial was in response to Soviet diplomatic complaint that missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads were being produced in West Germany, recalling rocket test-firings last December by Weapons and Air Equipment Co. of Hamburg. German government said investigation of the Hamburg company established that it possessed no manufacturing facilities. Two days later, according to Missiles and Rockets, the company halted production of rockets that it “apparently planned to export to Middle Eastern Arab nations.” Company officials told M&R the decision was made voluntarily to prevent further embarrassment to West German government. (NYT, 2/6/64, 5; M&R, 2/17/64, 9)
Officials of NASA’s Saturn program expressed interest in a miniature version of the Rover nuclear rocket engine. Called the “Poodle,” the liquid-propellant engine was developed under an AEC contract with Space Technology Laboratories of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge.	(M&R, 6/8/64, 22)
NASA launched second re-entry experiment for aec, designated Reentry Flight Demonstration-2 (RFD-2), on a Scout booster from Wallops Island, Va. Nonradioactive mockup of nuclear isotopic generator was sent to 800-mi. altitude by three-stage Scout, before the payload reentered atmosphere on its ballistic trajectory and impacted about 250 mi. southeast of Bermuda. Primary objective of rfd-2 was to acquire data on generator disassembly and fuel capsule burnup rate for use in advanced generator designs. In previous flight test (rfd-1 in May 1963), nonradioactive model of Snap-lOA nuclear reactor was tested in atmospheric re-entry; rfd-i demonstrated that space reactors can be designed to melt down and disassemble upon re-entry. The nonradioactive mockup in rfd-2 was a model of an isotopic-thermoelectric generator. Earlier testing had shown that heat created during re-entry could be used to burn up isotopic generator, leaving very minute particles which then would be dispersed at high altitudes to eliminate any radiation danger. (Wallops Release 64-72)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket at White Sands, N. Mex., the rocket serving as a test round for a series of rockets to be flown in Sweden in July, and containing micrometeoroid-particle collector as follow-up to Aerobee 150 experiment three years before. Despite extremely low peak altitude (about 30 mi.—the second stage broke up after about 4.5 sec. of burning), instrumentation functioned until impact except for aspect sensor and Dovap. No useful scientific data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., reached 107-mi. altitude with four spectrographs to obtain spectra of planets, but no data were obtained because attitude control system’s despin valve failed and the rocket spun out of control. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda published erroneous map of the target area in the Pacific for its rocket tests which it had previously announced would begin August 4. The map placed the impact areas within 10Q mi. of populated islands, but the targets as previously defined were several hundred miles from nearest inhabited areas and in another part of the Pacific. (Shabad, NYT, 8/3/64)
According to breakdown of FY 1965 budget of NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology, NASA would initiate preliminary design study of advanced fluorine-hydrogen (flox) rocket engine in FY 1965. The new engine would be based on results of experimental fluorine program with RL-10 engine. (M&R, 2/17/64,18)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket with ionosphere experiment payload from Wallops Island, Va., to peak altitude of 105 mi. The payload carried instrumentation to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in the D and E regions of the ionosphere; it impacted 114 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Provided by Univ. of Illinois and the Geophysics Corp. of America, the experiment was an investigation of the International Year of the Quiet Sun (1964-65) (iqsy). (Wallops Release 64-37)
Trustees and President of Clark Univ. announced Clark’s proposed new library would be named the “Robert Hutchings Goddard Library” in honor of the distinguished rocket pioneer, who was an alumnus and professor of physics at Clark. (Clark Announcement)
The second set in a series of three dual ship-to-shore sounding rocket launchings was conducted at 5:24 p.m. EST from the usns Croatan and at 5:27 p.m. from Wallops Island, Va., about 200 mi. apart. Sodium vapor was ejected by the Nike-Apaches from about 25 mi. up to an altitude of approximately 125 mi. The reddish-pink clouds were visible for several hundred miles along the East Coast. (Wallops Release 6484; NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with instrumentation to obtain data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and on charged particles responsible for auroral absorptions was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 127-mi. altitude. Instrumented payload included five charged-particle detectors, aspect magnetometer, and accelerometer. All flight objectives were met. (nasa Rpt. SRl)
X—15 No. 3 flown 'by NASA pilot Milton O. Thompson to 63,000-ft. altitude and 2,045-mph speed (mach 3.10). The X-15 rocket engine burned 41 sec. before Thompson cut back power to planned 40 per cent. Then engine unexpectedly cut off. Thompson could not restart it, and he had to make emergency landing on Cuddeback Dry Lake. Cause of premature shutdown was malfunction in engine control system. This was fourth forced landing in 107 X-15 flights. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Balt. Sun, 5/22/64)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska payload to obtain data on the visible aurora and on the vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was to' be supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Payload also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors. The rocket attained peak altitude of 103 mi., and the flight appeared satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Gemini-Titan II (GT-2) rocket which was to launch unmanned Gemini spacecraft arrived at Cape Kennedy. It arrived by C-133B cargo plane from Martin Co. plant in Baltimore where it had undergone testing. (AP,Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel,7/12/64)
U.K. successfully launched its second Blue Streak rocket booster from Woomera, Australia, in development test. Blue Streak was slated to serve as first stage of eldo’s multistage launch vehicle. (M&R, 10/26/64,11)
Kenneth W. Gatland, Vice-President of British Interplanetary Society, described space progress in Great Britain in Astronautics & Aeronautics. He pointed out that Britain not only played a leading role in establishing eldo but also was contributing to eldo “the 300,000-lb.-thrust Blue Streak ... as the booster for a three-stage satellite launcher [Europa 1].” Other activities—not counting the eldo contribution—had made Britain, in cooperation with Australia, “easily the biggest participant in space research outside the United States and the Soviet Union. “Upper-air research with Skylark rockets began at Woomera in February 1957 and has continued to the present time. Black Knight rockets have reached heights of 500 mi., and with it a number of interesting investigations have been made on both re-entry and stabilization and control of rocket vehicles at high altitudes. The growth of the Weapons Research Establishment at Woomera as a launching, tracking, and communications center under joint investment by the British and Australian Governments, and latterly by ELDO and NASA, has made this facility the finest and best-equipped overland rocket range in the Western World. . . . “With the advent of Sputnik 1 in October 1957, Jodrell Bank [radioastronomy facilities] quickly established itself on both sides of the Iron Curtain as an important center for space tracking and communications. . . . “In addition, the General Post Office in 1961-62 built an experimental ground station at Goonhilly Downs, Cornwall, for relaying telecommunications signals between the United States and the United Kingdom via Telstar and Relay. There are plans to develop this station into a ground terminal for a global telecommunications network. . . . “In July 1963, it was announced in Washington that Black Knight would be used by the United States, Great Britain, and Australia in a joint program of re-entry research [Project Dazzle] to he conducted over the Woomera rocket range.. . . “[British] universities and industry . . . [supplied] scientific instruments for the satellites S—51 and S-52 built and launched by the United States. A third scientific satellite, S-53, wholly engineered in the United Kingdom, will be launched by Scout in 1966.. . . “In the small rocket field, excellent results are currently being obtained with the Skua meteorological rocket .... a cheap and simple tool for the meteorologist to conduct routine research measurements in the upper atmosphere. . . . “Finally,. . . [studies] are currently being made in the United Kingdom into the concept of the Aerospace Plane, or space Transporter. . . .”	(A&A, 7/64, 18-26)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., in test of hinged-fin assembly with modified wedge designed to produce about 5 rps at Apache burnout and to obtain temperatures in flight at various points on the fin panel. Rocket reached 90-mi. altitude; performance of rocket and instrumentation was considered good, with exception of temperature probes, which were lost shortly after lift-off. (NASARpt. srl)
usaf OAR announced determination by Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists R. A. Skrivanek, R. K. Soberman, and Tom Ryan that nocti-lucent clouds were composed of meteoric particles or of residue of burned out meteors. The determination was made after extensive examinations of noctilucent cloud particles gathered by specially designed rocket nose cones sent aloft on Nike-Cajun rockets in joint afcrl-nasa—Univ. of Stockholm program. The researchers expected that another series of noctilucent cloud experiments to be conducted in Sweden this summer would confirm these results. ( oar Release 4-64-3)	"
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was fired from Wallops Island with 82-lb. payload containing grenades, detectors, and associated equipment. the grenades electing and exploding at altitudes ranging from 24-to 59-mi. altitudes. This flight was followed 20 min. later by Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Fort Churchill, Canada, with identical payload, a less successful flight because second-stage motor failed to ignite. Grenades were ejected and detonated but at altitudes too low to obtain useful data. The close-order firings were first two in current NASA, series to gather comparative data on winds and atmospheric temperatures up to 55-mi. altitude at widely separated locations on nearsimultaneous basis. (Wallops Release 64-7)
Mating assembly of Saturn V rocket sections would be accomplished with aid of air cushions, Marshall Star reported. General Motors’ Defense Research Laboratories was developing for MSFC a special tool—basically 20 “air pads”—for lifting rocket section and its wheeled carrier. Air pads would lift the huge sections about 1% in. from the floor. Tool designers were also working on mechanical mover for the air-cushion device so that one man would be able to move the stages forward and laterally. (Marshall Star, 1/8/64, 1-2)
Continuing the current series of sounding rocket experiments to obtain comparative characteristics of the upper atmosphere at widely separated locations, NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets at Wallops Island, Fort Churchill, and Ascension Island. The rocket payloads ejected 12 grenades which detonated at intervals up to 55-mi. altitude. (Wallops Release 64-16)
usaf successfully flew Athena re-entry test rocket from Green River, Utah, to target area at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. USAF said that “some test objectives were achieved.” Launch was said to be second time in five launches that the four-stage missile completed the 357-mi. course. (AP, Phil. Inq., 10/4/64)
Archeological relics dating as far back as 3,500 B.C. were being uncovered at future site of man’s rocket launchings to the moon—Merritt Island, Fla. (nasa Space Sheet, 10/16/64)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra of nehulosites of certain star fields. Rocket attained 118-mi. altitude and instrumentation performed properly, but failure of the attitude control system prevented the rocket from pointing at the targets and there were no experimental results, (nasa Rpt. srl)
The Athena rocket was successfully fired by usaf from Green River, Utah, to a target area in the White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. (M&R, 12/14/64, 10)
Launching of Saturn I SA-5 rocket from AMR was postponed at T—100 min. because blind flange in liquid oxygen line to S-I stage had not been removed after recent pressurization check. Launch was rescheduled for Jan. 29. (Wash. Post, 1/28/64; Marshall Star, 1/29/64, 1)
Largest monolithic solid grain ever poured was well into its 20-day curing cycle at Aerojet-Dade Div. of Aerojet-General Corp. The 120-in., 37-ft.-long “Subscale 1” would be test-fired in the same cast-cure pit in midAugust. Both batch and continuous mix processes were used with the continuous mix working for 55 straight hours in the 2^-day pouring job. The 100-ton grain was to produce about 600,000 lbs. thrust in checking out the nozzle, materials, and processes developed for the upcoming 260-in. large solid rocket test at Aerojet. (M&R, 7/13/64, 11)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., with Rice Univ. experiment “Sammy I” to measure and study causes of auroras and airglow. Vehicle carried 68-lb. payload, designed and built by professors and students in Rice Space Science Dept., to peak altitude of 56 mi. before impacting 74 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. No recovery operation was conducted; telemetry data during flight would be analyzed by the Space Science Dept. This was first of four similar experiments to be conducted under NASA grant; remaining three flights would take place at Ft. Churchill, Canada. (Wallops Release 64-3)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., sent instrumented payload to 117-mi. altitude in successful test of the sounding rocket’s attitude control system with the improved inertial reference system. Payload was recovered immediately after impact and found to he in excellent condition. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
French Dragon rocket was successfully fired to an altitude of 275 mi. from a base in Iceland, National Center of Space Research announced in Paris. Fired in cooperation with Icelandic scientists, the sounding rocket carried instruments to measure energy and direction of particles from Van Allen radiation belts. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/2/64; M&R, 8/10/64,11)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, called on defense industry at aiaa meetings to stop what he called unjustified and potentially dangerous “gloom and doom talk” about future defense spending. He said Pentagon r&d spending, currently at a $5.5 billion annual level, should remain relatively stable in coming years. Such pessimistic fears on part of industry, based on recent very small decrease in defense budget, Fubini said, could prompt top engineers and scientists to move into other industries and thereby weaken U.S. military posture by reducing industry’s capability of generating new ideas for dod and developing new weapons, (aiaa Booster, 7/2/64; NYT, 7/2/64,32M; Av. Wk„ 7/13/64,19)
NASA awarded $5,944,000 supplemental contract to the Boeing Co. for additional r&d and planning in the manufacture of Saturn V first-stage rocket at Michoud Operations, La. (New Orleans Times-Picayune, 4/4/64; Marshall Star, 4/8/64,10)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 111-mi. altitude, but telemetry transmitter failed. Five charged-particle detectors, an aspect magnetometer, and an accelerometer were included in the instrumentation, which was to have obtained data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and those responsible for auroral absorption. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ascension Island to peak altitude of 75.8-mi., in flight to measure wind and temperature and derive density and pressure from 12 grenade explosions during rocket ascent. All grenades ejected and detonated as programed, and ground microphones recorded the sounds, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Nomadic Lapps in northern Sweden had registered complaints about ESRO’s rocket launching plans from new base being built about 100 mi. northeast of Kiruna. Beginning in 1966, esro would fire 50 rockets per year 120 mi. into the ionosphere every year for eight years. But the Lapps, living in the target area for the rockets, were fearful for the safety of themselves and their reindeer. (Reuters, NYT, 10/21/64, 26)
At aiaa banquet, G. Edward Pendray Award was presented to Andrew G.	Haley for his “pioneering contribution to the analysis of governmental and international legal questions arising from the rapid development of space travel and space exploration, as exemplified by his book, Space Law and Government, published in 1963.” aiaa Lawrence B. Sperry Award was presented to Daniel M. Tellep, Manager of Launch and Entry Thermodynamics Research and Engineering at the Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., for Tellep’s “contributions to re-entry technology through participation in the United States’ first re-entry flight test program and for advancements in the field of heat transfer as related to aerospace programs.” Also presented were the 1964 Graduate and Undergraduate Student Awards to Richard C. Lessman and Lawrence S. Iwan. (aiaa Annual Mtg. Program; aiaa Booster, 7/2/64)
NRX-A2 Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) experimental reactor, run at full power Sept. 24, was restarted in test of reactor system in the low-power, low-flow region of operation. Analysis of data from this run confirmed design predictions and indicated no unusual start-up or control problems. Test was conducted by Aerojet-General and Westinghouse Electric Corporations for nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, (snpo; NASA Press Conf. Transcript, 11/12/64)
New York Times reported that aec and USAF were jointly supporting work on a relatively simple nuclear rocket engine (Project Poodle) that was likely to be flyable in the next five years. The rocket would be clustered to propel an upper rocket stage, and it was reported that the newly designed device might save more than $300 million on space missions which had already been planned and for which conventional upper stages had been contemplated. The novelty of the new engine stemmed from the fact that its power would be derived not from a controlled nuclear reaction but from the decay of radioactive polonium 210. Propulsion would be provided in gentle acceleration of about % lb. thrust sustained for periods of weeks. (Witkin, NYT, 6/1/64)
usaf successfully launched the fifth Asset re-entry test vehicle in its series of six from Cape Kennedy. The glider rode pickaback aboard a singlestage Thor booster. (Wash. Post, 12/9/64; M&R, 12/14/64, 10)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from NASA Wallops Station to 71-mi. altitude with payload of 12 explosive charges to provide data on atmospheric winds and temperatures and effects of the “warming trend” in the upper atmosphere. Previous measurements had been made during February “warming trend,” which moved in westerly direction across the northern hemisphere. This second and unexpected warming trend appeared to be moving in easterly direction. (Wallops Release 64-25; nasa Rpt. srl)
United Technology Center (utc) had developed hybrid rocket combining best features of solid and liquid propellants and 20% more powerful than any solid-propulsion rocket operational today. Rocket used solid fuel—butadiene rubber—and liquid oxidizer—liquid oxygen. utc Assistant Manager of Advanced Technology Douglas D. Ordahl said the rocket also was safer than solid-fueled rocket motors and was simpler and more reliable than liquid-fueled rockets. (WSJ, 5/26/04)
usaf announced an ion rocket would be tested in 90-day orbital flight next spring, using Agena vehicle. Electrical power to operate the engine would be provided by Snap 10A reactor, the first test combining an electrical propulsion engine and a nuclear reactor in space. Spokesmen said similar rocket had been successfully tested in August in suborbital flight from Pt. Arguello, Calif. The new engine, developed by Electro-Optical Systems, was said to have “developed the unheard-of specific impulse level of 7,800 seconds—roughly 20 times greater than the best chemical rockets of today.” {Wash. Post, 10/6/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/64)
Intelligence information reaching Washington revealed that Red China had begun to manufacture its own MiG jet fighters. Significance of the new development was that Red China might have the principal ingredients of a nuclear force—A-bombs and jet fighter bombers. (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/31/64) During December: Boeing Co. was named systems integration contractor for NASA’s three-stage Saturn V booster. Work would be performed at the firm’s launch systems branch at New Orleans under an 085 million supplement to its contract as prime contractor for the booster’s first stage. Systems and engineering integration would be conducted in three major areas: the vehicle, systems documentation, and systems development breadboard facility. On the vehicle itself, Boeing would be responsible for mechanical interface engineering, instrumentation and telemetry systems, aerodynamics and flight mechanics, flight evaluation and operation, atmospheric environmental design criteria, malfunction detection system, structural heating and environmental control system, structural dynamics, and vehicle assembly documentation. (M&R, 1/4/65,10)
USAF was considering developing new 40,000-lb. thrust third stage for Titan III launch vehicle, Aviation Week reported. Burning high-energy fuels, the new stage would replace the 16,000-17,000-lb.-thrust transtage. Meanwhile usaf asked six firms for proposals for a back-up and/or replacement rocket engine system for the transtage, said to be experiencing development difficulties. But usaf was not asking for upgrading of the 16,000-lb.-thrust system at this time. (Av. Wk., 4/6/64, 13; SBD, 4/10/64,59)
Kiwi B—4E reactor, operated at nearly full power for eight minutes Aug. 28, was restarted and run for a second time at power level nearly identical to that achieved during the first experiment. Test lasted about 2.5 min. and reactor performance was excellent. This demonstration of capability to rerun reactors came much earlier in the NASA—AEC nuclear rocket program than had heen anticipated; officials considered it a significant step toward economical development of nuclear propulsion technology. Harold B. Finger, Manager of NASA—aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, said: “We have proved that nuclear rockets can give the kind of performance that is needed for advanced space missions. We could use essentially this type of reactor for experimental flights in the early 1970s and have an operational system by 1975.” Test marked final one planned for Kiwi, (snpo; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64)
The third and final set in a series of dual ship-to-shore sounding rocket launchings was conducted at 5:53 a.m. EST from the USNS Croatan and at 5:56 a.m. from Wallops Island, about 300 mi. apart. Sodium vapor was ejected by the Nike-Apache launched from the ship up to an altitude of approximately 141 mi.; sodium vapor failed to eject from the payload launched from Wallops Island. (Wallops Release 64-85; nasa Rpt. srl)
Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Electric Corp. successfully conducted first power test of a Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application ) experimental reactor designated the nrx—A2. The reactor was operated for six minutes, at powers ranging from 56% of full power to near full power. All test objectives were met. Nerva was a project of NASA—AEC Space Nuclear Reactor Office, (snpo; Lewis News, 10/30/64, 1; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/25/64)
120-in. solid-propellant rocket motor being developed by United Technology Center for usaf was static-fired for nearly two minutes, a “completely successful” test. (SBD, 1/30/64,163)
X-15 No. 1 flown by usaf pilot Maj. Robert Rushworth to maximum speed of 3,920 mph (mach 5.76) and altitude of 101,000 ft., in flight near Edwards AFB, Calif. For the flight a special camera was installed in the plane’s fuselage to test optical degradation caused by temperatures of up to 1,200° F. This was the 103rd flight of the rocket research aircraft, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Chic. Trib., 3/28/64)
United Technology Center’s 120-in.-dia., solid-propellant motor for Air Force’s Titan III—C booster was static-fired successfully for more than 110 sec. with a new ablative nozzle-throat which probably would be substituted for the carbon throat previously used in test firings. (Av. Wk., 11/23/64, 34; utc)
NASA successfully launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to 89-mi. altitude from White Sands, N. Mex. Purpose was to map photon-emitting night-sky sources. Gas-filled proportional counters were used to detect and measure energy of the x-rays. The rocket performed well and experimental results were good, but 10-20% of desired data were lost because yo-yo despin mechanism failed to deploy. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA announced Purdue Univ. had been awarded grant of $840,000 to finance expansion of Purdue’s Jet Propulsion Center. The construction would enable Purdue to conduct studies of ultra high pressure combustion in rocket thrust chambers, (nasa Release 64-145)
dod announced additional $30,414,000 had been obligated to Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, on cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for design, development, and fabrication of Titan III space booster, (dod Release 3-64)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Univ. of New Hampshire instrumented payload was launched from Thumba Range, Trivandrum, India, to 102-mi. altitude. Payload instrumentation included densitometer and baroswitch, to determine altitude and intensity of electric current systems in the ionosphere near the magnetic equator. Performance of both rocket and instrumentation was considered good; telemetry signal was received for 395 sec., and good data were expected, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
usaf Secretary Eugene M. Zukert said that the Titan III rocket would make its maiden flight during the coming summer. Eventually, Titan III would launch the usaf’s Manned Orbital Laboratory, probably sometime in 1967 or 1968. In addition, Zuckert announced that three firms, Douglas Aircraft Co,, General Electric Co., and Martin Co., had been authorized to go ahead with work on orbital space-station studies. (UPl, Louisville Courier-Journal, 6/6/64)
Atlas-Centaur 4 (AC-4) hurled its Centaur second stage into orbit around the earth with a mass model of the Surveyor lunar spacecraft in its nose. The first-burn performance of the Centaur rocket sent the stage into a nearly circular parking orbit of 100 mi. perigee and 106 mi. apogee. The second bum should have put the rocket into an oval path taking it out as much as 5,000 mi. from earth; however, the attempt to restart the RL-10 engines failed and the stage began to tumble and roll. After about 15 hr. in orbit, the Centaur stage and its Surveyor dummy payload re-entered the atmosphere over the South Pacific east of Australia and disintegrated. NASA said all prime mission objectives had been met, including the demonstration of the structural integrity of the Atlas-Centaur during powered flight, testing of the guidance system which was flying closed loop for the first time, verification of the structural and thermal integrity of the Centaur nose fairing and insulation panels, and verification of the performance of the jettison systems for the nose fairing and insulation panels. Project officials were investigating what caused the stage to tumble, preventing propellants from reaching the pumps. (NASA Release 64289; Lewis News, 12/24/64, 1; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 24; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/11/64)
Static-test firing of Titan II rocket for first Project Gemini flight was postponed at Cape Kennedy until Jan. 14 because of possible malfunction of first-stage propellant valve during countdown, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/11/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/64)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Ft. Churchill, Canada, reached 144.5-mi. altitude in experiment to study very low energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Rocket performance was good and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Two of three trays containing experimental emulsions did not completely retract and were damaged by heat and upon impact by water. Preliminary estimate was that 100% good data were obtained by the emulsion that functioned properly and 60% by the two which did not retract. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
nasa successfully launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to an altitude of 522 mi., with instrumented payload to measure the earth’s geomagnetic field from the ground to Javelin peak altitude. Data from this experiment would be combined with that obtained from a Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched 90 sec. earlier. This was the first Javelin launched from the Churchill Research Range, (nasa Rpt. srl) ,
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with instrumented payload to study very low energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. The rocket reached 133.7-mi. altitude, ejected recovery package. After land recovery of the payload, examination revealed the emulsion trays all had fully extended and fully retracted properly, so that very good data would be obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
nasa Aerobee 300 sounding rocket with Univ. of Michigan payload to measure electron and neutral particle temperatures in the atmosphere was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 200-mi. altitude. Instrumentation included electrostatic probe, omegatron gage, Bayard-Alpert ion gage, as well as a solar aspect sensor to provide proper attitude. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory, although the omegatron made no measurements, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to 86.6-mi. altitude, but nose cone failed to release. Using CW propagation transmitter, Gerdien condenser probe, and ion trap, experiments were to have measured ambient electron and ion density, monitored integrated ultraviolet flux from the sun, and tested two 12.267-mc shroud antennas. The propagation experiment obtained good data from 83 sec. to peak, but no other experimental results were obtained. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Engineers proposed development of intercontinental ballistic troop transport capable of carrying 1,200 troops to any trouble spot on earth in 45 minutes. Such an Ithacus rocket transport would be ideal for helping stamp out “brush fire” conflicts, according to engineers Philip Bono and George C. Goldbaum of Douglas Aircraft who spoke at aiaa annual meeting. If funds were committed to project, they considered the ICBM transport system might be operational by 1975.	(Houston Chron.,
NASA successfully launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket to an altitude of 110.8 mi. from Wallops Island, Va. Experimental objectives were: (1) to measure daytime ion and electron densities and solar ultraviolet flux in the region from 31—124 mi.; (2) to test efficiency of loop antenna section for extending CW propagation measurements to “D” region altitudes. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Two NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rockets were launched from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The first rocket reached 126.5-mi. altitude carrying instrumented payload which was recovered after impact. Electron measurement experiment did not work, but the other experiments apparently were successful: hypervelocity micrometeoroid collectors, cosmic dust collectors, and momentum and energy measurements as correlative data for the collectors. The second rocket reached 145.5-mi. altitude in successful nighttime test to study distribution of Lyman-alpha radiation. Scanning ultraviolet spectrometer and a photometer were used. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
Final Gemini unmanned flight test (GT-2) from etr was postponed after a last-second engine misfire on the Titan II rocket. The trouble occurred 1.7 seconds after the Titan II booster engines ignited: loss of hydraulic pressure caused one of the two engine nozzles to swivel out of place; and automatic system sensed this and immediately extinguished both engines in the rocket’s first stage one second before lift-off. A NASA spokesman said that one of the nozzle tubes received a slight crack as a result of the malfunction and that extensive checking of all systems must be completed before a decision would be made as to whether the entire first stage would be replaced. The Titan II was to have lifted the 6,900-lb. Gemini capsule to 106 mi. in the suborbital flight and then accelerated it to faster and hotter reentry than normal. A parachute landing in the Atlantic was projected for the capsule and recovery planned. Chief goals of the flight, second in the Gemini series, would have been to test the heat shield as well as control, life support, and other systems. NASA said the delay meant the first manned Gemini flight would not take place until the second quarter of 1965. GT—2 would be attempted again in January. (Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib. 12/10/64; Balt. Sun. ■	12/10/64; Witkin, NYT, 12/10/64)
Black Knight rocket was fired at Woomera Rocket Range in U.K.-U.S.-Australia Project Dazzle. Minister of Supply Allen Fairhall said the rocket reached 370-mi. altitude, where second stage rocket ignited to drive instrumented re-entry package back through the atmosphere. (Reuters, Houston Post, 8/7/64)
Geraldo de Carvalho Silos told the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that Brazil would establish a rocket center near Natal and would seek U.N. sponsorship for the facility. The U.N. had been asked to sponsor a similar international facility at Thumba, India. (NYT, 11/4/64,39)
NASA launched a 110-lb. instrumented payload to measure upper atmospheric day-glow emissions from Wallops Station, Va., aboard a four-stage solid-propellant Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket. Day-glow studies were extended to higher altitudes than previous observations and tests of instrumentation being considered for future orbital missions were conducted. The payload, containing a spectrophotometer, ultraviolet photometers, and a rotating filter wheel photometer, was carried to an altitude of 548 mi. as scientific data were telemetered to ground receivers for 17 minutes. Impact occurred in the Atlantic 930 mi. from the launch site. (Wallops Release 64-79; nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with experiment to obtain optical spectra of night ultraviolet airglow. Rocket attained 1'13.5-mi. altitude, and the attitude control system kept the two fast spectrographs pointed accurately at the horizon, permitting four-minute exposure of the faint molecular oxygen Herz-berg bands. Also included in payload was a Nikon camera to obtain star-field backgrounds for aspect determination, (nasa Rpt. srl)
USAF began awarding small study contracts to industry to explore various aspects of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Directed toward the orbiting of a 4-ton laboratory in 1968 to help DOD determine the military role of manned space flights, mol would be launched by a Titan III—C rocket and would orbit for approximately one month. Contracts were let last month to the Martin Co. to study the role of Titan III—C in relation to launching the laboratory. Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and the AiResearch Div. of the Garrett Corp. got contracts for study of environmental control systems. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/5/64)
A scheduled flight of the X—15 rocket ship to test star-tracking cameras was canceled when rain soaked lakebeds used as landing fields for the plane. No new date was scheduled. (Wash. Post, 11/10/64)
According to Hebrew Univ. sources, Dr. Menahem Steinberg of Hebrew Univ. in Jerusalem had developed new oxidizer for use in solid-fuel rocket engines, said to be superior to those in general use because the gases produced by combustion would be of a low molecular weight and so would increase propulsion power. The sources said two years would be required to develop and confirm the new discovery. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 4/2/64)
Five-segment 120-in. rocket motor for Titan III exploded after 55 sec. during static firing at Edwards afb, Calif. Explosion caused extensive damage to new $ 10-million solid-motor test facility, dedicated just three hours earlied by SSD commanding officer Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, who had called the new stand “the most sophisticated and highly instrumented facility in the world.” Stand was operated for usaf by United Technology Center (utc), and further tests were shifted to utc’s test facility at Coyote, Calif. Cause of explosion was thought to be failure of casing weld when a “boot” in the bottom of the motor was removed. {M&R, 5/11/64,16)
Japan launched its first meteorological sounding rocket from the National Space Development Center’s testing range on Nii Jima Island. The two-stage rocket reached 68.2-mi. altitude. (AP, NYT, 7/23/64, 46; AP, Wash. Post, 7/23/64)
Gemini spacecraft launched into orbit in unmanned test April 8 (GT-1) re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated midway between South America and Africa. Attached to the ll-ft.-long spacecraft was 20-ft.-long cylindrical rocket stage. They had been orbiting the earth at altitudes from between 100 and 190 mi. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/14/64; AP, Houston Post, 4/14/64)
President Johnson stated in press conference: “This past week the United States has demonstrated in at least eight different situations this Nation’s determination to insure both peace and freedom in the widest possible areas. “Progress toward these ends is frequently slow and rarely dramatic, but it should be viewed in the perspective of history and not headlines. . . The President listed the first seven situations, then “And finally, we have witnessed and the whole world has witnessed with pleasure the remarkable success of our Saturn rocket, the most powerful rocket thrust known to man. This rocket, I am happy to say, was first recommended by our committee [Senate Preparedness Subcommittee, chaired by Johnson] in 1958.” (Transcript, Wash. Post, 2/2/64, A7)_	_	_	_
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory successfully completed eightminute power experiment with the Kiwi—B4E reactor, the eighth and final reactor built for power testing under the Kiwi phase of the NASA—aec nuclear rocket program. All planned test objectives were met and reactor performance was smooth. Duration of the test was limited by the liquid hydrogen capacity of the Jackass Flats, Nev., facility. (snpo; Wash. Post, 8/29/64)
usaf launched four-stage Athena re-entry test rocket from Green River, Utah, for a partially successful flight. Flight was aborted automatically before third-stage ignition because of an inverter malfunction. (M&R, 10/5/64,11)
Paper surveying space nuclear propulsion by Harold B. Finger, James Lazar, and James J. Lynch of NASA and aec was presented to AIAA. “. . . a major forward step has been taken in the milestone established by the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in its design, development, operation, and analysis of the KIWI-B4D nuclear rocket reactor experiment. This test provides good reason for confidence in the successful execution of the tests to be conducted this year and next and provides a good basis for confidence in the availability of nuclear rockets when they will be required for the performance of advanced space missions. The availability of these nuclear rocket propulsion systems will give this country a propulsion capability far advanced over any other rocket propulsion system available. . . . “Progress has been made in electric propulsion, particularly in the thrustor area, but important research data and technology are also beginning to be provided in the difficult area of nuclear reactor electric generating systems required for prime electric propulsion in space. “Beyond these systems, other advanced nuclear propulsion concepts are not yet well enough understood to justify undertaking significant development efforts. Careful and systematic accumulation of research information to evaluate the feasibility of these concepts and to arrive at a real understanding of them appear appropriate.” (Text)
Army Corps of Engineers announced award of $8,079,003 (NASA funds) fixed-price contract to Malan Construction Co. of Koppers Co., Inc., for construction of a rocket engine test stand at the NASA Mississippi Test Operations, (dod Release 856-64)
Lightning damaged certain electrical systems in Titan II launch vehicle and ground checkout equipment at Cape Kennedy, where the booster rocket was being prepared for launching of unmanned Gemini spacecraft (GT—2). NASA spokesman said: “The over-all effect of this condition may result in a delay of the first manned flight [GT-3] into next year.” (Houston Post, 8/19/64; upi, NYT, 8/19/64, 15)
Usaf launched Thor-Agena booster combination from Pt. Arguello with unidentified payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/25/64)
usaf Project Asset space glider was launched from Cape Kennedy with single-stage Thor booster to 31-mi. altitude before returning downward at 8,800-mph speed and impacting 900 mi. southeast of the launch site in the Atlantic Ocean, usaf said die spacecraft temperatures had reached about 2,000° in the 25-min. flight, which was termed “very successful.” (AP, Wash. Post, 10/28/64; M&R, 11/2/64, 8)
President Lyndon B. Johnson said in article for The Journal of the National Education Association: “The nation that has the schools has the future. No less than our rocket thrusts into outer space, there is urgently needed a national education thrust of massive proportions that will help us master the problems of our age. “. . . figuratively and physically we are building not only a pathway to the stars but also—hopefully—bridges of understanding here on earth. “It is here on earth that our task begins. And for that task, the education attainments of our fellow Americans are, in some categories, far less than they should be. . , .” (AP, NYT, 1/3/64,21)
Hurricane Cleo battered Cape Kennedy rocket launching site with gale winds up to 65 mph. Technicians dismantled second stage of Titan II for GT—2 Gemini flight and stored it in hangar, lashed first stage of the Titan II to the pad. No damage was done to the Titan II or other lashed-down rockets. (Wash. Post, 8/28/64; AP, Balt Sun, 8/29/64) 766-598 0—66-----20
1.5 million-lb.-thrust S—1-8 Saturn booster was successfully fired in a fullduration static test at msfc. Built by Chrysler Corp. at Michoud Operations plant near New Orleans, the booster was the first to be produced by private industry. (AP, 6/12/64)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket reached 85-mi. altitude in launch from Chamical, Argentina. Instrumented payload apparently obtained good data in measurement of electron density, electron temperature, ultraviolet and solar x-radiation flux. Test was second of two Nike-Cajun launches by NASA and Argentina’s National Commission of Space Research. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office announced successful completion of cold-flow experiments on a Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application) experimental reactor, designated the nrx-ai, by the Aerojet-General and Westinghouse Electric Corporations. The experiments were designed to check the structural stability and flow dynamics of the nrx-a reactor under nonpower conditions. All test objectives were met. (SNPO)
Britain successfully launched a Blue Streak rocket from the Woomera Range in Australia. The rocket reached an altitude of 110 mi. and a top speed of 6,400 mph. Because the engines cut off seven seconds earlier than had been planned, the rocket fell 382 mi. short of impact area. The rocket traveled 620 mi. northwest of Woomera and disintegrated over Western Australia. (NYT, 6/6/64)
msfc . planners believed a post-Saturn V booster would be needed if the U.S. were to undertake a manned planetary exploration program, Missiles and Rockets reported. They also favored the so-called Block II vehicle, which would have two stages using new propulsion techniques and high-pressure engines. First stage would be recoverable. (M&R, 7/13/64, 9)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., with Univ. of N.H. instrumented payload reached 90-mi. altitude, but experiment results were not obtained because of telemetry failure at 4.05 sec. Primary purpose of flight was to check out instrumentation for Nike-Apache sounding rocket experiments to be conducted on the IQST Mobile Launch Expedition in early 1965. A second checkout launch was scheduled for mid-January, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket reached 124-mi. altitude in U.S.-Pakistan experiment from Sonmiani. Sodium vapor trail from the rocket was photographed by ground cameras to measure direction and speeds of upper atmospheric winds. (NASA Rpt. srl)
United Technology Center successfully test-fired its 120-inch-dia., 1million-lb.-thrust solid propellant rocket motor for nearly two minutes at Edwards AFB, Calif. The firing was the fourth static test within two months. The 250-ton rockets were being developed for the first stage of the Air Force’s Titan III—C standard space launch vehicle, under contract to the AF’s Space Systems Div. The Titan III—C was scheduled to orbit a variety of manned and unmanned payloads, including the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). (M&R, 1/4/65, 26)
NASA conducted two sounding rocket launches from USNS Croatan, near Wallops Island, Va., to determine whether or not ship’s radar could track metalized-mylar spheres with sufficient accuracy to obtain significant geophysical data. Both payloads, each consisting of two metalized-mylar spheres, were provided by Univ. of Michigan. The first rocket, a Nike-Apache, reached 136-mi. altitude and two spheres ejected and inflated, but ship’s radar did not acquire track. Land-based radars did obtain sphere trajectory data. The second rocket, a Nike-Cajun, reached 92.6-mi. altitude, its spheres ejecting and inflating as planned but deflating earlier than expected. Ship’s radar provided questionable position data which would have to be analyzed further. (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Rpts. srl)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with instrumented payload to obtain comparison of electron density profile with wind profile and to measure electron temperature. Sodium vapor ejected as scheduled and Langmuir probe functioned well. Launch was to have been one of four spaced through a single night, but high winds and subsequent cloud cover forced cancellation of the other three, (nasa Rpt. she)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands, N. Mex., with JPL payload to measure ultraviolet light and fluctuations in earth’s magnetic field. Rocket started large yaw maneuvers soon after 30 sec. and reached only 18.2-mi. altitude; no new scientific data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
38th anniversary of first liquid-fuel rocket flight—that of Dr. Robert H. Goddard whose rocket flew 184 ft. in 2y2 sec. at Auburn, Mass., in 1926.	(A&A/1915-60, 21)
Test firing of Bell Aerosystems Co. 40,000-lb .-thrust fluorine-hydrogen rocket engine showed combustion efficiency exceeded 95 per cent of theoretically obtainable maximum. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64, 69)
Unnamed NASA official quoted 'by Howard Simons in Washington Post as saying there was “increasing evidence” that U.S.S.R. was building powerful new rocket booster. However, it was not used in launching three-man voskhod i spacecraft. U.S. Government officials were said to believe voskhod i launched by “old, reliable space boosters . . . mated into a multistage rocket.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 10/ 14/64)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carried instrumented payload to 127-mi. altitude, in successful flight to obtain data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and on those responsible for auroral absorption. Instrumentation included five charged-particle detectors, an aspect magnetometer, and an accelerometer, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
NASA launched Saturn I SA-5 from AMR in first successful Right test of both stages of the rocket. The 1.5-million-lb.-thrust S—I stage performed as planned, and the 90,000-lb.-thrust upper stage (S-IV) powered by six liquid-hydrogen RL-10 engines separated and burned properly for eight minutes, attaining orbital speed. The orbited body (spent S-IV stage, instrument unit, payload adapter, Jupiter nose cone, and 11,500 lbs. of sand ballast) weighed 37,700 lbs., nearly 20,000 lbs. of which was payload. As the first of the Block II Saturn I’s, SA-5 was first Right test of both Saturn stages and only the second flight test of a liquid-hydrogen powered rocket stage (see Centaur AC-2, Nov. 27, 1963). The five Block II Saturn I’s differ from Block I predecessors in that they have live upper stages, S—I propellant tanks are extended to provide 100,000 lbs. usable propeflant, and tail fins are added for stability. During the flight eight onboard motion picture cameras photographed various operations of the rocket and a TV camera provided real-time photographs of separation and ignition of S-IV stage. Shortly after S-I burnout, the motion picture cameras were ejected, impacting downrange where pararescue men recovered seven of them. This test of the world’s largest known rocket proved flight capability of Saturn I’s liquid-hydrogen, clustered-engine upper stage and demonstrated the vehicle’s capability to orbit 20,000-lb. payload. {Marshall Star, 2/5/64, 1; NYT, 1/30/64, 1; M&R, 2/3/64, 17-18)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with upper atmosphere grenade experiment was launched from Wallops Island to 73-mi. altitude, and series of 12 grenades was ejected and detonated at intervals from 23-to 58-mi. altitude. Experiment was coordinated with similar grenade shot from Sweden’s Kronogard Range (81-mi. peak altitude) and with another experiment launched there on a Nike-Apache rocket to measure noctilucent clouds (77-mi. peak altitude). These launchings marked beginning of third series of grenade experiments conducted by NASA gsfc from Wallops Island, Fort Churchill Research Range, and Ascension Island, with Sweden joining the group for this series. The Fort Churchill and Ascension Island launchings were canceled because of weather conditions. (Wallops Release 64-59; NASA Rpt. srl)
Second U.S. manned rocket flight was made 20 years ago today, when Northrop MX-324 flying wing was towed aloft and propelled by 200-lb.-thrust Aerojet rocket engine and flown for four minutes by test pilot Harry Crosby over Harper’s Dry Lake, Calif. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/64, 44; A&A, 1915-60, 47)
European Space Research Organization (ESRO) made first launching, a British Skylark sounding rocket, to altitude of 125 mi. from Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia. {NYT, 7/11/64, 5)
NASA and the Swedish Space Committee agreed to extend for another year their cooperative sounding rocket studies of the upper atmosphere and noctilucent clouds. Under the new agreement, the U.S. would provide the eight payloads and part of the ground equipment on a loan basis. Sweden would provide four of the eight sounding rockets and most of the ground instrumentation. Launching, payload recovery, and other support operations would be carried out by Swedish personnel. The joint studies began in 1961. (nasa Release 64-131)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ascension Island carried Univ. of Michigan instrumented payload to 98-mi. altitude to measure atmospheric pressure, temperature, density, and winds using the pitot-static probe. All objectives appeared to have been met. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska instrumented payload attained 107-mi. altitude and obtained data on the visible aurora and on vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors also were included in die payload. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra of nebulosities of certain star fields. Abnormal coning motion of the rocket and subsequent pitch-roll coupling caused the rocket to reach only 46-mi. altitude; and the attitude control system had no chance to point at the programed targets, so no experimental data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA used an Aerobee rocket to launch two experiments from White Sands Missile Range. The experiments were to measure cosmic dust and electron densities in the upper atmosphere. (M&R, 12/21/64, 8) NASA also successfully launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., to peak altitude of 121 mi. Objective was to obtain data on the electron density distribution in the ionospheric D region by means of a radio propagation experiment, and to measure photoemission currents. (NASARpt. SRL)
Space-General Corp. was building new five-ton rocket vehicle for usaf to use in testing recovery and re-entry parachutes at El Centro, Calif., Missiles and Rockets reported. Vehicle, called “Hi-Dive,” would be dropped from aircraft at 45,000 ft., slowed down by stabilization parachutes for firing of rockets to speed it up to mach 5. Test parachute would deploy at 30,000 ft. Delivery was expected next spring. (M&R, 9/14/64, 11)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched within 10 min. of each other to provide data on evening atmospheric temperatures, winds, densities, and pressures from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, Va., using explosive-grenade technique. Ft. Churchill rocket reached 77.5-mi. altitude, ejecting and detonating all 12 grenades. Wallops Island rocket reached 74.9-mi. altitude, ejecting and detonating all but the ninth grenade. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
The French Government reported two successful firings of its four-stage Berenice rocket, a mach-12 re-entry test vehicle, from the lie du Levant testing center in the Mediterranean. Tests were conducted by the Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (ONERA). The Berenice project was designed to supply re-entry data for use in France’s strategic missile program. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,25)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., reached 96.5-mi. altitude in successful flight to measure brightness of stars in the ultraviolet. Experiment instrumentation for the NASA rocket was provided by Space Astronomy Laboratory of the Univ. of Wisconsin (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to an altitude of 78 mi., to test the prototype Nike-Cajun grenade payload produced by Zimney Corp. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory, except for failure of 12th grenade to explode. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. Wasatch Div.’s 156-in. solid-propellant rocket motor was fired for 130 sec. and terminated within 0.5 sec. of predicted action time, although the last 30 sec, of the firing was completed without the plastic nozzle extension, which parted at the metal attachment flange. Severe erosion of the 5-ft. nozzle extension skirt, which was constructed entirely of ablative materials, weakened the structural integrity of the skirt and it blew off after about 100 sec. of motor burning. The firing continued normally after loss of the skirt with only about an 8% degradation in' thrust, which had peaked at just over 1.4 million lb. This was the first demonstration of thrust-vector-control using a movable nozzle. The rocket motor case used in this feasibility demonstration was undamaged, would be used in the follow-on 156-in. program which was awaiting dod approval. (Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 26)
NASA Wallops Station launched a sounding rocket with instrumented payload to determine the effects of the ionosphere on delicate low-frequency radio radiation receiving sensors. A Nike-Apache rocket boosted the payload, designed to test instrumentation for possible use in the space astronomy program, to an altitude of 85 mi. Preliminary data indicated the experiment was successful. (Wallops Release 64^-57)
NASA launched an Aerobee rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., to a height of 95 mi. The payload, an inflatable paraglider equipped with mylar-sandwich-type meteoroid penetration sensors, was flown in a meteoroid shower to investigate meteoroid hazards in space. Experiment performed as planned, vehicle worked successfully, and payload was recovered. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10; NASA Release 64-141, 64-135)
NASA investigative committee recommended series of tests to determine whether static electricity caused accidental ignition of Delta rocket motor in the Spin Test Facility at Cape Kennedy last April 14. In its preliminary report, the fact-finding committee said there were four possible causes for the ignition: heat, shock, outside radio signals, and electrical impulse. The first three possibilities seemed unlikely, but they would be studied further. Committee considered it “possible, however, that static electricity could have built up in such a way as to cause ignition.” Until the committee completed its study and made its fined report, NASA would not fly the X—248 motor. (NASA Release 64-98; KSC Release 55-64)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumba Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (nasa Rpt. SRl)
After two previous failures, usaf successfully launched four-stage, solidfuel Athena missile. Rocket was fired from Green River, Utah, on estimated 15-min., 475-mi, flight to White Sands, N. Mex., carrying one of series of subscale experimental re-entry vehicles being tested as part of program to develop advanced re-entry vehicles for space travel and ICBm’s. No other details of flight were given. (AP, Hartford Courant, 7/9/64)
NASA successfully launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to an altitude of 444 mi., with instrumented payload to measure the earth’s geomagnetic field from the ground to Javelin peak altitude. Data from this experiment would be combined with that obtained from a Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched 90 sec. earlier. (NASA Rpt. srl)
USAF launched Titan II rocket from AMR on successful 5,000-mi. flight to test its ability to function both as an icbm and as booster for Project Gemini manned spacecraft. The Titan II carried Gemini malfunction detection system and damping device to counteract vibrations. (M&R, 1/20/64, 11)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with Johns Hopkins Univ. instrumented payload was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 100mi. altitude. Rocket carried spectrophotometric instrumentation which measured absolute intensity of certain spectral features in the far ultraviolet region of the airglow during an aurora. Although rocket did not reach predicted 157-mi. altitude, the experiment provided general confirmation of the only previous experiment in that region, and with much higher resolution, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Of the formerly operational Thor missiles that were being converted to space missions, nsaf spokesman said: “This program has proved that it is possible to take a complex vehicle that was designed as a weapon and convert it to peaceful uses at a substantial saving and without sacrificing reliability. We can expect that there will be more than this.” afssd estimated converted booster cost up to $150,000 less than new Thor booster. (M&R, 4/6/64, 31)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded two NASA contracts for work to be performed at NASA Mississippi Test Facility: $3,801,146 contract to Chaney and James Construction Co., Inc., for construction of booster storage building, RP-1 dock, and booster transfer dock; and $2,401,542 contract to Farrell Construction Co. for construction of main canal. (dod Release 128-64)
NASA-modified Areas sounding rocket, launched at Wallops Island, Va., carried white rat in specially designed, instrumented payload compartment in nose cone of the rocket to 114,000-ft. altitude, where the payload separated from the booster, a parachute deployed, and the container floated down to the surface of the ocean. Package was recovered by helicopter a few minutes later about 20 mi. offshore, and the rat was returned to NASA Wallops Station for observation and analysis. During the flight, biomedical data such as heartbeat and body temperature of the rat were telemetered to ground stations. Launch was part of Bio-Space Technology Training Program. (Wallops Release 64—65)
Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) flew X—15 No. 2 to 83,000-ft. altitude and 2,966-mph speed (mach 4.49). Engine of the rocket research aircraft burned 76 sec. This was the first flight of the rebuilt No. 2 aircraft, and performance was successful, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
An experiment designed by youthful rocket scientists ended in tragedy when “Gus,” a two-ounce mouse, was killed in a mishap. Several youths from Schenectady had designed the rocket, which was to carry Gus to an altitude of 6,000 ft. The rocket went off at an angle upon launch and smashed into the ground killing its passenger. The launch, which had been protested by local humane societies, was viewed by a crowd of 400. (AP, L.A. Herald Examiner, 7/19/64)
NASA and India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy announced they were jointly conducting series of four sounding rocket launchings from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station to investigate equatorial electro jet, electric current flowing along earth’s magnetic equator at about 60-mi. altitude. Thumba range is located near southwestern tip of India, on the magnetic equator. In the four electrojet experiments, India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy provides launching site and supporting facilities; personnel for sounding rocket launch operations, acquisition of data and data analysis; and supporting ground magnetometer and meteorological observations. NASA provides Nike-Apache rockets, loans the launcher, telemetry equipment, and supplementary magnetometers. Indian launch and telemetry personnel were trained by NASA. Rocket magnetometer was built by Univ. of New Hampshire through NASA contract. (nasa Release 64-19)
Four Soviet parachutists at world parachute jumping championships, Leutkirch, West Germany, set new world record for men’s team jumping from 1,000 meters, landing an average of 66.5 centimeters from center of target. Previous world record of 89.5 centimeters was set two days earlier by U.S. team. (Reuters, NYT, 8/12/64,35) Nike-Cajun launched from Ft. Churchill reached 77.5-mi. altitude with 12 grenades ejecting and detonating during rocket ascent. Ground-based microphone array recorded time and direction of detonation sounds’ arrivals to obtain atmospheric temperature, wind, density, and pressure data. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops Island ejected 12 grenades during its ascent to 72-mi. altitude, with similar ground-based microphone array to obtain data. Nike-Apache launched from Kronogard reached 75.5-mi. altitude with micrometeoroid-particle-sampling payload. Although sampling cans did not seal completely, preliminary evaluation indicated that data would be recovered. Experiment was cooperative effort of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories and Meteorological Institute of Stockholm Univ. Nike-Cajun launched from Kronogard, with grenade payload functioned properly, but no usable data were obtained because of loss of Dovap near Cajun ignition. For same reason, peak altitude was unknown. (nasa Rpts. srl)
India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy and NASA announced signing memorandum of understanding for Indian-U.S. cooperation in meteorological sounding rocket program. Data gathered in the program would contribute to International Indian Ocean Expedition, a continuation of research begun during igy, concentrating on weather and atmospheric conditions related to the Indian Ocean area. Under the agreement, India Dept, of Atomic Energy would provide, transport, assemble, and launch Loki-Dart sounding rockets and payloads; operate the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Range; and coordinate launchings with those of other countries in International Indian Ocean Expedition. NASA would lend radar equipment, train Indian personnel, and provide technical advice. (NASA Release 64-39)
usn commissioned the guided missile ship Norton Sound at Baltimore, Md. For 12 years previously Norton Sound had served as a seagoing test platform for various missile systems, particularly for numerous sounding rocket and “Rockoon” launches, (dod Release 468-64)
European Space Research Organization launched second British Skylark sounding rocket with scientific payload to altitude of 125 mi. from Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia. This launch and identical one the previous day were initial attempts of the 10-nation organization. (NYT, 7/11/64, 5)	_	_
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice-president of Aerojet-General and director of Solid Rocket Operations, announced the firing of a small solid propellant motor which successfully started and stopped more than six times. In the test, Aerojet used a 4-in. motor with 6 lbs. of propellant. (M&R, 11/23/64,9)
Placing a 100-in. telescope in orbit by 1975-1980 for studying the stars was “not an unreasonable goal,” Dr. Leo Goldberg told iau in Hamburg. The Harvard Univ. astronomer summed up arguments for telescope in space by saying that he could not agree with those “who prefer to look at the universe through a hazy, dirty, semi-opaque atmosphere.” Cost of such a project could be justified, he said, only if expected lifetime of such an instrument was long. However, he cited Soviet and U.S. progress toward space rendezvous techniques and expected increases in rocket booster power, and said: “The future looks terribly exciting.” (Sullivan, NYT, 9/1/64)
Fourth stage of four-stage Blue Scout rocket failed to ignite after USAF launch from Cape Kennedy. The booster was to have sent a USAF scientific probe 23,000 mi. into space to study earth’s magnetic field. Preliminary estimates indicated the 33-lb. payload reached altitude of several hundred miles before it fell back into the Atlantic Ocean. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/13/64)
