S—ic—1, first stage of the Saturn V booster, rolled out of the Manufacturing Engineering Lab at msfc exactly on schedule. The stage was moved to the Quality arid Reliability Assurance Lab where it would be checked out automatically in preparation for static firings, (msfc Release 65-239)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with four nrl solar-study experiments was launched from wsmr to 115-mi. altitude. Rocket performed well and three experiments functioned as planned, providing good data: ultraviolet spectroheliograms were obtained, spatial detail in Lyman-Alpha light on the solar disk was photoelectrically recorded, and solar Lyman-Alpha flux measurements were made by the ion chamber. The fourth experiment was to have recorded the comet Ikeya-Seki against the corona, but because of a mechanical failure in the white-light coronagraph experiment these data were not obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Evaluation of the Soviet space effort should be done in terms of Russian rather than U.S. requirements and considerations, suggested William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: “To look at things from the Russian angle for a change may provide a new view of the whole space race.” Hines suggested that the orbits of the Molniya satellites were egg-shaped because with 12-hr. periodicity “the Molniya-type satellite stays over the homeland about two-thirds of the time and comes back at exactly the same time each day.” He said that the U.S.S.R. probably had no weather satellites “because it does not need this branch of the weatherman’s art.” A possible reason that there were no polar-orbiting Soviet photographic reconnaissance satellites like the U.S.’s Samos was that they were not needed. No Saturn V-type launch vehicle development was evident, Hines concluded, possibly because “Russia’s approach to [lunar landing] is not necessarily ... the same as America’s. ... A revealing hint along this line is contained in a recent issue of Moscow News. . . . The author puts forward the suggestion that a lunar landing and return mission might be organized using two spacecraft rather than one, each of which could be launched by a rocket smaller than Saturn V.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/65, A14)
NASA had awarded Thiokol Chemical Corp. approximate $16-million, multiple-incentive-development contract to develop a 100-lb.-thrust rocket engine for use in spacecraft attitude control and maneuvering systems and for launch vehicle ullage and attitude control systems. Designated c-1, the engine would be powered by storable hypergolic liquid propellants, (nasa Release 65-322; msfc Release 65-262)
S-IVB stage for the Saturn V booster was successfully test-fired for full duration at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento Test Center. In a test simulating a lunar flight, the stage ran for three minutes, was cut off for 30-min. orbital coast period, and then re-ignited for 355-sec. run. (Marshall Star, 8/25/65, 1)
Soviet professor V. V. Fedynskiy, in an interview with UchiteVskaya Gazeta, said that proton i had demonstrated the possibility of getting more powerful spaceships into orbit, which, if necessary, could lift into space a crew and a large quantity of research equipment. He said use of the new rocket booster would permit more intensive studies of space, including those that would allow a more thorough research of the physical fields and internal structure of the earth directly from space. Such studies would be of primary interest for geophysics and geology, he said.	(17chitel’skaya Gazeta, 7/22/65, 4)
NASA launched 3.5-ton Aerobee 350, new two-stage research rocket, from Wallops Station, Va., in first flight test. The 52-ft.-long, 22-in.-dia. rocket carried 367 lbs. of performance instrumentation to peak altitude of 235 mi. and impacted in Atlantic Ocean 160 mi. from launch site. Designed and developed by Space-General Corp., Aerobee 350 had a main stage “sustainer” propelled by four liquid-fuel engines, each developing 4,100 lbs. thrust. Booster stage used a solid propellant Nike motor with 51,000 lbs. thrust. Booster and sustainer stages fired simultaneously, with the booster burning out and separating about 3.2	sec. later. The rocket would boost a minimum-weight payload of 150 lbs. to an altitude of 290 mi. and a maximum payload of 500 lbs. to 210 mi. (Wallops Release 65—37; nasa Rpt. srl)
Indonesia test-fired a research rocket from a site “somewhere in Indonesia,” Djakarta radio reported. The rocket reached 210-mi. (338-km.) altitude, (upi, Houston Chron., 8/8/65)
Soviet news agency Tass announced that firing of a new type of multistage rocket booster on Jan. 31 had been so successful that further tests in the Pacific series had been canceled. The rocket had travelled more than 8,000 mi. in the Pacific southwest of Hawaii, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/2/65; upi, IE ash. Post, 2/3/65)
R. E. Clarson, Inc., of St. Petersburg, Fla., was awarded a $2,179,000 contract for alterations to Launch Complex 34, Cape Kennedy, to accommodate the Saturn ib rocket. Army Corps of Engineers made the award, (ap, Miami Her., 2/3/65)
NASA Aerobee 300A sounding rocket was successfully launched from Wallops Station, Va., to a peak altitude of 326.2 km. (203.6 mi.). Primary objective was the nighttime measurement of the density and temperature of neutral No using an omegatron mass spectrometer, and the simultaneous measurement of electron temperature and density using a small cylindrical electrostatic probe. A secondary objective was the testing of a lunar optical sensor especially developed for thermosphere probe application. Univ. of Michigan provided the experiment instrumentation. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had selected the Apparatus Div. of Texas Instruments, Inc., for contract negotiations expected to exceed $1 million for development of a weather-measuring device to be carried on the Nimbus B weather satellite: an experimental sensor, Iris (Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer), would he designed to collect information on the atmosphere’s vertical temperature, ozone, and water vapor distribution on a worldwide basis. Nimbus B was scheduled for launching by a Thorad Agena D booster in 1967. (gfsc Release G-21-65)
Second Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with experiment to obtain measurements of comet Ikeya-Seki was launched by nasa from Wallops Station, Va. The 205-lb. payload, consisting primarily of an Ebert-Fastie scanning spectrometer and an attitude control system for pointing the instrumentation at the comet, was boosted to peak altitude of 117 mi. (Wallops Release 65-69)
An unmanned instrument-packed Gemini spacecraft (gt-2) was launched from Cape Kennedy on Titan II launch vehicle in suborbital shot preliminary to U.S.’s first two-man venture. Aboard was an automatic sequencer which issued orders at precise times en route to fire the rocket’s second stage, to separate the spacecraft from the rocket, to jettison the spacecraft’s storage section, to cartwheel the spacecraft into a reentry attitude, and to open the spacecraft’s parachutes. The rocket reached a maximum altitude of 98.9 mi. and a speed of 16,708.9 mph before impacting 2,127.1 mi. downrange. The Gemini spacecraft descended by parachute into the Atlantic 16 mi. short of the planned impact point and 52 mi. from the carrier U.S.S. Lake Champlain which recovered the capsule an hour and 45 min. after launch. The capsule was reported in excellent condition. Major experiments for which the test was intended were apparently complete successes: a test of the heat shield; a test of the retrorocket system; and a test of the sequencing system. Despite its successes, the test had some difficulties: a fuel cell that would be the primary electrical system in the spacecraft during long-duration manned flights failed to operate before launching because of a stuck valve; the temperature was found to be too high in the cooling system of the spacecraft, (nasa Release 64—296; MSC Roundup, 1/3/65, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/19/65; Houston Chron., 1/19/65; upi, Rossiter, Wash. Post, 1/20/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 1/20/65)
Potential of the Saturn IB was noted in the New Orleans Times-Picayune: “The payload potential of the Saturn I—B boosters now under production at Michoud seems to have escaped general attention in discussions about space missions and the rocket assemblies assigned or assignable to carry them out. These and other factors are significant in connection with efforts under way, just coming to light, to intrude on, supplant or degrade the SI-B in the Apollo or other programs for which it is fitted. “The first of the ‘new Saturns,’ or intermediate Saturns, of the Chrysler Corporation’s Space Division has reached Cape Kennedy for the initial lift-off in tests and flights that will lead to human exploration of the moon. “Payload requirements vary of course for different objectives of this 12-shot series. Regardless of what is first put aloft, the i-b assembly is designed to send into desired orbit 36,000 pounds of functional vehicle—not to mention the 30,000 pounds of a burned-out second-stage, should that lagniappe be added. “This rating compares with the 26,000-pound payload Soviet spacemen boosted into orbit last July 16; with 21,000 pounds sent into orbit by the Titan 3-C June 18; with the rated 25,000-pound payload capacity of the Titan 3-C; with the 22,000-pound payload rating of the ‘old Saturn’; with the 18,000-pound payload dispatched by an ‘old Saturn’ a year or two ago; and with 4,000 pounds orbited by the Atlas.” {CR, 8/19/65, A4674)
Patent granted to Barnes Engineering Co. on an instrument that could distinguish a rocket flash from a sunset—an important distinction in the automatic tracking of missiles. The invention was already in use at a Government launch site for research in missile development, reported the New York Times. Lockheed Aircraft Co. received a patent for a reentry vehicle designed for more accurate landings than had been made with the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft. Invented by Charles H. Christenson, the craft had wings that could be extended for flight in the atmosphere or folded for launching and space travel. The vehicle’s tail section would exert considerable drag after reentry; ring-shaped control surfaces could reduce the drag when extended rearward. (Jones, NYT, 9/4/65, 27)
France announced successful launching in the Sahara of the Emeraude stage of the Diamant booster. (M&R, 3/15/65, 11) dies on declining basis until 1970. Sen. A. S. Mike Monroney (D-Okla.), Chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee investigating ways to keep helicopter lines alive, suggested increased support from major airlines as possible alternative to Federal aid. Stuart G. Tipton, President of Air Transport Association which represented almost every scheduled U.S. airline, testified that helicopter lines received about $1 million a year in indirect support and that “as a matter of principle, this is as far as the airlines should go or be expected to go.” He added that experience and advances in helicopters and poor-weather landing equipment were about to make helicopters potentially profitable in all large cities. Withdrawal of Federal support now would be disastrous. (Clark, NYT, 3/9/65; Clark, NYT, 3/10/65, 69)
A $784,600 contract had been awarded to Mechling Barge Lines, Inc., for towing three Saturn space vehicle barges, NASA MSFC announced. Two of the barges, Promise and Palaemon, would be used to carry the Saturn I and IB boosters. A third, being readied, would transport the larger Saturn V booster. The contract covered a one-year period. (msfc Release 65-128)
Italy launched a French Centaure rocket in collaboration with the European Space Research Organization (esro), the Italian Defense Ministry announced. The rocket was launched from the Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia to gather information on atmospheric particles at between 60- and 100-mi. altitude. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/8/65, 3)
Memorandum of Understanding for a cooperative Argentina-U.S. program of meteorological sounding rocket research was signed by Teofilo Tabanera for the Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales (cnie) and Hugh L. Dryden for NASA. Specific purpose of this experimental program was to obtain high-altitude meteorological data in the vicinity of Chamical, Argentina, by Boosted-Dart and Areas sounding rockets and to evaluate Argentine ground support equipment in conjunction with the payloads. General purpose of the experimental program was “to develop a basis for future meteorological rocket soundings on an operational basis.” The program was contemplated as “one element in a projected inter-American, experimental, metero-logical sounding rocket research network (exametnet) .” (Memo of Understanding)
British Meteorological Office’s Skua solid-propellant sounding rocket was described by Kenneth Owen in Indian Aviation. The eight-foot-long, five-inch-diameter rocket had been in use since the beginning of the year as a tool for weather observations and other research. A series of Skuas would be launched as part of iqsy; launchings were planned at the rate of three a week during the nine two-week periods of IQSY known as “World Geophysical Intervals.” (Indian Aviation, 3/65, 73-74)
The first flight-model S-IVB second stage for the Saturn IB booster was test-fired at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento Test Center to demonstrate its flight readiness before formal acquisition by NASA. The stage’s 200,000-lb.-thrust J-2 engine was fired for 452 sec. (7V2 min.) without mishap. Test was computer-controlled throughout, marking “the first time a fully automatic system has been used to perform a complete checkout, propellant loading, and static firing test on a space vehicle.” (nasa Release 65-267; msfc Release 65—202; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1, 10)
NASA and DOD had approved first phase of a General Dynamics proposal for 30% -uprated Atlas slv x3 booster. This phase covered only reliability improvement by introduction of new components. Order to proceed on actual uprating was expected this month. (M&R, 3/15/65,
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket, launched from Wallops Station, Va., attained peak altitude of 90.5 mi. (145 km.). Primary experimental objective was to measure spectral irradiance of the stars Spica and Alkaid in the wavelength interval from 1,100 A to 4,000 A. Instrumentation consisted of an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer with photometers and optical telescope. Attitude control was obtained with a modified Attitude Control System (Acs), a roll-stabilized gyro platform, and an optical tracker—the combination known as Strap. The Strap system performed correctly. Due to an incorrect gain setting, the star-tracker failed to lock-on throughout most of the flight. The telescope and spectrometer functioned properly, but obtained no data due to the failure to lock-on. Experiment was conducted by GSFC. (nasa Rpt. srl) During May: A camera capsule from the Saturn I sa-7, launched from Eastern Test Range Sept. 18, 1964, was found in shallow waters off San Salvador in the Bahamas. Color film in the capsule had deteriorated and was not usable. The capsule was the third one found of the eight flown on the sa-7. The first two were found in November 1964, near San Salvador and Eleuthera Islands. Film in these capsules was in good condition. (Marshall Star, 5/19/65, 6)
U.S.S.R. made public a statement issued by Soviet Foreign Ministry accusing Britain of using its territory to train West German troops in “handling rocket weapons that can bear nuclear warheads.” The British Embassy in Moscow, recipient of the statement, made no comment, (ap, NYT, 9/13/65)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station, boosted 51-lb. payload with ionosphere experiment for the Univ. of Illinois and the gca Corp. to 113-mi. (182-km.) peak altitude. Payload carried instrumentation to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in D and E layers of the ionosphere. No recovery was required since data from the experiments were radioed to ground stations during the seven-minute flight. Experiment was last nasa 1964—65, iqsy project. (Wallops Release 65-79; ap, Wash. Post, 12/17/65, A8)
Soviet Union launched a “new type” space booster that spanned more than 8,000 mi. of the Pacific, according to Tass. The firing was said to have been so successful that a second planned shot was canceled. (M&R, 1/8/65, 8)
Prof. S. N. Vernov, corresponding member of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, noted in Tass interview the unusual weight of proton I and its special equipment for studying cosmic particles of super-high energy. He said the method for counting the particles, worked out eight years ago by Prof. N. L. Grigorov, had made it possible to determine the total energy of each particle separately. Scientists had hesitated to use the method in space because of the weight of the equipment. This problem had been solved with the creation of a more powerful booster, he said. (Bakinskoy Rabochiy, 7/20/65, 2)
NASA announced it would negotiate a two-phase contract with Aerojet General Corp. for design and development of a liquid-hydrogen, regeneratively cooled exhaust nozzle for the Phoebus nuclear rocket reactor test program. First phase of the contract would include a four-month preliminary design study of nozzle concepts and an evaluation of fabrication and testing methods. This phase would be negotiated on a cost-plus-fixed-fee basis at an estimated value of $400,000. Using results of Phase I, the contractor would design, develop, test, and deliver three nozzles to the Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nev. Phase II would be awarded as an incentive contract with an estimated value of $10 million. Phoebus, a 5,000-megawatt reactor, would be tested as part of the program to develop nuclear propulsion devices for space missions. ( nasa Release 65-28)
The first stage of the Titan II booster which orbited GEMINI V was recovered intact in the Atlantic about 450 mi. northeast of Cape Kennedy. An Air Rescue Service plane reported that the 71-ft. stage was in the water 25% submerged, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/22/65, A34; upi, NYT, 8/22/65, 13)
USN fired a Hydra-Iris sea-launched sounding rocket, to 184mi. altitude carrying a 100-lb. payload. The rocket was launched from a point about 1,400 mi. east of Montevideo, Uruguay. Mission was to measure radiation intensity within the inner Van Allen radiation belt. (M&R, 2/8/65, 8)
A Soviet booster capable of generating more than 60-million hp. had launched the instrumented spacecraft of the Proton series, Prof. Georgi V.	Petrovich disclosed in Aviatsiya i Cosmonavtika. Each engine had produced about 3-million-lbs. thrust at liftoff, usaf Titan m-c had produced 2.4-million-lbs. thrust when it was launched with an instrumented payload June 18. (Shabad, NYT, 11/14/65, 74)
Argo D—4 Javelin sounding rocket was successfully launched with 80-lb. instrumented payload from NASA Wallops Station to peak altitude of 549 mi. (883.9 km.). Furnished by the Univ. of Pittsburg under contract to NASA, the experiment measured the quantity of helium and hydrogen gases and the ionization of helium in the exosphere. Impact occurred 653 mi. (1,051.3 km.) downrange in the Atlantic. (Wallops Release 65-52; nasa Rpt, srl)
W. Y. Jordan, Jr., R. J. Harris, and D. R. Saxon, all of MSFC, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics article that clustering of nuclear rocket systems up to 10,000 mw. of power had been studied. These studies indicated the concept showed sufficient promise to warrant more detailed design studies, and these studies had been initiated. They stated that a “modular nuclear vehicle system concept, which offers a flexible multipurpose space-transportation capability, now appears possible through development of only one basic propulsion system and vehicle stage. . . .”	(A&A, 6/65, 48-52)
Canada’s Black Brant research rocket underwent its first successful launch from Ft. Churchill, Manitoba. (M&R, 6/28/65, 11)
First cooperative sounding rocket experiment sponsored by NASA and the Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research (zwo) was successfully conducted by Dutch scientists at Coronie, Surinam. Object of the experiment was to measure winds in the equatorial upper atmosphere by releasing a cloud of sodium vapor to be illuminated by the sun and tracked. Launching, using a Nike-Apache rocket, was first of four to be conducted under a memorandum of understanding signed in June 1964. The three subsequent launches were successfully conducted Sept. 21, Sept. 24, and Sept. 27. Dutch launch team had trained at Wallops Station, Va., earlier this year. (NASA Release 65-299; nasa Rpts. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket reached a peak altitude of 91.1	mi. from Wallops Island, Va. Purpose was to simultaneously measure the altitude of sodium airglow with sodium vapor and interference filters and determine atmospheric density with a 26-in., metallized, inflated mylar sphere, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Two simultaneous iqsy launches for high-altitude research were made by usaf from Eglin afb, Fla., in support of each other, one with a Nike-Cajun rocket and the other with a Sparrow-Areas. (Eglin afb Release 65-449)
Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, Soviet commander of the strategic rocket forces, said in Krasnaya Zvezda:	“Representatives of the aggressive imperialist circles often brag about their rocket-nuclear weapons. In answer to this we can state with assurance that in respect to the quality and quantity of rocket-nuclear weapons, we not only do not lag behind those who threaten us with war, hut far surpass them.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/6/65, 2, atss-t Trans.)
Soviet Union announced new rocket tests in the Pacific Ocean west of Hawaii and asked all countries to leave the area during the testing period. An official announcement by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said “a new modification of a space vehicle booster” would be launched. Tass said the test area covered “a circle with a radius of 40 n. mi., with a center of 19°8' north and 178°46' west.” The test firings would take place between October 31 and December 30. (Pravda, 10/30/65, 1, atss—T Trans.)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun with acoustic grenade experiment at Point Barrow, Alaska, to obtain upper atmospheric meterological data within the Arctic Circle. 12 grenades were ejected and detonated at intervals from about 25 to 56 mi. altitude as the rocket ascended. By recording the sounds on five sensitive microphones on the ground, scientists could obtain wind direction and velocity, atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure data. This was the first of a series of such experiments to gather upper atmospheric data within the Arctic Circle. Point Barrow was 1,100 mi. from the North Pole and 300 mi. within the Arctic Circle, at 71° north latitude. (Wallops Release 65—4; ap, NYT, 1/29/65)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., to investigate characteristics of the Ikeya-Seki comet. Reaching peak altitude of 111 mi., the 245-lb. payload, designed by scientists at the Univ. of Colorado and JPL, contained a scanning spectrometer, a filter wheel photometer, and related equipment to obtain spectra of the head and tail of the comet and to measure radiation. Data would assist in analyzing the materials in the comet and would be coordinated with observations conducted by other scientists. (Wallops Release 65-67)
Second two-stage Dragon sounding rocket launched by France from Skogasandur, Iceland, to 248-mi. peak altitude. Payload was instrumented to study protons and electrons in the Van Allen radiation belt, (ap, NYT, 9/5/65, 48)
An editorial in Red Star, the Soviet Defense Ministry newspaper, revealed that the booster that had launched voskhod ii had developed 1.43 million lbs. of thrust. The article said Soviet rockets were “unmatched” and that the voskhod ii flight “expedites the appearance of orbital stations and the landing of people in the heavenly bodies.” (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/24/65)
Lance battlefield missile was successfully test fired at the White Sands Missile Range. Built for the Army by Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., the Lance was said to combine guided missile accuracy and range with the low cost and high reliability potential of a free rocket. It would complement division artillery and expand the capability for nuclear and non-nuclear fire, (ap, NYT, 3/18/65, 57)
GSFC was pushing Aerobee 350 sounding rocket toward operational status to get second- and third-generation upper altitude data, wrote William S. Beller in Missiles and Rockets: “With much of the first-generation work already performed in the altitudes from about 50 mi. to 100 mi., a more sophisticated rocket is needed. . . . “The Aerobee 350 shows more than twice the performance of the 150: for heavy payloads, the factor tends toward 2.5, showing the most significant advantage; for lighter payloads, the factor approaches 2.0. “The Aerobee 350 launched from Wallops Island will carry a payload of 150 lbs. to 290 mi. altitude; or 500 lbs. to 210 mi. If the launching takes place at White Sands, N.M., which is at 4,000 ft., the rocket will put out 15—20 mi. more altitude performance for the same payload weight. An Aerobee 350 launch tower is to be built at White Sands.” (Beller, M&R, 9/27/65, 26)
NASA successfully launched Argo D-4 sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., to peak altitude of 588 mi. Objective of 17y2-min. lest was the measurement of phase differences to determine electron density along the rocket trajectory. Experiment was provided by Pennsylvania State Univ. (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe experiment to measure pressure, temperature, and density from 15-km. to 115-km. altitude was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada. Rocket and experiments functioned properly and good data were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
British Black Knight research rocket reentered earth’s atmosphere at 10,800 mph after a successful firing at the Woomera range, Australia. Rocket had reached 390-mi. altitude, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/27/65, A2)
Vesta, a new French meteorological sounding rocket, was successfully fired for the first time from the Hammaguir Range, Algeria. The single-stage rocket, propelled by liquid fuel, carried an instrumented payload to 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude. (NYT, 10/28/65, 74M)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf), addressing American Management Assn, conference in New York City, announced recent approval and initation of usaf Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Reentry Tests program (Start), “a four-fold research spacecraft program to develop unmanned test vehicles capable of maneuvering to a precision recovery site after reentering from orbit.” In a Baltimore Sun editorial, Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., said that the Martin Co. had designed for this program a new, wingless V-shaped plane, maneuverable in atmosphere because its shape would provide aerodynamic lift. The program would:	(1) launch the SV-5 by Atlas booster, (2) continue Asset experiments to test vehicles entering atmosphere at very high speeds, (3)	study effects of vehicles passing through atmosphere at slower speeds, and (4) relate to allied studies that had not yet led to specific designs for identifiable reentry vehicles. (Text; AFSC Release 31.65; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 3/4/65)
West Germany was waging vigorous campaign by letter, circular, and word-of-mouth to persuade German technicians to leave their jobs in Egyptian aircraft and rocket industry. The campaign could be result of recent arrests in Cairo of several West German citizens on espionage charges. (Olson, NYT, 3/6/65, 7)
British designers had perfected a miniature rocket costing only $2,240 per copy, it was reported. Nine ft. in length with a 7%-in. diameter, the rocket would use solid fuel and reach a speed of 3,500 mph, sending the casing containing scientific instruments to maximum altitude of 80 mi. plus, (ap, Kansas City Times, 1/4/65)
200,000-lb.-thrust j—2 engine was captive fired for 388 sec. on a new test stand at nasa msfc. The J-2 engine would be used to power the Saturn s-ivb stage, second stage for the Saturn V. Ten tests of the liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen powered rocket engine had been conducted at msfc since the J-2 engine test facility was put into use in August 1965. (msfc Release 65-300)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was successfully launched from USNS Croatan carrying an instrumented payload to provide data on the neutron intensity, solar x-ray flux, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionosphere electron density at different latitudes. Experiment was conducted for the Univ. of New Hampshire, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
A Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Sta., Va., to peak altitude of 109.9 mi. (176.8 km.) in an experiment Lo measure electron densities. Good signals were received on all telemetry channels throughout the flight; indications were that good data were obtained. Instrumentation was provided by gca Corp. (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA announced that it would negotiate with Space Technology Laboratories and Thiokol Chemical Corp. for six-month, fixed-price contracts of approximately $1.5 million for definition of a program to develop and produce a 100-lb.-thrust rocket engine. The multipurpose engine, designated c-1, would be designed for spacecraft attitude control and maneuvering systems and also for launch vehicle ullage and attitude control systems. It would be powered by the hypergolic, storable liquid propellants monomethylhydrazine (mmh) and nitrogen tetroxide. (nasa Release 65—41)
On the occasion of the Smithsonian Institution Bicentennial Celebration, President Johnson said: . . the Institution financed by Smithson breathed life in the idea that the growth and the spread of learning must be the first work of a nation that seeks to be free. “These ideas have not always gained easy acceptance among those employed in my line of work. The government official must cope with the daily disorder that he finds in the world around him. “But today, the official, the scholar, and the scientist cannot settle for limited objectives. We must pursue knowledge no matter what the consequences. We must value the tried less than the true. “To split the atom, to launch the rocket, to explore the innermost mysteries and the outermost reaches of the universe—these are your god-given chores. And even when you risk bringing fresh disorder to the politics of men and nations, these explorations still must go on.” {Pres. Doc., 9/20/65, 276)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range to peak altitude of 115 mi. (185 km.). Objectives were to photograph the solar disc and to measure solar flux. Parachuted payload was recovered without observable damage; development of film was in process, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range to study the ultraviolet radiation of Orion and a group of stars, reached ll4-mi. (183.5-km.) altitude and performed successfully, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa successfully launched explorer xxviii Interplanetary Monitoring Probe (Imp-C) from ETR on a three-stage Thor-Delta booster. A slightly longer than planned burn by the third stage engines placed the 130-lb. probe into an orbit with 164,000 mi. (264,040 km.) apogee and 120 mi. (193 km.) perigee instead of the scheduled orbit of 130,000 mi. (209,300 km.) apogee and 120 mi. (193 km.) perigee. Inclination was 34°; period, 5 days, 22 hrs. The spacecraft was equipped with devices to report on the earth’s magnetic field, cosmic rays, and the solar wind throughout its highly elliptical orbit. Confused telemetry signals from the explorer xxviii for 3% hrs. after launching made it seem the spacecraft had not separated from the third stage of the booster; however, later signals indicated that all spacecraft systems were operating normally, that separation had occurred. The Imp series began with explorer xviii (Imp-A) launched Nov. 26,1963. (nasa Release 65-164; Wash. Sun. Star, 5/30/65)
With arrival of the sea-going launch platform USNS Croatan at Valparaiso, Chile, NASA completed a successful expedition of launching scientific experiments off the west coast of South America. A total of 77 sounding rockets were fired, 45 of them Nike-Cajun and Nike-Apaches, and 32 of them single-stage meteorological rockets. Firings occurred at various position from 5° north to 60° south of the equator. Five experiments were conducted at or near the 60th parallel at about 78° west longitude. The project was part of the NASA sounding rocket program being conducted during the 1964-65 International Quiet Sun Year. Expedition data would be correlated with findings of scientists throughout the world conducting experiments on iqsy phenomena. (Wallops Release 65-22)
A half-length 260-in.-dia. solid rocket motor generated 3.5 million pounds thrust during a successful two-minute test firing at Aerojet General’s Dade County, Fla., facilities. Firing tested strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the cast propellant, the insulation, and the ablative nozzle; it demonstrated that massive quantities of solid fuel could be controlled under firing conditions. Test was part of the national large solid motor technology program initiated by usaf in 1963 and transferred to NASA in 1965. (nasa Release 65-295, 65-311; lrc Release 65-65)
Poland launched its first meteorological rocket. The two-stage vehicle was 2.5 m. (8.2 ft.) long and reached an altitude of 37,000 m. (121,360 ft.).	{M&R, 6/28/65, 10)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure data was launched from Wallops Island, Va. to altitude 73.5 mi. (118.2 km.). Twelve grenades were to have exploded during rocket ascent, but two did not explode. All other instruments performed as anticipated. A similar experiment was launched from Point Barrow successfully. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Harold B. Finger, Director of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power and Manager of the aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed NASA’s electric thrustor program in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “We conducted the first successful flight test of an electric rocket engine in July, using the SERT 1 spacecraft. This flight demonstrated that ion beam neutralization will take place satisfactorily in space and, therefore, eliminated the only uncertainty regarding the basic feasibility of successful space operation. A second major accomplishment was the design, fabrication, and test of a 30 kilowatt thrustor. This thrustor is 10 times larger than previous ion engines, and demonstrates that we are successfully developing the engineering relations required to build the mega-watt size thrustors needed for spacecraft prime propulsion.” Discussing nuclear propulsion programs, he said: “1964 was a year of significant progress in the Nuclear Rocket Program. It was marked by the successful completion of the kiwi series of reactor development experiments and the successful initiation of the nerva reactor testing. These reactor experiments, coupled with work in other portions of our Nuclear Rocket Program, provide assurance that the graphite core nuclear rocket can be available to fulfill its role as the next major space propulsion system. “Of particular significance in 1964 was the successful demonstration of the adequacy of the reactor structural design, the elimination of reactor structural vibrations, full power reactor operation for over ten minutes at an altitude equivalent specific impulse of about 750 seconds, a rapid automatic startup, the ability to restart the rocket reactor, the determination of the effect of a maximum reactor power excursion, and the neutronic investigation of two rocket reactors located side-by-side as would be necessary in clustered engine configurations. . . . “During this year emphasis will be placed upon extending our reactor technology to higher temperature, longer duration, and higher power while we proceed as rapidly as possible to close coupled nuclear rocket engine system testing. We face this task of developing nuclear rocket technology including component, subsystem, and engine system work, with a confidence that is based on the solid accomplishments in our reactor development program and with the knowledge that the technology we are developing will provide the propulsion capability that will ultimately be required for extensive space exploration.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 243-300)
Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge had proposed to NASA a design for a Deep Space Planetary Probe System to he used in a flyby of Jupiter, Saturn, or Pluto. The spacecraft would consist of a large dish antenna, possibly as large as 16 ft. in diameter, which would telemeter data back to earth. Power would be supplied by 10-watt Snap-19 generator. The spacecraft could be boosted by either Atlas-Centaur or Saturn IB-Centaur with upper-stage assist from available solid rockets or from the Poodle, a low-thrust radioisotope rocket engine. Flyby missions for the probe could be made in 1970 to Jupiter, to Saturn in 1972, and ultimately to Pluto. (SBD, 4/23/65, 297)
Super Guppy, a five-story-high aircraft designed to carry large rocket sections, made a safe emergency landing at Edwards AFB after part of its aluminum skin peeled off during a high-speed dive. No one was injured. Aircraft was undergoing flight tests for certification by faa. (ap, Wash. Post, 9/26/65)
Agreement was signed for a cooperative Brazilian-U.S. sounding rocket project to obtain meteorological information, NASA announced. Project provided for cooperation in obtaining wind, temperature, and other meteorological information between 40 km. and 100 km. by rocket soundings using the acoustic grenade technique. Experiments would be conducted from the Brazilian launch range at Natal. The agreement, in form of a memorandum of understanding, was signed by representative of the Momissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) of Brazil and nasa. It was the third to be concluded between CNAE and nasa during 1965. (nasa Release 65-372)	r
Indonesia successfully launched the second (of ten) Japanese Kappa 8L two-stage meteorological sounding rocket from a site near Bandung, West Java. The 62-kg. (136-lb.) rocket reached an altitude of 90 km. (56 mi.). First firing had been Aug. 7. (Interavia Air Letter, 8/16/65, 5)
Writing in the January 1965 issue of Astronautics and Aeronautics, Dr. Harold B. Finger, Manager of aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), summed up the various components of the advanced nuclear propulsion program and emphasized the importance of the solid-core nuclear rocket within the field: “Solid-core nuclear rockets are the best understood and most nearly developed of the many advanced nuclear-propulsion concepts being investigated in this country. They offer the most assured and earliest possible means for very substantial improvements and advances in space-flight propulsion capability. Furthermore, because solid-core nuclear rockets rely heavily on technology and techniques of chemical rocket engines and although much extension of these techniques is required, no fundamentally new engineering approaches are required to develop this new breed of substantially improved rocketry for actual flight use. Solid-core nuclear rockets can be relied on for our future space missions. “Progress has been made in electric propulsion, particularly in the thruster area, and important research data and technology are also beginning to be provided in the difficult area of nuclear-reactor electric generating systems required for prime electric propulsion. “Beyond these systems, other advanced nuclear propulsion concepts are not yet well-enough understood to justify undertaking significant development efforts.” (A&A, 1/65, 30-35) During January: Nine areas of scientific experiments for the first manned Apollo lunar landing mission had been summarized and experimenters were defining them for NASA. Space sciences project group expected to publish the complete report by Mar. 1, to be followed by requests for proposals from industry on designing and producing instrument packages. A major effort was under way by a NASA task force making a time-motion study of how best to use the limited lunar stay-time of 2 hr. minimum for the first flight. (Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 13)
In an article suggesting the possibility of catastrophe during the Gemini gt-4 flight, William Hines had said in the Washington Evening Star: “The truth is that the only ‘first’ the United States has a chance to achieve in Gemini 4 is ‘first casualties in space’—and nobody (including the Russians) seek this dubious record.” Commenting on the planned “rendezvous,” he said: “. . . the other and more questionable added spectacular on the present mission—is a risky business of unknown proportions . . . There are several purely technical objections to this exercise. First, it is not part of the original Gemini 4 mission, but an afterthought. Second, the spacecraft was not built for rendezvous. Third, the rocket was never envisioned as a target vehicle and is uncontrollable in space. . . . “But if tragedy should strike as a result of something that happens on the first few orbits of Gemini 4, how will the responsibility be fixed: As pilot error ... or politician’s error?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/65)
NASA and the Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) signed an agreement in Sao Jose dos Campos, Brazil, providing for a cooperative project for studying hemispheric weather patterns by launching meteorological sounding rockets from Brazil. Project would be part of the Inter-American Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). Under the terms of the agreement, Brazil would transport the rockets and equipment from the U.S. to Brazil, assemble and launch the rockets from Brazilian launch facilities, and provide meteorological data to other participants in the network. NASA would lend ground support equipment such as radar to cnae; train Brazilian personnel in the handling of sounding rockets and in reducing meteorological data; and provide data obtained at NASA’s Wallops Station, Va., to other participants in the network. Agreement was similar to one signed by the U.S. and Argentina on May 18, 1965. The project entailed no exchange of funds between the two countries, (nasa Release 65-258)
usaf awarded Thiokol Chemical Corp. a $2,000,000 initial increment to a fixed-price contract for production of solid rocket motors. Estimated final amount of contract was $5,000,000. General Dynamics Corp. received from afsc a $1,655,299 fixed-price contract for design and fabrication of reentry vehicle instrumentation and range safety systems, (dod Release 946-65)
Canada’s Black Brant research rocket underwent its second successful launch from Ft. Churchill, Manitoba. (M&R, 6/28/65, 11)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched in the second apparently successful attempt this week of Project Luster to capture particles of interplanetary matter during the Leonid meteor (shooting star) shower. The 105-lb. payload, containing special collection surfaces, was launched from White Sands Missile Range to peak altitude of about 100 mi. Instrument package separated from the rocket and descended into the range recovery area. Initial radar and telemetry data indicated that inflight performance of the rocket and its payload was as planned. Similar flight conducted Nov. 16 with an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands also performed flawlessly. (NASA Release 65—358)
Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) would cooperate with U.S. and Argentine scientists in a study of hemispheric weather patterns, NASA announced. NASA and cnae had signed an agreement July 1 providing for the cooperative project, which would be part of the inter-American Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). First launchings were scheduled before the end of 1965 from Natal, Brazil, and Wallops Station, (nasa Release 65-258)
A copper-plated 461//>-lb. “minilab,” instrumented to measure radiation variations in the earth’s magnetic field, was launched to 8,700-mi. altitude from Cape Kennedy on a four-stage Blue Scout Jr. rocket. It carried three sensing devices designed to produce a radiation profile during its two-hour climb into the Van Allen radiation belt and the two-hour plunge back through the earth’s atmosphere to the Indian Ocean, (upi, NYT, 3/31/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 138)
A job classification dispute at the Chrysler facility of the Michoud Saturn plant in New Orleans caused over 200 United Auto Workers (UAW) to walk off the job. Chrysler was responsible for developing first stage of Saturn ib rocket for nasa. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/10/65)
Kiwi-TNT (Transient Nuclear Test) was successfully completed at Jackass Flats, Nev. This was a safety test to verify predictions of behavior of graphite nuclear reactor during a maximum power excursion. Using data from the test scientists would establish safety standards, particularly for launching nuclear-powered rockets. Nuclear energy released in the test was well within the designated maximum of nuclear test ban treaty of 1963. Preliminary test results indicated: (1) from l/j-mi. to 50-mi. downwind from the test site, radiation did not approach accepted danger levels; (2) lethal radiation was confined to 200-to-300-ft. radius of the site, and beyond 500-to-600-ft. radius “a person would probably have survived unhurt unless struck by a piece of debris”; (3) pre-test predictions of the reactor’s behavior were accurate; and (4) cleaning up radioactivity at the site was easier than expected. Kiwi ground-test version of a nuclear-reactor rocket engine was a nasa-aec project, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/13/65; NYT, 1/13/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 1/13/65; JAMA, 2/8/65, 27—29; Rover Chron., n.d.)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket, with 51-lb. payload instrumented to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in the D and E regions of the ionosphere to peak altitude of 110 mi. Experiment, conducted for the Univ. of Illinois and the GCA Corp. from Wallops Station, was part of International Quiet Sun Year 1964-65. (Wallops Release 65—58; nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched a two part 994b. sounding rocket payload from NASA Wallops Station which reached an altitude of 614 mi. but did not separate in flight as planned. Launched on a four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) and designed as “mother-daughter” experiment, the payload was to separate into two sections at about 170-mi. altitude with radio signals to be sent from daughter to mother as they continued to rise separately. The technique was devised to provide more accurate profiles of electron density in the upper atmosphere. Telemetry data would be analyzed to determine why the sections did not separate. (Wallops Release 65-3; nasa Rpt. srl)
Atlantic Research Corp. announced the Frangible Areas meteorological sounding rocket, developed for USAF, had successfully passed flight tests at the Western Test Range. (M&R, 3/8/65, 11)
Launching pad damage caused by the Mar. 2 explosion of an AtlasCentaur rocket at Cape Kennedy amounted to $2 million and would take three to four months to repair, NASA reported. To avoid delay in the Atlas-Centaur launching scheduled for mid-summer, NASA was speeding completion of a new launching pad that was 90% completed and that could be ready in two months, (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 3/14/65)
Fred Callahan, 16, of Ft. Benning, Ga., prepared to launch Zeus 2, possibly the largest rocket built by an amateur. Zeus 2, nine ft. long with 2,000-lb. thrust, could reach peak altitude of 64 mi. Zeus 1 was launched by Callahan three years ago. (Wash. Daily News, 4/10/65)
USAF announced successful test firing of a simplified rocket engine called Scorpio. The engine had eight combusters in a ring around a nozzle and an injector that sprayed fuel into the combusters through several ports. Scorpio developed 200,000 lbs. thrust and would be modified to produce greater power, (afsc Release 44.65; ap, Balt. Sun, 3/30/65)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. would receive from usaf a $1,562,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for work on a solid-fuel rocket program. (dod Release 659-65)
USAF 1,175-lb. Project Asset reentry glider, last in a test series of six, was launched from Cape Kennedy by a Thor-Delta rocket booster on a 13,300 mph suborbital flight; the spacecraft then was lost at sea. The experiment was to test materials for future lifting body reentry designs; it consisted of 2,000 tiny heat-sensitive spots in ten different colors designed to change hue as the glider came back through the atmosphere from an altitude of 40 mi. usaf said that most of the information sought had been radioed to the ground during the 30 min. flight, but that visual examination of the glider was necessary for data on heat distribution. Officials presumed the glider sank into the sea, although intermittent radio signals received had indicated it had been at least partially afloat for some hours. Planes and ships were combing an area in the Atlantic Ocean about 2,750 mi. southeast of Cape Kennedy for the missing craft, (ap, Wash. Post, 2/24/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 134)
The $2-billion Rover nuclear-propelled rocket program was approaching a decision whether to move forward and prepare for early post-Apollo missions or let the technology dwindle, Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, told Aviation Week & Space Technology. The two-part decision was (1) whether to move forward with a flight-type engine of 200,000-300,000-lb. thrust— an advanced Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application), and (2) whether to start a $50-million construction program in Nevada for testing in the vicinity of the Nuclear Rocket Development Station near Las Vegas. Unless these decisions were made soon, “there will be a tail-off of technology,” Finger said. (Av. Wk., 12/6/65, 57)
NASA launched an ionosphere experiment from Wallops Station, Va., on a four-stage Javelin (Argo d-4) sounding rocket. Primary objectives of the flight were to measure ion and electron densities and temperatures and the ionic composition in the upper atmosphere. A malfunction in the launch vehicle caused the 140-lb. payload to reach an altitude of only 200 mi. instead of the planned 520 mi. Telemetry data were received for about nine minutes. Project officials termed the flight a partial success despite the failure to achieve peak altitude. (Wallops Release 65-31)
Lt. Gen. Nikolai Kamanin, commander of Soviet cosmonauts, said during a meeting with Moscow writers: “After the flight of Gemini v, Johnson said officially that the United States was inviting representatives of the Soviet Union to the next flight so that they could see U.S. rockets and rocket devices. We told him: Thank you but we do not intend to visit your launching site. We do not intend to go because we know all too well that all space devices are as a rule launched into space with the aid of military rockets. You do it this way and we do it that way. While military rockets are used for these purposes we are unable to show you our Soviet rockets because we know all too well that our rockets were, are, and we are convinced, will be the most powerful, with the greater distance and load capacity. This is of decisive importance for the defense of the country.” (Tass, 10/24/65)
rocket apart or caused an explosion that destroyed it, reported a USAF Flight Safety Review Board which had met with the NASA Design Certification Review Board. Series of continuing tests was being scheduled to assure reliability of future Gatv flights. (Text; Clark, NYT, 11/9/65, 3)
In an interview with Tass, Soviet rocket designer Prof. Petrovich said that Soviet scientists intended one day to put scientific expeditions on the planets of the solar system to uOiuCStlCStC them. Designers were concentrating their efforts on developing highly efficient new engines which could lift extremely heavy payloads to the prescribed orbits, he added. (Tass, 11/15/65)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. received from usaf a $3,195,500 fixed-price contract for design, development, and firing of a 156-in. solid rocket motor. USAF also awarded United Technology Center a $10,500,000 increment to a previously issued contract for design, development, fabrication, delivery, and flight testing of large segmented solid propellant motors, (dod Release 426-65)
A four-stage, 60-ft.-long Journeyman (Argo d-8) sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station, Va., carried a 137-lb. instrument package to an altitude of 1,060 mi. on a 25-min. flight that ended 1,700 mi. offshore in the Atlantic, east of Bermuda. After launch, the payload, unfurled two 35-ft. antennas to provide a single dipole antenna, measuring 70 ft. from tip to tip. Main objective of the mission was to measure the intensity of radio frequency energy originating largely from outside the solar system. This was done at three frequencies: 750, 1,125, and 2,000 kc. Secondary objectives were the investigation of previously detected radio noise on the top side of the ionosphere and measurement of electron density in that part of the ionosphere. Information would be used in planning future space radio astronomy experiments to investigate certain characteristics of antennas in the ionospheric region. Experiment was conducted in cooperation with the Univ. of Michigan. (NASA Release 65-214; Wallops Release 6540; ap, Balt. Sun, 7/1/65)
DOD’s Hibex, the high acceleration experimental booster, was successfully tested at White Sands Missile Range, N.Mex. (M&R, 3/8/65, 11)
France’s Emeraude rocket, first stage of the Diamant booster, was successfully launched from Hammaguir Range, Algeria, after three failures. Its liquid-fueled engine provided 62,000-lbs. thrust for 88 sec. Twelve Emeraude launchings were originally scheduled. Second and third stages of the Diamant launch vehicle, both solid fueled, had already been successfully tested. No attempt had been made to launch the three stages linked together. (Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 18; M&R, 3/22/65, 9)	....	.
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by Brazil from the Natal Range reached an altitude of 117 mi. The second Brazilian sounding rocket launch in a cooperative meteorological program with nasa, the flight was a nighttime twin-experiment of daytime experiment Dec. 15. (nasa Rpt. srl; Reuters, NYT, 12/20/65,45)
The 2,000th full-scale solid rocket motor of the Polaris A-3 model was shipped to Navy’s Pacific Missile Facility where it would be integrated into an operational missile. (}/Armed Forces, 4/24/65, 15)
Tokyo Univ. Aeronautical Institute announced successful firing of a three-stage Lambda research rocket from Uchinoura in southern Japan. The rocket reached an altitude of 680 mi. and landed in the Pacific northwest of the Marianas. (Reuters, NYT, 3/19/65)
Canada’s National Defence Research Council said it would negotiate an agreement with NASA for Canadian operation of the rocket launching range at Churchill, Manitoba. The announcement said such an agreement would open the way for a new partnership between the two countries in research. (NYT, 2/26/65, 13)
dod announced award to Thiokol Chemical Corp. of $2,300,000 increment to existing contract for production of Minuteman Stage I operational and flight test rocket motors, (dod Release 255-65)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to altitude of 204.67 km. (127.2 mi.) with Rice University experiment to make time resolution measurements of electron fluxes within an aurora for use in determining transit times of these electrons from their sources. Performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. srl)
An article by Omer Anderson on U.A.R. rocket program was inserted in the Congressional Record by Rep. Silvio Conte (R—Mass.). Based on interviews with German scientists just back from Egypt and with West German defense ministry officials who debriefed them after their return, the article said: “Egypt’s missile program is considerably further advanced than is generally realized in the West. “Some of these scientists who have returned to West Germany say that Nasser will have the missiles to devastate wide areas of Israel by late 1967 and that he will have rockets with a 1-ton payload by the end of 1965. “West German defense ministry experts who have questioned the returning rocket scientists regard their assessment of Nasser’s rocket potential as entirely realistic and possibly too conservative. “The scientists say Nasser has accelerated greatly his rocket program since the first test firing of four missiles on July 22, 1962.” (CR, 1/26/65, 1160)
It was reported that Lockheed Propulsion Co. had successfully test-fired a new solid-propellant rocket motor at the proving ground in Redlands, Calif. The lightweight “pulse motor” measured 10 ft. in length, 2 ft. in dia., and contained 40 solid-propellant wafers, each of which could develop more than 1,000 lbs. of thrust. This was possibly the rocket motor that would power the Sram (short-range attack missile) mentioned by President Johnson in his defense message to Congress [See Jan. 18, 1965]. (Miles, Wash. Post, 1/20/65; SBD, 1/18/65, 74)
To date, 46 sounding rocket launchings had been made from the USNS Croatan operating at sea off South America’s west coast, NASA announced. 32 of the firings were two-stage sounding rockets carrying upper atmosphere and ionosphere experiments; 14 were singlestage vehicles to obtain high-altitude meteorological data. Launchings were part of NASA’s sounding rocket program for the 1964—65 International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) when solar flare and sunspot activity were at a minimum. Expedition data would be correlated with findings of scientists throughout the world conducting experiments to study iqsy phenomena, (nasa Release 65-104)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Station, Va., to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure at a time of minimum zonal wind flow by exploding twelve grenades during the ascent of the rocket. Two grenades did not eject and a third exploded before complete ejection, causing complete failure of experiment. Coordinated firings did not occur simultaneously at Ft. Churchill or Pt. Barrow due to weather conditions and payload problems. (NASA Rpt. srl)
usaf launched an Honest John-Nike Hydac high-altitude research rocket with 250-lb. payload from Eglin afb, Fla. (Eglin afb Release 65449)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va.. to altitude of 37.7 mi, <141.1 km.I with experiments to measure the neutron intensity above the earth’s atmosphere, the flux of solar x-rays, and Lyman-alpha radiation; and to determine ionospheric electron densities. All instruments functioned as predicted. (NASA Rpt. SJtL)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe to measure pressure, temperature, and density from 15-km. to 115-km. altitudes. Experiment was not successful because of undetermined malfunction in the rocket during Apache-stage propulsion, (nasa Rpt. srl)
USAF announced a four-stage Blue Scout Jr. rocket combination with a scientific payload had failed after launch from Cape Kennedy. The second stage developed trouble about 100 sec. after launching, causing the range safety officer to send destruct signal. The stage broke apart on its own. The third stage, meanwhile, separated from the second stage, ignited, and followed approximately its preplanned path. The fourth stage failed to ignite; it and the payload plummeted harmlessly into the Atlantic Ocean southwest of Ascension Island. The probe was to have sent its instrumented payload 24,500 mi. into space to study earth’s magnetic field. (NYT, 1/29/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 132)
nasa had awarded a $67,135 contract to the Univ. of Utah for a one-year study of chemical processes occurring during combustion of solid-propellant rocket motors. Study would attempt to better understand the interaction of gaes in the combustion zone by using recently developed fast-scanning spectroscopic instruments, (nasa Release 65-390)
On U.S.S.R.’s Aviation Day, Soviet Defense Minister, CommanderinChief of Antiaircraft Units, Air Marshal V. A. Studets said in an interview with Nedelya that Soviet antiaircraft units could destroy any flying object with the first rocket: “. . . we have means that can in good time detect and destroy any flying apparatus of any size, at all altitudes, even the lowest. If the country is threatened by a ballistic missile, it will be met far away by an antimissile.” Soviet TV showed a film of a new aircraft reported to fly to nearly 95 km. (59 mi.) altitude at a speed of 6,500 km/h (4,500 mph) — mach 6. This aircraft would be used for cosmonaut training (as with the U.S.’s x-15a or nf-104a). No further details were available. (Nedelya, no. 33, 1965, 4-5; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/18/65; Inter avia Air Letter, 8/20/65, 5)
Jet airline pilots would no longer be required to wear oxygen masks when flying above 35,000 ft. according to a FAA rule effective as of this date. Under the new rule, the requirement for one pilot at the controls to use oxygen would apply now only above 41,000 ft., where the time element would be much more critical in case of sudden decompression. (faa Release 65—84) During, September: First useful photograph of the nightglow was recorded aboard a NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range. Rocket was at 173-km. (106.8-mi.) altitude; distance from the earth’s horizon to the center of the nightglow was 90 km. (55.9 mi.). Tri-X film was used. (M&R, 9/27/65, 15)
Designs for an aircraft with speed potential of 17,500 mph were being studied by both usaf and NASA, reported the Washington Daily-News. Called the Scramjet (Supersonic Combustion Ramjet) by usaf and the hypersonic Ramjet by nasa, the aircraft could reach about 180,000-ft. altitude with the Ramjet engine and then be boosted into space by a small auxiliary hydrogen rocket motor. Above 180,000 ft. there would not be enough oxygen to support the Ramjet engine’s combustion. The aircraft would fire retrorockets to reenter the atmosphere and return to earth. One of three competing companies would be selected to begin work on test engine hardware by summer 1966. (Wash. Daily News, 12/7/65, 3)
usn recommissioned two rocket launching ships, the Carronade and the White River, and assigned them to the Pacific Fleet to support amphibious landings. On Sept. 18 the rocket launching ships Clarion River and St. Francis River had been recommissioned, (dod Release 65265)
A land exchange between the U.S. Government and New Mexico was nearing completion, clearing the way for construction of a $20 million rocket testing complex to be built by Bell Aerosystems Co. near the White Sands Missile Range, (ap, Houston Chron., 3/24/65)
In a television interview, Israeli Premier Levi Eshkol urged West Germans to end the activity of German rocket experts in the United Arab Republic, said that these experts were helping the Arabs to prepare a war against Israel. The West German government had officially deplored the participation of German scientists and military experts in Arab rocket projects, but had not interfered on the grounds that the group was composed of private citizens who, according to the German Constitution, could work where they pleased. German rocket expert Prof. Wolfgang Pilz, leader of Germans working for the U.A.R., spoke in an interview of the pressure brought to bear by the Israeli Government, particularly the terrorist tactics of Israeli secret agents which made it necessary for Germans to be accompanied by body guards at all times. (ATT, 1/7/65, 5; Buchalla, NYT, 1/8/65, 1)
Lockheed’s 156-in.-dia., solid-fueled rocket motor fired for approximately 58 sec., developed over 3-million-lbs. thrust, and produced about 715 psi of pressure. Vector control system went through its three programed cycles without flaw. Fifth firing of a 156, test was conducted at Lockheed’s Potrero, Calif., facilities. (Av. Wk., 12/27/65,61)	.	_
Observers in Moscow believed that the Soviet Union would shortly launch a gigantic spacecraft with as many as four to six people aboard, said an article in Poland’s Trybura Ludu. The spacecraft would most likely be commanded by one of the experienced cosmonauts and would have a weight of over 12 tons. It would be placed in orbit by the booster which launched PROTON I. The latter, according to the correspondent, probably used solid fuel. The correspondent speculated that the spacecraft would remain in orbit one week and that several cosmonauts would take a “walk in space” simultaneously. (Trybura Ludu, 7/18/65)
First full-scale testing of a Coralie engine took place at Vernon, France, 15 days ahead of schedule. Firing of the engine, second stage of the European Launcher Development Organization’s ELDO Europa booster, lasted 96 sec. Compatibility of the four-nozzle liquid engine with the flight-type structure was checked out, and the low level of vibration was called highly encouraging. (M&R, 12/6/65)
nasa’s pioneer VI interplanetary probe was successfully launched into heliocentric orbit from Eastern Test Range with an Improved Thrust Augmented Delta booster. Main Delta engine and three solid strap-on motors fired together and burned for 43 sec.; burned-out casings were jettisoned 70 sec. after launch; main engine burned out after two minutes 45 sec. Delta second stage ignited after two minutes 59 sec.; first stage separated and fell away; shroud was jettisoned at two minutes 59 sec. Second stage burned six and two-thirds minutes, then stage coasted for some 16 min. During coast phase, spacecraft was pointed in direction for injection into solar orbit and, with third stage, was spin-stabilized. Nine seconds after spin-up third stage separated from second, then third stage ignited and burned for 23 sec. Two seconds after third stage burnout, pioneer vi separated from the burned-out stage 346 mi. above Africa and was now in solar orbit. Two seconds after third stage separation (about 25 min. after launch), spacecraft booms automatically deployed; automatic changes began to orient the spacecraft perpendicular to the sun. Sun orientation maneuver took about five minutes. The 175-lb., drum-shaped pioneer vi, first of four Pioneer spacecraft to be launched at six-month intervals, would study the solar windstream; investigate the sun’s magnetic field and chart it from several locations in the plane of earth’s orbit; attempt to differentiate between cosmic rays coming from the sun and galactic cosmic rays originating from beyond the solar system. Closest approach to the sun would be about 76 million miles and would be reached after 155 days of flight. The six scientific experiments, provided by four universities and arc and gsfc, were functioning normally, (nasa Release 65-375; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, A14; Wash. Post, 12/17/65, A8; ap, NYT, 12/17/65, 29; WSJ, 12/17/65,1)
First of four Stellar Acquisition Flight Feasibility (Staff) flights planned by usaf failed 73 sec. after launch of the experiment aboard a Polaris A-l booster. The experiment’s Stellar Inertial Guidance System (Stings) was operating open-loop and was not guiding the missile, which had to be destroyed when it veered off course. Stings had been locked onto the star Polaris and had tracked properly through the first 54 sec. of flight until time of second-stage ignition, when the trouble with the launch vehicle apparently developed. Period during which the Stings operated was time of highest dynamic pressure; data received were termed excellent. Main purpose of the Staff flight was to test a telescope-like device intended to allow a Stings to take a reading from Polaris after piercing the earth’s cloud cover and to plot an exact trajectory to a target area. (M&R, 4/19/65, 9)
nrx a-3 Nerva reactor, joint nasa-aec project to develop a nuclear rocket, was restarted and operated for the third time at Jackass Flats, Nev. Total operating time was 45 min., including about 7 min. at more than 40% of its designated 55,000-lb. thrust capacity. Function of the test was to explore control system response characteristics in low and intermediate power ranges. (snpo-N-65—9; upi, NYT, 5/29/65, 8; Rover Chron.)
NASA successfully launched an Aerobee 150a sounding rocket to peak altitude of 110 mi. from Wallops Island, Va., with instrumented payload to measure the ultraviolet and visible light emitted from the earth’s atmosphere between 37 mi. and 125 mi. An Attitude Control System (Acs) was also flown. Good spectral data were collected. (NASA Rpt. srl)
LRC completed 10 experiments to explore nuclear engine chilldown (cooling by liquid hydrogen propellant) and to determine the range of conditions for which flow oscillations would occur in an engine system. An additional 16 runs were conducted to obtain data on the “bootstrap” starting of a nuclear engine. Results of these tests indicated that nuclear rocket engines should be able to start smoothly and stably over a wide range of startup conditions. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1965,148-49)
Abort Dec. 12 of the scheduled Gemini vi flight received editorial comment in the New York Times: “Disappointing as this was, the event had its brighter aspects as well. It gave a vivid demonstration of the effectiveness of the failsafe arrangements. These permitted survival of the rocket and its crew despite the fact that ignition and a buildup of power had taken place before the safety mechanism sensed trouble and shut down the powerful motor.” (NYT, 12/13/65, 38)
The U.S. manned orbiting laboratory was aimed at “the practical testing of orbital nuclear weapons, not scientific space laboratories” in violation of a U.N. agreement not to orbit weapons of mass destruction, wrote Col. Gen. Vladimir Tolubko, deputy commander of Soviet rocket troops in Za Rubezhom. His remarks were Russia’s first comment on President Johnson’s Aug. 25 announcement that U.S. would develop a manned orbiting laboratory. (Wash. Post, 9/10/65, A25; Reuters, NYT, 9/10/65,12C)
In U.S. launch vehicles hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed recent study by the Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board’s Launch Vehicles Panel: “In considering the merits of canceling certain vehicles in order to provide quantity production of the remaining vehicles, the Launch Vehicle Panel of the AACB evaluated several alternatives against a forecast of DOD’s and NASA’s needs over the next 10 years. This space-mission forecast served as a basis for determining the number of launch vehicles required and the cost of producing the various combinations of these launch vehicles. “The result of the study is particularly interesting in that it shows a cost difference of less than 1 per cent among the alternative options. This difference is less than the accuracy of the data used in the analysis. The results indicate that any economies that might be realized by increased quantity production of boosters would be lost through cost of adapting specific mission spacecraft to a new vehicle where the costs of such work have already been incurred. . . . “The major advantages of the recent comprehensive study . . . , as distinct from previous reviews, were the development of much improved methods for estimating the costs of launch vehicles considering the effects of quantity production, variety of vehicles, and inplant workload; the use of an inclusive or overall forecast as a basis for determination of both dod and NASA space missions against which total launch vehicles costs could be calculated; and the value of the results of the study to NASA to confirm our judgment on the use of the SATURN i-b for the apollo and voyager missions. . . we are making extensive use of DOD-developed launch vehicles and will continue to do so for some time to come. However, a wider variety of first-stage boosters and upper stages is required by NASA space missions than by those of the DOD. We have requirements for a wider range of variety of size, payload, and velocity for our missions. We have been carefully investigating our future vehicle needs; optimum vehicle configurations; and the most promising advanced propulsion methods to be sure that our program will provide the options that the country will need in making decisions to undertake future missions. “. . . we are utilizing the channels and procedures established by the DOD—NASA launch vehicle agreement and by the AACB to coordinate the needs and activities of NASA and the DOD to assure the most effective national launch vehicle program. However, we are presenting to the Congress, in our budgets each year, the specific booster needs we have over and above those which can be met by DOD-developed systems. . . .”	(Hearings . . . National Space Launch Vehicles, 6-19)
