Boosted Areas sounding rocket, last in series launched during solar eclipse from usns Range Recoverer near Koroni Beach, Greece, carried gsfc experiment to obtain data on electron and ion density distribution in ionospheric D region, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmh carried high angular resolution x-ray collimators to estimated 103-mi. (165-km.) altitude in NASA-American Science and Engineering, Inc.-MIT experiment to determine size and location of strong x-ray sources in Scorpius. Rocket and instrumentation performed successfully [see May 23]. (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station reached 99-mi. (159-km.) altitude and impacted 64 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Objectives of flight were to compare five ionospheric plasma probes using stable ionosphere as a laboratory for evaluating the probes and to check relevant theories of probe operation, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 94-mi. (151-km.) altitude in GSFC-Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe experiment to measure atmospheric density, pressure, and temperature. Experiment, designed to observe diurnal variations in fine structure of region from 9-68 mi. (15-110 km.), was launched in conjunction with thermosphere probe experiments launched Aug. 26. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
First of fleet of nine, 135-ft. nasa barges for transport of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been placed in service on inland waterways between New Orleans and msfc’s Mississippi Test Facility, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., announced. Company had designed double-walled cryogenic tanks for mounting on modified existing hulls according to requirements of NASA, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and Coast Guard. The three 250,000-gal.-capacity hydrogen barges and six 105,000-gal.-capacity oxygen barges could carry "the largest quantities of the two liquids ever transported in individual vessels.” Docking facilities in test stand area at mtf would permit pumping of liquids directly into rocket fuel tanks, (ap&c Release, 3/24/66)
Full 2M-min. duration test of fourth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-4) was conducted on msfc’s East Test Area facility. S-IB-4 would leave msfc in late January for Michoud Assembly Facility for post-firing checkout. (msfc Release 66-25)
usaf Flight Safety Review Board announced it had pinpointed cause of the Atlas booster failure during the aborted Gemini IX mission May 17: gimbaling of the booster engine which forced the Atlas-Agena into a hardover trajectory was caused by a short circuit in the electrical command system of the engine pitch servo valve. Although several other failures could have caused a similar occurrence, the Board said, only this one could have caused the exact set of data received from the launch vehicle. Malfunction was called a random failure, but to ensure that it would not happen again, new tests would be made on the Atlas and electrical connections in all new boosters would be x-rayed. nasa scheduled the mission, redesignated Gemini IX-A, for June 1. (upi, Wash. Post, 5/26/66, E17; NYT, 5/26/66; nasa Proj. Off.)
Second 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor (SL-2), Nation’s largest, was successfully test-fired for NASA in Dade County, Fla., by Aerojet-General Corp. Fueled with polybutadiene, aluminum and ammonium-perchlorate and fired nose down in a 150-ft.-deep pit, motor developed within 1% of the predicted 3.5-million lbs. thrust and burned for almost precisely the planned 126 sec. Test showed repeatability of the firing, proved that manufacturing techniques were reliable, and demonstrated that the motors could be produced at a predictable cost. First 260-in. motor (SL-1) was successfully fired for two minutes Sept. 25, 1965, producing 3.6-million lbs. thrust. Strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the cast propellant, insulation, and the ablative nozzle were tested. Large solid motor project was designed to demonstrate feasibility of building and operating solid motors of greater size than those in current use for multistage launch vehicle systems carrying heavy payloads into space, (nasa Release 66-31; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/24/66, A5; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/24/66)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried instrumented payload to 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude. Conducted for Johns Hopkins Univ., experiment measured auroral spectral emission lines in the upper atmosphere as a function of altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
nasa launched four-stage Pacemaker rocket from Wallops Station to test performance of spacecraft heat shield design. First two stages lifted 135-lb. payload to 75,000-ft. altitude. As payload began to fall back to earth, last two stages were fired to drive it downward at about 6,800 mph. Information was obtained by tracking and photography and from the payload itself, which was recovered after parachute descent into Atlantic. (Wallops pao; upi, NYT, 11/1/66)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Andoeya, Norway, carried scientific payload to estimated 133-km. (82.6-mi.) altitude. Experiment, conducted by gsfc and Norwegian Defense Research Establishment (ndre), was designed to obtain measurements at high spectral resolution of D-region composition, using a new spectrometer based on ion cyclotron resolution principles. Instrumentation functioned properly,- and clamshell nose cone ejected at programed 55 sec. (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Two-stage Wasp (Weightless Analysis Sounding Probe) sounding rocket carried 1,500-lb. payload to 148-mi. (238-km.) altitude in ballistic trajectory from NASA Wallops Station in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen under near-zero gravity conditions. Payload, consisting of scale model of liquid hydrogen fuel tank, impacted 330 mi. downrange in Atlantic; no recovery was involved. Experiment under weightless conditions, continuing for seven minutes, was recorded by television cameras through transparent lucite tank and was telemetered back to Wallops. Cameras, mounted on five-foot extension booms, photographed the liquid’s sloshing motion when small thrusters were activated to show how well baffles positioned the liquid in the tank. (nasa Release 66-147)
NASA Nike-Apache meteorological sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried acoustic-grenade payload to 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude in experiment conducted for Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee (suparco) and British National Space Research Committee. Grenades did not eject, but data were obtained from trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud release and spectrum photography. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Two rocket engines which had key roles in U.S. space program—RL-10 and H-l engines—were being given to Smithsonian Institution by msfc for National Air Museum’s display on the history of rocketry, (msfc Release 66-95)
Simulated Aerobee 150 was launched from wsmr to 2-mi. (3.2-km.) altitude in gsfc flight test of proposed new Aerobee booster. Instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and booster performance was excellent, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, discussing applications of space technology at a meeting of Dallas County Medical Society in Dallas, said that "by adding to our knowledge of space, and of man in space, ... we are building a very large bank of knowledge that will serve generations of man in all major fields of activity.” In a news conference in Dallas, he said that the Soviet space program was ahead of the U.S.’s "and will be for the next year or two.” He said he felt the U.S. would beat the U.S.S.R. to a lunar landing, but was not as confident as 12 mos. ago: "A year ago I would have said the Saturn V would be far bigger than anything they could do. I’m not so sure now. They have a very vigorous program. . . . This year they have flown proton i and II—both four times the size of Gemini—and they have announced a big new rocket.” Asked if the Proton series promised ability to maneuver like U.S.’s Gemini spacecraft, Webb replied: "Anytime you can put up a spacecraft that weighs 27,000 pounds, you’ve got a capability to do a lot of things you cannot do with a smaller craft. You can develop the maneuverability, but it’s hard to develop the large capacity of large spacecraft—and this is where we have been behind and are still behind.” (Text; AP, Denver Post, 1/13/66)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by nasa and Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) from mobile facility at Natal, Brazil, carried 225-lb. payload of four x-ray detectors on ballistic trajectory to 120-mi. (193km.) altitude. Payload, which impacted 66 mi. downrange in the Atlantic, telemetered scientific data to ground stations. First nasa x-ray astronomy experiment on a sounding rocket in the Southern Hemisphere, flight searched for specific galactic x-ray sources, observed Magellanic clouds for x-ray emissions, and obtained spectral information on known x-ray sources, (nasa Release 66-311)
usaf SV-5D lifting body was successfully launched from wtr by Atlas booster on reentry mission, but "due to an undetermined malfunction in the final phases of descent” was not recovered. Released at desired altitude, the 900-lb. vehicle had deployed parachute to slow its descent rate and reentered planned recovery area using lifting body principle. Goals of mission—first of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program—were to study aerodynamic characteristics of SV-5D shape, heat shield performance, guidance and flight control systems, instrumentation, and recovery system, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/66, A4)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 89-mi. (144-km.) altitude in NASA-American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to make a high-resolution survey of celestial x-ray sources. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache meteorological sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried 25-grenade payload and dummy trimethyl-aluminum (tma) canister weighing 25 lbs. to estimated 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude. 23 grenade flashes were photographed by K-24 ballistic camera network in experiment conducted for British National Space Research Committee and Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee to obtain wind, temperature, and other meteorological data between 31-93 mi. (50-150 km.), (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrlinstrumented payload to 109-mi. (175-km.) altitude in experiment to photograph solar corona and disc and to measure solar disc variations and total solar flux in Lyman-alpha. Performance of rocket and instrumentation was considered excellent, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA and West Germany’s Ministry for Scientific Research had signed cooperative agreement to investigate the physics of comets, interplanetary medium, and earth’s magnetosphere. Initial experiments, to be launched in fall 1966, would release vaporized metal in upper atmosphere, creating artificial ion clouds which would be observed from ground. Results would be reviewed to determine desirability of conducting similar experiments on larger vehicle at a distance of several earth radii. Under agreement, BMwF would provide rocket payloads, supplementary cameras, and photometric equipment. NASA would furnish one Javelin and one Nike-Tomahawk rocket, launching range, support facilities, and equipment for optical observations. (nasa Release 66-121)
NASA Aerobee 150 and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 35 min. apart from wsmr reached 116-mi. (186-km.) and 74-mi. (119-km.) altitudes in GSFC-essa Institute for Telecommunication Sciences and Aeronomy experiment. Aerobee rocket and instrumentation, designed to measure micrometeoroid and cosmic dust impacts and electron densities, performed satisfactorily. Although Nike-Cajun did not reach predicted altitude and two of seven experiments to obtain data on ionospheric D-region did not function properly, satisfactory results were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Administration officials had no indication that U.S.S.R. was man-rating a new booster for manned lunar landing program, Technology Week reported. They also doubted reports that U.S.S.R. would attempt landing mission in October 1967—fiftieth anniversary of Bolshevik Revolution—but anticipated another Soviet manned earth-orbital flight in 1966. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 3)
U.S.S.R. began new carrier rocket tests in the Pacific that would last until Dec. 30. Tass said area with 56-km. (35-mi.) radius had coordinates of 0°5' south latitude and 163°45' west longitude. Ships and aircraft were requested not to enter this area daily between noon and midnight local time. (Tass, 11/19/66)
Boosted Areas sounding rocket was launched from deck of usns Range Recoverer near Koroni Beach, Greece, as test for flight series to obtain data on electron and ion density distribution in ionospheric D region during solar eclipse May 20. No data were obtained because 2nd stage failed to ignite, but problem was corrected to ensure successful flights during eclipse, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA awarded Honeywell, Inc., a $230,000 contract to determine alternate approaches and concepts for measuring horizon radiance characteristics over earth’s surface—knowledge essential for design of space vehicle guidance and control systems. LaRC-directed study, including investigation of factors affecting horizon radiance profiles, analysis of measurements and evaluation of possible flight techniques, would support Project Scanner rocket flight tests. (LaRC Release; NASA Release
Site at Pakachoag Hill outside of Auburn, Mass., where Dr. Robert H. Goddard launched world’s first liquid-fuel rocket flight on March 16, 1926, was approved as a national landmark by Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall. (Dept, of Interior; SBD, 11/23/66, 119)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) ended three-day, seven-nation Inter-ministerial Conference in Paris without reaching decisive conclusions. Issues involved were: (1) Western Europe’s independent space role competitive with U.S. and U.S.S.R.; (2) extent of collaboration to keep pace with technological advance; and (3) continuation of initial eldo project, three-stage Europa-1 rocket. Cost estimate had more than doubled to $420 million, and recent proposal to move Europa-1 into space communications would add $60 million. Another meeting was scheduled for June. (Mooney, NYT, 4/29/66, 8; upi, Wash. Post, 4/27/66, A15; NYT, 4/28/66, 24)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried gsfc payload to 184-mi. (296-km.) altitude for simultaneous measurements of magnetic and electric fields, low-energy electrons, and low-energy protons in a visible aurora. Secondary objectives were rocket aspect measurement and evaluation of xenon flashing light for trajectory determination, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Launch of NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 rocket, on mission to perform first double-ignition of a hydrogen engine in space, was aborted at ETR seconds before liftoff when a power cord failed to disconnect from the booster. Failure automatically stopped the Atlas engines from firing and countdown was halted at two seconds. No new launch date was set. (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/30/66)
Agena rocket stage identical to one at KSC which NASA planned to use as target vehicle in the March Gemini VIII mission suffered an explosive start in ground firing at USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center. Failure, which followed five successful test firings, was similar to explosion which canceled Gemini VI mission Oct. 25, 1965. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/14/66)
Sixteenth-century manuscript "On Rockets” by Conrad Haas (circa 1550) received at iaf Congress in Madrid. Concepts of rocket construction included multistage rockets and a design of a house-like upper stage. (Text)
NASA launched ComSatCorp’s intelsat ii-a comsat from etr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into elliptical transfer orbit in preparation for geostationary orbit. Transfer orbit parameters: apogee, 23,382 mi. (37,646 km.); perigee, 186 mi. (299.9 km.); period, 11 hr. 9 min.; inclination, 26.4 . At ninth apogee—on Oct. 30—ComSatCorp bred the apogee motor. Apparently the apogee motor nozzle was blown off shortly after the motor ignited, and intelsat ii-a entered orbit with 23,330-mi. (37,545-km.) apogee; 2,072-mi, (3,334km.) perigee; 12 hr. 16 min. period; and 17° inclination rather than planned 22,300-mi.-altitude synchronous orbit over Pacific. ComSatCorp announced that 192-lb. satellite, nicknamed "lani bird,” could receive and transmit television and other forms of communications, but that "significance of this potential remains to be assessed.” First satellite in ComSatCorp’s two-satellite Intelsat II system to provide transatlantic and transpacific comsat coverage, intelsat ii-a had been scheduled to extend commercial service to the Pacific; assist in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements; and provide capability for live transpacific TV by handling TV, data transmission, or up to 240 voice channels between "first class” ground stations. Intelsat II-B was planned for launch in early 1967. intelsat i ("early bird”) had been orbited April 6, 1965. (ComSatCorp Releases; NASA Proj. Off.)
S-IC-3 booster for first Saturn V flight was shipped from nasa’s Michoud Assembly Facility aboard Poseidon to msfc for static-testing scheduled for late October, (nasa Release 66-218)
Radio astronomy experiment designed to measure average intensity of cosmic radio noise originating outside the solar system was launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Javelin rocket on 20-min. ballistic flight with 570-mi. (918-km.) apogee. Measurements were made at frequencies which couid not be accurately detected by ground-based receivers. Data would aid study of galaxy’s formation. (Wallops Release 66-31)
USAF was awarding Thiokol Chemical Corp. $1,075,507 contract for design, fabrication, and testing of thrust vector control system for 156-in. solid rocket motor, (dod Release 897-66)
Tokyo Uniy. Space and Aeronautics Institute announced it had launched a two-stage meteorological sounding rocket, last in a series of 15, from test center in Uchinoura, Kyushu—600 mi. southwest of Tokyo. (AP, NYT, 3/21/66, 27)
Proposal by Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Lab. that a scanning system be mounted in a lunar crater to report to earth the precise location of x-ray sources as they appeared over the crater’s rim because of the moon’s rotation, was discussed by Walter Sullivan in the New York Times. Recent rocket observations [see Mar. 2] had disclosed objects, some of them otherwise invisible, that strongly emitted x rays— part of the spectrum which cannot penetrate earth’s atmosphere. "A systematic survey of the sky in this wavelength,” Sullivan said, would "open an entirely new window on the universe.” (Sullivan, NYT, 3/20/66, 8E)
Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Apphcation) successfully ground-tested for first time at full power— 1,100 mw, corresponding to 55,000-lb. thrust in space—by nasa and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Two and one-half hours after initial ignition, engine was restarted and run for 15 min. at varying power levels, reaching a maximum at slightly less than full power. Nerva engine had operated successfully up to partial power—40 mw—Feb. 3. (aec Release J-54; Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aviation announced successful launch of 240-lb. meteorological sounding rocket from Uchinoura launching range in Kyushu, southern Japan. Single-stage rocket reached 40.8-mi. (65.7-km.) altitude in 2 min. 4 sec. Data were telemetered to ground station. (Wash. Post, 4/22/66, B2)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from wsmr to 142-mi. (229-km.) altitude to measure atmospheric composition and temperature at 62- to 124-mi. (100- to 200-km.) altitude range, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, each carrying payload of 19 acoustic grenades, from three launch sites—Point Barrow, Alaska, Churchill Research Range; and nasa Wallops Station—to gather data on atmosphere between 20- and 60-mi. altitudes over widely spaced geographic areas. Grenades were ejected and detonated at programed altitudes, yielding information on wind directions and speeds and atmospheric densities, pressures, and temperatures. Rocket launchings were first in series of nine planned for February. Similar experiments would be conducted throughout the year to observe atmospheric conditions during different seasons. (Wallops Release 66-9)
NASA Nike-Apacbe sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 126-mi. (202-km.) altitude in NASA-Univ. of Michigan experiment to measure ambient neutral and ion composition and density as function of altitude and compare data with those obtained on February 1965 flights. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl) .
nasa’s Lunar Orbiter A spacecraft was mated to its Atlas-Agena D booster in preparation for scheduled Aug. 9 launch from ETR. {Tech. Wk., 8/8/66, 3)
Soviet rocket tests begun Aug. 25 in the Pacific had been completed six weeks ahead of schedule, Tass announced. (Tass, 9/6/66; upi, NYT, 9/7/66)
NASA Inventions and Contributions Board granted United Aircraft Corp. a waiver of title rights in all inventions made, or to be made, under NASA contract, which involved the RL-10 rocket engine. (KB)
S-IB stage for sixth flight Uprated Saturn I booster (S-IB-6), powered by eight Rocketdyne H-l engines, was successfully captive-fired at msfc for 145 sec., producing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-124)
Close of iaf Congress was dramatized when Spain launched her first sounding rocket—Carabela 4—from Arencillo base, near Huelva. British-built rocket, which cost approximately $1,700, carried 12-lb. instrumented payload to 81-km. (50-mi.) altitude and then impacted 40 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Two NASA officials—William Hausman, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, and Clotaire Wood, NASA European Representative—observed the launch, first of six in a long-range program to study meteorology. (Wilford, NYT, 10/16/66, 78)
NASA successfully completed third rocket-launched test [see Nov. 5 and 21] of LaRC-managed parachute landing system for Voyager spacecraft. Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr deployed 30-ft.-dia. disc gap band parachute at approximately 130,000-ft. altitude. Voyager program was managed by jpl. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Moscow parade celebrating 49th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution included rocket which Russians claimed was immune to any antimissile defense system and could be dropped out of orbit from any direction. (AP, Wash. Eve, Star, 11/7/66, Al, A6)
Initial tests of first liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen turbopumps for nasa’s 1.5-million-lb.-thrust M-l rocket engine technology program had been successfully completed at lrc. Pumps, driven by 200,000-hp gas generator, were largest ever built for handling propellants for high-energy rocket engine, (lrc Release 66-10)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 94-mi. (151-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs; rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. nasa Aerobee 150 launched 25 min. later to 109-mi. (174-km.) altitude in NASA-Naval Research Laboratory experiment photographed outer solar corona with moon near edge of field of view and sunlit particles near the rocket. Flight also obtained heliograms showing inner corona and solar disc and data on solar flux in Lyman-alpha. Rocket and instrumentation, except for a spectroheliograph, performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket with new 4th stage ignition system was launched from Wallops Station to 434-mi. (698-km.) altitude. Instrumented payload measured positive ion composition of ionosphere, electron density, and temperature; and mapped distribution of Lyman-alpha radiation to determine amount of atomic hydrogen in earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was tested by NASA and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Control positioning error in initial ignition led to automatic flow shutdown. In 18-min, test following second, low-pressure start, reactor reached design power of 1,090 mw and exhaust temperature reached 3,630°F maximum. Test was fourth in series which began Feb. 3 and marked system’s eighth and ninth start. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station on second development flight of series. The 53-ft.-long rocket developed 60,000	lbs. thrust and reached 222-mi. (357-km.) altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean some 106 mi. from launch site. Preliminary examination of data indicated rocket’s performance was close to predicted. Direction of sounding rocket program was under ossa, (nasa Release 66-221; Wallops Release 66-44)
Launch crews began erecting Titan II booster on Pad 19 at etr in preparation for September launch of Gemini XI mission. (AP, Houston Post, 7/24/66)
NASA assigned lrc responsibility for development of space vehicle design criteria in the area of chemical propulsion. Howard W. Douglass, former director of lrc’s Flox Project Office, was appointed Chief of Design Criteria Office and Assistant Chief of Chemical Rocket Div. (lrc Release 66-40)
nasa awarded rca two-year $7,837,000 contract for logistic support of computers used to check automatically Saturn IB and V booster stages during manufacture and at launch site. Major equipment for the Saturn checkout systems would be the RCA 110A computer produced under separate contract with nasa msfc. (msfc Release 66-8; Marshall Star, 1/12/66, 1)
nasa launched 49-lb. payload with ionosphere experiment for Rice Univ. to 116-mi. (186-km.) altitude from nasa Wallops Station with Nike-Apache sounding rocket to test theory that intense electrical currents flow at high altitudes over the earth and are strongest at about 120-mi. altitude. Data from magnetometer designed to detect magnetic field caused by the currents were telemetered from the payload to ground stations at Wallops during flight. (Wallops Release 66-11; nasa Rpt. srl)
U.S.S.R. had successfully completed series of carrier rocket tests in the Pacific 16 days early, Tass reported. Nov. 20 Tass statement had said that tests would continue until Dec. 30. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/14/66, Dll)
Meteorological sounding rocket launched from Chamical, Argentina, was first in series of launches planned for NASA-Argentine Space Commission (cnie) cooperative program, cnie had scheduled 13 launches for i966 as part of Inter-American Experimental Meteorological Rocket Network (exametnet), in which Argentina, Brazil, and U.S. would cooperate to establish in the Western Hemisphere a north-south chain of stations for coordinated sounding rocket launchings to obtain experimental data on weather patterns. Brazil launched first rocket under exametnet program from Natal, Brazil, Jan. 12. (nasa Release 66-103)
Two Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launches, from Point Barrow, Alaska, and Churchill Research Range, were coordinated in gsfc experiment to obtain atmospheric data as time of summer maximum for noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rockets and instrumentation functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range in engineering test preceding series of five gsfc launches to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy proton, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during Polar Cap Absorption event. Rocket performance was near predicted; however, nose cone did not retract because of override switch heating problem, and data were poor in quality, (nasa Rpt. siu.)
nasa announced plans to begin powered flights of M-2 and HL-10 manned lifting bodies at Edwards afb in early 1967. Equipped with 8,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine, vehicles would be flown at altitudes up to 80,000 ft. and speeds of 1,000 mph in series of 8-min. test flights designed to simulate spacecraft reentry conditions, (nasa Release 66-329)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aviation announced successful launch of Japan’s first television-equipped sounding rocket: 1.4-ton rocket carried 22-lb. TV camera to 200-mi. (322-km.) altitude, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/4/66)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range in GSFC-Univ. of Michigan pitot-static tube experiment to observe the fine atmosphere temperature structure at noctilucent-cloud altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Five successful sounding rocket launchings were conducted from the deck of usns Range Recoverer during eclipse of sun in Greece, NASA announced. Launchings of the Boosted Areas rockets, part of a cooperative project of the Greek National Committee for Space Research and NASA, were planned to investigate ionization of the upper amosphere during solar eclipse, (nasa Release 66-32; NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 404-mi. (650-km.) altitude in GSFC-Canadian Defence Research Board Telecommunications Establishment experiment to measure ion and electron density and temperature. Although rocket did not perform as expected, all instrumentation functioned normally and "excellent” data were received, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
AFCRL launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from wsmr to 117-mi. (188-km.) altitude to collect micrometeorite particles during Leonid meteor shower, (oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 90-mi. (145-km.) altitude in experiment to measure spectral irradiance of stars Alpha Lyrae, Lambda Scorpii, Zeta Ophiuchi, and Delta Scorpii. Flight marked first successful operation above earth’s atmosphere of Star Tracking Rocket Attitude Positioning (Strap) system. The 330-lb. telescope device telemetered almost 80 sec. of ultraviolet data and was recovered undamaged about 55 mi. from launch site for reuse in fall 1966. Data would give experimenters information on star surface temperatures, gravitational field intensity, and relative ages, (nasa Rpt. srl; gsfc Release G-16-66)
eldo successfully test-fired three-stage Europa rocket from Woomera Range, Australia. Booster was blown up over Simpson Desert 6 min. 42 sec. after launch. {Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 8)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to estimated 104-mi. (167-km.) altitude. Experiment conducted for Univ. of Michigan measured ambient air density from 19-75-mi. (30-120-km.) altitudes by radar track of two falling Mylar spheres ejected at plus 72 sec. Flight also measured solar heating effects by comparing diurnal variations of measurements, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa conducted first rocket-launched test of parachute landing system for Voyager spacecraft at wsmr. Honest John-Nike rocket boosted 200-lb. experimental package to 104,000-ft. altitude, but ground command transmission did not correctly trigger deployment. Successful balloon-launched test in the LaRC-managed parachute experiment series had been completed Aug. 30. Voyager project was managed by jpl. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Final glide flight of M2-F2 lifting body vehicle before installation of XLR11 8,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine [see Dec. 30] was made at Edwards afb with Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry as pilot. Purposes of flight, 14th in unpowered series, were testing of stability and control and determination of vehicle performance characteristics, (nasa Proj. Off.)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 136-mi. (219-km.) altitude in NASA-Univ. of Minnesota experiment to measure atmospheric temperature and composition from 62- to 124-mi. (100- to 200-km.) altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) reactor (NRX-A5) was successfully ground-tested by nasa and aec at Jackass Flats, Nev. Test, in which reactor was operated at design power of 1,100 mw for 15Vi min., was first in series to "obtain additional data on reactor characteristics under extended operating duration” under joint nasa-aec Rover program, (aec Release J-151)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 98 mi. (157 km.) in NASA-Univ. of New Hampshire experiment to provide data on neutron intensity at different latitudes, solar x-ray fluxes, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionospheric electron densities. Rocket performed satisfactorily and instrumentation performance was considered excellent, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 111-mi. (178-km.) altitude, gsfc experiment, first in series of three, successfully measured number and energy distribution of electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev, which produce visual aurora, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Horace Sheely of the National Survey of Historic Sites, Dept, of the Interior, inspected Pakachoag Hill, Auburn, Mass., site of first successful liquid-fuel rocket flight made by Dr. Robert H. Goddard. Accompanying Sheely were members of the Auburn Rotary and Lions Clubs joint committee to preserve the Goddard site. (Joint Comm. Ltr.)
NASA announced transfer of project management of the RL-10—first hydrogen-fueled rocket engine—from msfc to lrc and of Headquarters program authority from NASA omsf to ossa. RL-10, which had powered Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IV) in six successful flights prior to conclusion of msfc’s Saturn I program July 30, 1965, also powered Centaur upper stage launch vehicle, managed by lrc. (nasa Release 66-74)
Four experimental ramjet missiles launched by France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera) reached speeds of nearly 4,600 fps between 40,000- and 115,000-ft. altitudes. Missiles were part of a 10-flight program code-named stataltex, to generate data applicable to eventual development of an atmospheric booster that could reach mach 5. (M&R, 5/23/66, 9)
NASA Aerobee 150A launched from NASA Wallops Station carried afcrlinstrumented payload to 136-mi. (219-km.) altitude in experiment to measure incident solar radiation. Rocket vehicle coning motion made accurate solar pointing and consequent data acquisition possible only 60 per cent of the time, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Martin Marietta Corp. was receiving $7,622,000 fixed-price contract from afsc for work on Titan III booster, (dod Release 536-66)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried two far-ultraviolet image converters to 83-mi. (134-km.) altitude in nrl experiment to obtain stellar spectra and photographs; rocket and instrumentation did not perform as expected, and no useful data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites'with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude. NASA-Univ. of Maryland experiment was designed to (1) evaluate pulse and thermal equalization probes as research tools, (2) investigate electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere, and (3) investigate use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Small hydrogen-oxygen engine originally developed for Saturn S-IV rocket stage was being adapted to serve as heater for expanding helium gas used in repressurizing S-IVB propellant tanks in space. Burner, providing an 800-lb. payload gain through weight reduction, would make it possible to meet pressure requirements by using supercold helium from bottles immersed in liquid hydrogen inside fuel tank, and would serve as possible source of low-thrust ullage control power during weightless flight, (msfc Release 66-92)
nasa successfully launched two companion sounding rockets five minutes apart from nasa Wallops Station for simultaneous measurements of properties of the neutral atmosphere, ionosphere, and solar radiation intensities at 120- to 380-mi. altitudes. Aerobee 150A sounding rocket with 180-lb. AFCRL-instrumented payload to measure solar ultraviolet radiation and electron temperatures as function of altitude reached 142-mi. (229-km.) altitude. While Aerobee 150A was still in flight, four-stage solid-propellant Javelin boosted instrumented payload to 380-mi. (611-km.) altitude to obtain simultaneous measurements of neutral gas densities, temperatures, and composition; ion densities and composition, and electron temperatures and densities. Data from both flights were telemetered to the ground and would be correlated to study effects of solar radiation on ionosphere and upper atmosphere. (Wallops Release 66-12; nasa Rpt. srl)
Manufacturers of rocket components, faced with possible work shortage because of nasa’s delay in formulating plans for post-Apollo missions, were making "frank pitches to the U.S. Space Agency—and presumably to the Defense Department-—for more business,” wrote Alvin B. Webb in the Washington Post. Webb noted that "Chrysler is expected to begin building the last of its Saturn 1-B boosters by the end of this year. The same applies to Douglas production of S4B upper stages for the Saturn 5. "Boeing, under the present schedule, probably will begin to run out of work on the Saturn first stage in late 1967.” (Webb, Wash. Post, 5/16/66, D9)
usaf space launch crews were being familiarized with new low-cost Burner II upper-stage booster developed by Boeing to inject payloads into orbit and then orient the payload accurately. Small, guided, solid-fuel stage, scheduled for operation in late 1966, would "economically bridge the payload gap between the dod-nasa Scout launch vehicle and the Delta and Agena upper stages.” (Boeing Release)
Series of power tests for breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was completed by NASA and AEC at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Final 16-min. test studied duration capability at approximately design power and temperature—1,130 mw and 3,715°F. Engine system had been started 10 times during series [see Feb. 3, 11, March 3, and 16] and had operated for 110 min., including 29 min. at nominal full power. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Test-firings of XE nuclear rocket engine—last major step before developing hardware for flight-rated nuclear engine—would begin in latter half of 1968, Milton Klein, Deputy Manager, nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, told Atomic Industrial Forum in Pittsburgh. Klein also disclosed that his office had begun preliminary design of new facilities with two test positions, each capable of testing a 200,000-lb.-thrust engine or an entire propulsion module under simulated altitude conditions. (Text)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 50-lb. instrumented payload to 115-mi. (185-km.) altitude. Conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp., experiment was designed to measure electron density in ionospheric D region. (Wallops Release 66-36)
Boosted Areas 2 rocket was successfully launched for first time from wsmr. Equipped with new Marc 42A1 1st stage, rocket carried 16-lb. payload to 90-mi. (145-km.) altitude. (Tech. Wk., 8/1/66, 10)
Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19-grenade payload in gsfc experiment coordinated with launch from Point Barrow, Alaska, to study atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as summer progressed toward time of maximum noctilucent cloud sightings. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk launched from Churchill Research Range reached 151-mi. (243-km.) altitude in last of four NASA-Univ. of California, Berkeley, experiments [see Sept. 1, 6]. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and measurements of flux, energy spectrum, pitch angle distribution, and time variations of mirroring and precipitating charged particles were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Javelin rocket launched from Wallops Station releases barium cloud visible over much of eastern United States. were feasible and that "development of a land-landing capability must be vigorously pursued.” NASA test pilot Milton 0. Thompson was awarded SETp’s 1966 Iven C.	Kincheloe Award, presented annually to the outstanding experimental test pilot of the year, "in recognition of outstanding professional accomplishment in the flight testing” of M2-F2 wingless lifting-body vehicle, (nasa Release 66-252; frc Release 18-66; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/24/66, A2)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried grazing incidence telescopes and bandpass filters to estimated 107-mi. (172-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs. Another GSFC-instrumented Aerobee 150 was launched from wsmr eight hours later to 121-mi. (195-km.) altitude to obtain solar spectral data from 2-60 A. Both rockets and their experiments performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried scientific payload to estimated 83-mi. (134-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment designed to measure spectral irradiance of the stars Sirius and Rigel. Control system, star tracker, and ultraviolet stellar spectrometer performed satisfactorily. Brief data periods, caused by failure of fine jet pressure regulator on control system gas supply resulting in high thrust, had possibly aided establishment of flux values at discrete wavelength intervals. (Wallops Release 66-4; NASA Rpt. srl)
150-mi. (242-km.) altitude in first of a series of four NASA-Univ. of California, Berkeley, experiments to obtain proton and electron measurements over energy range of 1-300 kev. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily [see Sept. 6, 16]. (nasa Rpt. skl)
Breadboard of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was tested by NASA and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Initial fixed-drum start tested control drum response; maximum power reached was 230 mw, compared with reactor’s 1,100-mw design power. Test duration was nine minutes, and maximum exhaust temperature was 1,540°F. After a second low-pressure start was aborted, system was given normal start; in 22-min. test it reached 350-mw maximum power and 2,130°F maximum temperature. Nerva engine had been successfully started twice on Feb. 3. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Two series of coordinated nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched from NASA Wallops Station, Churchill Research Range, Point Barrow, Alaska, and Natal, Brazil, in gsfc experiment to gather data—by means of exploding grenade technique—on atmospheric wind, temperature, pressure, and density as summer maximum of noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, except one rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station did not achieve predicted altitude, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Four-stage Javelin sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station ejected multicolored barium clouds over eastern U.S. at 310-mi. (499-km.) and 570-mi. (917-km.) altitudes. Cooperative NASA-German Ministry of Scientific Research (bmwf) experiment measured electric fields and wind motion in upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking ionized clouds; secondary objective was observation of interaction between cloud and solar wind. Launch was followed by reported sightings of "brilliant” Ufo’s. (nasa Release 66-245; Wallops Releases 66-46, 66-48; AP, Wash. Post, 9/25/66, A23; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/25/66, A3; nasa Rpt. srl)
First Europa 1 booster for European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) was successfully launched from Woomera Range although malfunction in an impact indicator at a downrange radar station led to early reentry. Booster, composed of British Blue Streak first stage and dummy French and German second and third stages, was programed for 143-sec. flight. Range safety officer cut flight short by eight seconds when radar indicated Europa 1 was heading off course to the left. There was no malfunction in the rocket itself. Reduction of data later showed booster had been on a correct course at 30.3-mi. (48.8-km.) altitude. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics officials estimated test was 90% successful, and that "objectives were achieved.” Europa 1 was sponsored by U.K., France, Australia, Italy, West Germany, the Netherlands, and Belgium, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/24/66, A12; NYT, 5/25/66, 22; Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 32)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried jpl 100-kw. radar to 102-mi. (164-km.) altitude in experiment designed to gather data on behavior of radar echoes as a function of altitude for use in developing planetary terrain sounding technique. GSFC-managed flight marked first successful functioning of high-powered radar in space. Similar radar had been flown successfully on NASA Convair 990 April 27. (jpl Release, 6/26/66; jpl, Lab-Oratory, 6/66, 10)
Memorandum of understanding for cooperative meteorological sounding rocket experiments was signed by the Spanish Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) and nasa. Purpose of project would be to obtain synoptic information on wind, temperature, and pressure at altitudes between 18 and 36 mi. Sixteen Boosted-Dart and Areas sounding rockets carrying chaff (tuned dipoles) or instrumented payloads would be launched from a range in Spain to be operated by the Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial (inta). conie would procure an Areas launcher, sounding rockets, payloads, and other equipment. NASA would provide, on a loan basis, an Mps-19 radar, van, Boosted-Dart launcher and additional equipment. NASA also would train Spanish personnel in equipment operations and maintenance. Scientific results of project would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 66-20)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 187-mi. (301-km.) altitude in GSFC-Univ, of Michigan experiment coordinated with Aug. 26 and 27 flights. Simultaneous measurement of N2 and electron density and temperature, measurements of atmospheric ion and neutral composition, and comparative data from two mass spectrometers and other experiments were obtained; rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Coordinated NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket series was launched from NASA Wallops Station, Churchill Research Range, Point Barrow, Alaska, and Natal, Brazil, in GSFC experiment to study atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 130-mi. (209-km.) altitude in second of three gsfc experiments to measure number and energy distribution of auroral-producing electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev. Satisfactory data were recovered despite malfunction of one detector, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Reported that usaf Titan II launch vehicle, which launched 12 out of 12 missions in the Gemini series, was expected to win a usaf incentive fee of over $2 million for Martin Co,, the prime contractor for two-stage booster. (Av. Wk, 11/21/66, 28)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station reached 631-mi. (1,015-km.) altitude in Univ. of Pittsburgh-Syracuse Univ. experiment to observe ionization levels of exospheric helium. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, with 18-min. telemetry signal. Unanticipated high-energy electron particles were measured, and data were under study to determine their source, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallqps Station ejected mixture of barium and copper oxide at about 125-mi. (201-km.) altitude during ascent and at 160-mi. (258-km.) altitude during both ascent and descent. Three distinct clouds, visible for hundreds of miles, were photographed and tracked in second NASA-German Ministry of Scientific Research cooperative launch to measure electric fields and wind motions in upper atmosphere [see Sept. 24]. (nasa Release 66-248; Wallops Releases 66-46, 66-49; nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range was third and last flight [see Feb. 9 and 16] in series of GSFC experiments to measure number and distribution of electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev, which produce visual aurora. Although radar lost track early in flight and peak altitude was not available, rocket performance was near predicted and series was considered completely successful, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
NASA successfully launched explorer xxxiii (Imp-D) Anchored Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (Aimp) from etr using Thrust-Augmented Delta booster with FW-4S 3rd stage to study interplanetary radiation and magnetic fields. Because tracking data indicated at 3:30 GET spacecraft was in excess-energy orbit, alternate mission plan was put into effect at 4:30 get: retrorocket was fired, injecting explorer xxxiii into elliptical earth orbit with 278,990-mi. (449,174-km.) apogee; 18,975-mi. (30,550-km.) perigee; 13.5-day period; 28.9° inclination. Planned parameters: 4,000-mi. (6,440-km.) apolune; 800-mi. (1,288km.) perilune; 10-hr. period; 175° inclination. NASA later revealed booster’s 2nd stage had produced 70-80 fps over-velocity which would have caused spacecraft to reach moon’s vicinity too early to achieve lunar capture. Despite explorer xxxiii’s failure to achieve lunar orbit, all active experiments were operative and high scientific yield was expected. Fourth of seven Interplanetary Explorers planned by NASA and first to attempt lunar orbit, 206-lb. explorer xxxiii carried six scientific experiments and one engineering experiment—a solar cell damage study. Primary mission objectives were to study at lunar distances the earth’s magnetic tail and magnetosphere in interplanetary space twice a month by means of lunar anchored spacecraft; and to measure interplanetary magnetic fields, solar plasma, and energetic particles in cislunar space. Program was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Space Science and Applications (ossa), (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-162; upi, NYT, 7/2/66, 5; Strothman, Wash. Post, 7/2/66, A2)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 51-lb. payload to 115-mi. (185-km.) altitude and impact 88 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Payload instrumentation failed to function properly, however, and desired results were not obtained. Flight was last in a series of seven similar experiments conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois to measure seasonal charges and other effects in the D- and E-regions of the ionosphere. Previous six launches had ^been conducted successfully from Wallops Station in April, July, and November 1964; and June, September, and December 1965. (Wallops Release 66-1; nasa Rpt. srl)
Fourth flight Saturn IB booster (S-IB-4) left NASA msfc for Michoud Assembly Facility aboard the NASA barge Palaemon for post-captive-firing checkout, (msfc Release 66-27)
NASA Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19-grenade payload to 78-mi. (125-km.) altitude. gsfc experiment obtained temperature, wind, density, and pressure data during auroral condition at altitudes to 56 mi. (90 km.) by recording sound arrivals of explosions of all 19 grenades, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 96-mi. (154-km.) altitude in Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment designed to observe ultraviolet emissions from Venus. Scattered light produced by solar illumination of itt startracker optics prevented acquisition and lock-on of target Venus, hut good data were obtained on Lyman-alpha. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster successfully underwent short-duration—35-sec.—static firing at msfc. (msfc Release 66-288)
France’s Dragon sounding rocket was successfully launched from Norwegian range on Andoeya Island by Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). (Tech. Wk., 10/31/66, 13)
First of uprated J-2 rocket engines designed to power upper stages of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles had been delivered to msfc for static firing, naa’s Rocketdyne Div. had increased engine’s maximum thrust to 230,000 lbs. by strengthening turbine wheels of turbopumps and modifying engine control system, (msfc Release 66-91)
JPL 100-kw. radar was flown successfully on nasa Convair 990 at 3-6-mi. (5—10-km.) altitude in preliminary test for rocket flight [see May 9]. (jpl Release, 6/26/66)
nasa’s second Project Scanner instrument package was successfully launched by three-stage solid propellant Trailblazer booster from nasa Wallops Station on suborhital trajectory to gather information on earth’s horizon. Two-channel radiometers measured infrared energy emitted from earth’s horizon by carbon dioxide and water vapor; star-mapper telescope provided data on attitude of spin-stabilized spacecraft. Project Scanner was a phase of horizon definition research conducted by LaRC. (Wallops Release 66-58)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried sodium payload to 124-mi. (200-km.) altitude in experiment conducted for Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee to measure wind direction and speed at 50- to 124-mi. (80- to 200-km.) altitudes. No photography was possible since sodium flash, observed at +60 sec., was not followed by sodium cloud release, (nasa Rpt. srl)
U.S.S.R. began rocket test series in the Pacific Ocean. (Tass, 9/6/66) August 26: nasa officials revealed at Hq. news briefing that data accumulated thus far from lunar orbiter i indicated the moon’s shape departed from that of a perfect sphere with a bulge of about Vi mi. at its north pole, a depression of about Vs mi. around the Northern Hemisphere, a 3^-mi. bulge around the Southern Hemisphere, and a depression of about Yi mi. at the South Pole. Conclusions were based on assumption moon’s density was uniform. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/66, A3; Av. Wk., 8/29/66, 18)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfcinstrumented payload to 128-mi, (206-km.) altitude to obtain dayglow measurements. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt. srl)
France planned to continue work on large space boosters, either alone or with other interested European nations, despite British decision to withdraw from eldo’s Europa rocket program, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. French officials, open in their bitterness at the British decision, viewed the withdrawal as further proof that U.K. made "a poor European partner.” {Av. Wk., 6/13/66, 38)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 93-mi. (149-km.) altitude in third ARC-managed Project Luster experiment to collect meteoric debris during peak of Orionid meteor shower. Luster micrometeoroid sampling instrument deployed successfully during flight; debris was vacuum sealed at recovery. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 134-mi. (216-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to evaluate the method of the double floating probe as a tool for monitoring ionospheric electric fields. Rocket performance was excellent, and data obtained by one of two independent antenna systems was in quantitative agreement with the double floating probe theory. Other antenna system failed to deploy properly, (nasa Rpt. srl)
25th anniversary of Reaction Motors, Inc. Formed to develop James H. Wyld’s liquid-fueled rocket, corporation became in 1958 Reaction Motors Div. of Thiokol Chemical Corp. (Thiokol, Aerospace Facts, 11-12/66, 2)
nasa had awarded Lockheed Propulsion Co. $96,000 contract to evaluate solid-propellant motor which could stop and restart spacecraft propulsion units on command. Current solid-propellant rocket motors did not have this capability. On future space missions concept could be applied to midcourse correction, probe separation, and orbit and space-probe injection. Lockheed, under contract to jpl, would conduct 18 test firings. (nasa Release 66-56)
U, S. and Brazil would cooperate in sounding rocket program to study total solar eclipse in South America Nov. 12. Nineteen sounding rockets would be launched to altitudes as high as 175 mi. (280 km.) from Rio Grande launch site located near path of total eclipse. Program was based on July 1965 agreement between NASA and Brazilian Space Commission (cnae). (Wallops Release 66-51)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr to 102-mi. (164-km.) altitude carried gsfc experiment to obtain ultraviolet spectral scans of bright stars from 1110 A to 4000 A. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
U.S.S.R. began carrier rocket tests in the Pacific, to last until Oct. 25. Tass said center of area with 74-km. (46-mi.) radius had coordinates of 37°14' north latitude and 172°49' east latitude. Ships and aircraft were requested not to enter this area daily between noon and midnight local time. (Tass, Pravda, 9/25/66, 2)
Supersonic transport and rocket flights in the next few decades could raise the average surface temperature of the earth by almost half a degree by spewing tons of chemical pollutants into the atmosphere, said Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, ucla planetary and space physicist, in an interview with the Los Angeles Times. Heavy burning of coal, oil, and gas introduced by the industrial revolution in the 19th century and the automotive revolution in the 20th had increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by about 15 per cent, MacDonald estimated. The carbon dioxide created a layer of gas that allowed heat from the sun to reach the earth but stopped it from escaping when it was re-radiated back from the earth. This was the "greenhouse effect,” which raised the temperature below the layer and lowered the temperature above the layer. "Four hundred supersonic aircraft flying four flights a day on intercontinental routes, would affect surface temperatures as much as the whole industrial and automotive revolutions have to date,” MacDonald said. (Getze, L.A. Times, 4/18/66)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried instrumented payload to estimated 180-mi. (290-km.) altitude, gsfc experiment measured magnetic and electric fields and low-energy electrons and protons in a visible aurora. Rocket aspect measurement and evaluation of a xenon flashing light for trajectory determination were secondary objectives, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched 210-lb. Reentry E payload by Scout booster from NASA Wallops Station to evaluate char integrity of low-density phenolic nylon heat-shield material and test its effectiveness in withstanding actual reentry conditions. In addition to four stages of Scout launch vehicle, 17-in. spherical rocket was attached to instrumented payload as velocity package, First two Scout stages lofted payload to 54-mi. (87km.) altitude. Remainder of vehicle coasted upward to 110-mi. (177-km.) altitude and at peak of trajectory, during 3rd-stage burn, guidance system began positioning vehicle for desired reentry angle. Fourth stage fired during descent, and then velocity package motor ignited, driving reentry payload to a velocity of more than 18,000 mph through earth’s atmos-sphere. Payload impacted 1,150 mi. downrange in the Atlantic; recovery was not attempted. Throughout flight, continuous telemetry channel furnished data before and after the one-minute communications blackout caused by reentry, and aircraft photographed visible portion of reentry. Delayed telemetry system, used successfully on previous flights to transmit during blackout period, failed to operate because of a transmitter malfunction, but data furnished by continuous channel on post-blackout conditions would permit evaluation of total performance and correlation with previous ground tests. Flight, fifth in series of experiments in Scout Reentry Heating Project designed to investigate heating environment of a body reentering earth’s atmosphere at 18,400 mph, was directed by LaRC. (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-18; Wallops Release 66-8)
Javelin sounding rocket was successfully launched by usaf Cambridge Research Lab. from Churchill Research Range, with payload designed to measure total and component magnetic field values and primary electron and proton fluxes during a magnetic-absorption event. (M&R, 5/16/66, iO)
Gemini VIII launch would be delayed at least 24 hrs. because of a leak in a unit of the spacecraft’s environmental control system and an overflowing fuel tank in the Atlas booster, nasa announced. Launch was reset, nasa announced March 15, for March 16. (Wilford, NYT, 3/15/66, 17; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 3/15/66; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/14/66, 1)
First full-scale checkout version of 365-ft. Saturn V rocket had been assembled at KSC to aid installation of electrical and plumbing connections on three mobile launching towers. (Marshall Star, 4/6/66, 1)
Successful launching of Boosted-Dart sounding rockets carrying chaff payloads from Natal, Brazil, and NASA Wallops Station marked first meteorological sounding rocket launchings conducted from North and South America the same day under coordinated NASA-Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) experimental program. Natal launch was first of a series of 32 launches planned by cnae for 1966 as part of InterAmerican Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). Brazil, Argentina, and U.S., cooperating in exametnet, were planning a north-south chain of stations through the Western Hemisphere to conduct coordinated sounding rocket launchings to obtain experimental data on hemispheric weather patterns, (nasa Release 66-12)
First fully successful launch and air-snatch recovery of the Air-Launched Air-Recoverable Rocket (Alarr) was made over wsmr. A modified MB-1 Genie carrying instrumented payload for upper atmosphere research, Alarr was launched from F-4C Phantom II jet fighter at 44,000-ft. altitude. Rocket reached 150,000-ft. altitude and 180-lb. payload immediately separated. C-130B transport operating from Edwards afb made successful mid-air recovery of payload at 5,000 ft. in second pass at target. Test, conducted for Kirtland AFB, was to develop new technique for high-altitude space probes: launch aircraft’s speed would serve as first stage of a rocket—eliminating need for a launch pad; descending payload would be recovered to prevent damage or loss. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/29/66; M&R, 4/4/66, 8)
nasa named L/Col. Robert A. Rush worth (usaf) to receive Exceptional Service Medal for his "outstanding contributions” to U.S. aeronautical research programs "both as a pilot and as an engineer” on X-15 rocket aircraft. Col. Rushworth, who would leave X-15 program in summer 1966 to attend Armed Forces Staff College, would be presented medal at NASA awards ceremony in October, (nasa Release 66-159)
esro successfully launched France’s Centaure rocket from range at Paksuniemi, Sweden, to study the aurora borealis. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/21/66, A14)
Sounding rocket launched by Spain from Arencillo base fell to earth within a hundred yards of launching site. Officials blamed failure in guidance system. Launch was part of series begun Oct. 15 to collect meteorological data from region at 30- to 60-mi. (48- to 97-km.) altitude. (Chic. Trib., 10/21/66)
Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 7 hrs. 23 min. apart from NASA Wallops Station reached estimated 81-mi. (131-km.) and 95-mi. (152-km.) altitudes. Experiment, conducted for Univ. of Michigan, measured ambient air density from 19-75 mi. (30-120 km.) by radar track of two falling Mylar spheres ejected from each rocket at +72 sec. Spheres ejected as programed in first launch, but radar was unable to track first sphere until +14 min. Preliminary indications were that it did not inflate properly. Radar tracked second sphere for 18 min. During second launch, both spheres ejected and inflated properly, and radar tracking was continuous for 20 min. Diurnal variations of the measurements were compared to measure solar heating effects, (nasa Rpt. srl)
