NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from wsmr to verify launch compatibility of rocket and modified Nike-Ajax military rail launcher, failed on premature staging at 150 ft; launch verification was successful. (NASA Proj Off)
AIAA Board of Directors endorsed hobbyists who built model rockets from paper, plastic, and balsa wood, but warned against the hazards of amateurs mixing their own fuels and experimenting with homemade metal rockets. Action preceded the National Model Rocket Championship contest scheduled to open in Mankato, Minn., Aug. 15. AIAA, which had for many years withheld endorsement of any type of nonprofessional rocket experiments, recommended that model rocketry be conducted only with adult supervision. (Wilford, NYT, 8/14/67, 37)
AFSC was conducting five-month study of ways to convert excess Minuteman I ICBm’s to launch vehicles, thereby saving millions of dollars. Results of study, to be completed by May, would determine feasibility of flight-test program in which two converted Minuteman boosters would launch instrumented payloads into circular orbits from etr. Preliminary studies had already shown that converted Minuteman booster could place large payloads into 575-mi circular orbit, or smaller payloads into an elliptical orbit 172 mi by 57,500 mi. (afsc Release 20-67)
NASA Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 38-mi (60-km) altitude in nots experiment to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo I Vs mission. First of a series of seven, rocket failed to attain experimental results because of parachute malfunction. (NASARptSRL)
Venus IV's launch site and launch vehicle had been prepared with assistance from military rocket experts, Deputy Commander Col. Gen. Vladimir Tolubko of Soviet strategic rocket forces reported in U.S.S.R.’s trade-union newspaper Trud. Emphasizing role of military specialists in the June 12 launching, Tolubko said they provided guidance during “first 10 minutes of the rocket’s flight,” and relinquished control to “the command measuring complex.” This complex, he wrote, had been controlling, for a decade, “various space apparatuses,” presumably both military and scientific vehicles, according to Baltimore Sun. “[Complex] receives measuring information and telemetry data from stations in Moscow, Siberia, the Far East as well as from special ships in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans,” Tolubko stated. Baltimore Sun reported: “Some Western observers believe all of the country’s massive lifting rockets fall technically under military control because of their potential as intercontinental missiles. Further command reverts to civilian hands if the rocket is on a scientific mission.” (B Sun, 11/17/67, All)
Prof. G. A. Tokaty of The City University, London, speaking to Royal Aeronautical Society’s Astronautics and Guided Flight Section meeting, in London, said: “. . . the Soviets have been (from about 1962) . . . working on a rocket system of 7 to 9 million lb thrust. Evidence of a general nature suggests that they are making good progress and have now reached an advanced stage in achieving a payload-carrying capability of the order of 400,000 to 550,000 lb. . . .” He added: “In the USSR, space science and technology have become an impressive source of new ideas, theories, industrial methods, especially in electro-radio-electronic instrument design [and] all these revolutionised the Soviet precision industry and accelerated the development of the national economy as a whole.” (Text)
The J-2 liquid rocket engine was restarted twice in simulated altitude tests conducted by msfc at aedc. Shut down after an initial 30 sec burn, the engine was restarted and run for 5 sec, then started and stopped again. Total burn time was 70 sec. (Tech Wk, 3/27/67, 24)
nasa Aerobee 150, Mod I sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. payload to 99.6-mi (160.3-km) altitude to obtain quantitative measurements of spectrum and intensity of solar x-ray flux in the 2-30 kev interval and to look for x rays from recurrent nova T Pyxides. This was first flight of new Aerobee configuration Mod I. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies experiment to 85-mi (136-km) altitude to: provide test of instrumentation; prove out feasibility of payload recovery and reuse; and provide geophysical observations of auroral zone under either quiet or disturbed conditions. All experimental objectives were met except payload recovery. (NASA Rpt SRL)
In related experiments, Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to obtain wind profiles by release of chemical and photograph of chemical cloud at 96-mi (154-km) altitude; another Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill to study shortterm variation of density, pressure, and temperature during 12-hr period to 80-mi (127-km) altitude; Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, to determine shortterm variations in upper atmosphere temperatures with payload of standard grenades. All rockets and payloads performed well, (nasa Proj Off)
Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, reached 496-mi (798-km) altitude in Southwest Center for Advanced Studies/Defence Research Telecommunications Establishment experiment to determine in conjunction with an overpass of an Isis satellite: vertical distribution of flux and energy spectra of soft electrons during a mild ionospheric disturbance; vertical distribution of thermal ion and electron densities and temperature of various species of ions; and flight qualification of a soft-electron spectrometer to be flown on isis—A spacecraft. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. experiment to 76-mi (125-km) altitude to determine x-ray spectra in the 0.3- to 3-kev energy range of several previously discovered cosmic sources and to search for variation with galactic latitude of diffuse x-ray background. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRl)
Existence of a secret three-station system which would have enabled sac to broadcast final messages to its surviving bomber and missile forces in event of a general nuclear attack on U.S. was revealed by Howard Silber in the Omaha World-Herald. System, operational since July 1963, had completed its mission and was being superseded by newer devices. Located near West Point, Wisner, and Tekamah, Neb., each constantly manned station had consisted of a guard house and three trailer-vehicles housing launch control equipment, electronics equipment, and a Blue Scout Junior rocket. The three-stage rockets were to have been launched in sequence so their messages could be sounded at specific prearranged intervals at altitudes of more than 100 mi. (Omaha W-H, 12/21/67, 1; AP, NYT, 12/22/67,31)
afcrl launched five Nike-Iroquois sounding rockets from Vega Baja, Puerto Rico, so that simultaneous observations of the ionosphere might he made using rocket instruments and the Arecibo radiotelescope. Rockets were designed to reach a peak altitude of 112 mi (180 km). Measurements of temperature, energy distribution, and density of ions and electrons provided basis for calibration and interpretation of ionospheric data acquired by Arecibo radiotelescope. (OAR Research Review, 12/67, 6-7) During October-November: Lunar Orbiter IV, launched May 4, was presumed to have crashed on lunar surface; contact with spacecraft had been lost July 17. (nasa Proj Off)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried GSFC payload to 131-mi (210-km) altitude in experiment to measure spectral irradiance of Gamma Velora and Zeta Puppis with a UV stellar spectograph, star tracker, and modified attitude-control system (strap). Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35—95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched first of five Nike-Apache sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station but canceled remaining four in the dusk-to-dawn series of launches because of unfavorable weather. Rocket ejected a trimethylaluminujn (tma) vapor trail of bluish color between 50- and 125-mi altitudes in experiment to measure wind velocities and directions at various altitudes in the upper atmosphere. Launchings were conducted for GCA Corp., under contract to GSFC. ossa had overall program responsibility. (nasa Release 67-179; WS Release 67—25; W Post, 7/23/67, A3)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR, carrying arc payload to 99.2-mi (159.5-km) altitude to verify performance of sparcs (Solar Pointing Aerobee Rocket Control System) and map the flight path magnetic field. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
House/Senate Conference Committee agreed on $4.86-billion NASA authorization bill—$234.2 million less than NASA had requested for FY 1968. It included $42 million for Voyager program, $347.7 million for aa program, $73 million for nuclear rocket program, and $157.7 million for launch vehicle procurement. Bill, which required Senate and House approval, was passed by the Senate Aug. 2. (nasa lar VI/83; Committee Release; Clark, NYT, 8/1/67, 13)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carried seven experiments to 100-mi (160-km) altitude measuring: spectral emission line intensity during an aurora as function of altitude; visible emission features of an aurora; and primary and secondary electron streams. Except for high voltage arcing, instrument performance was satisfactory; rocket performance was good, (nasa Rpt SRl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 118-mi (182-km) altitude in flight to observe profile of solar hydrogen Lyman-alpha line and to measure radiation in relation to earth’s planetary hydrogen. Experiments performed satisfactorily, but range schedule delay caused loss of coordination with Mariner V experiment, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried 14-in telescope with new strap iii stellar pointing control to 96.8-mi (155-km) altitude in Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to measure vacuum spectral emission lines from atmospheres of Venus, Jupiter, and Regulus. strap iii (used for first time) rocket and other instruments performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from wsmr to 114-mi (184-km) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain x-ray and euv photos of the sun and to flight test scat solar pointing system. Flight, first for scat, proved to hold pointing to within a few arc sec. Rocket and other instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 35-mi (56-km) altitude as second in nots series to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, and achieved all experimental objectives, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried ARC-instrumented payload to 88-mi (141-km) altitude to collect for analysis meteoritic debris during the peak of meteor shower. Three deployable module support arms held four module trays each, to entrap meteoritic debris. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASARptSRL)
usaf SV-5D lifting body vehicle was successfully launched from WTR by Adas booster on reentry mission and telemetered excellent performance data. Vehicle—third of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program—was second to perform preprogrammed cross-range maneuvers and first to be successfully recovered. First SV—5D vehicle was launched Dec. 21, 1966, and lost when parachute malfunctioned during reentry; second, launched March 5, sank in Pacific after losing its flotation gear. (Tech Wk, 4/24/67,13; Av Wk, 4/24/67,35)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried MIT x-ray experiment to 88-mi (142-km) altitude to search for undiscovered x-ray sources and to obtain data on celestial locations and energy spectra of “discrete celestial X-ray sources” in three regions. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
LeRC awarded four contracts totaling over $5 million for major systems of the sert n (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft: (1) $2,462,678 to Fairchild Hiller Corp. for system definition selection and qualification of components for spacecraft support unit; (2) $1,308,065 to Hugh es Aircraft Co. to develop prime power conditioning and control system for ion thrusters; $1,055,757 to Westinghouse Electric Corp. to develop backup power conditioning and control system; and (4) $290,987 to Cutler-Hammer Corp. to develop a radio frequency interference experiment to measure interference with radio communications generated by the ion engines. sert n was an orbital mission scheduled for late 1968 to advance the development of ion engines as propulsion units for future long-duration space missions, (nasa Release 67-188)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Minnesota experiment to 131-mi (210-km) altitude to measure composition and determine temperature of atmosphere in altitude range 62-124 mi (100-200 km). Experiment used three mass spectrometers and a yoyo despin system. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Fort Churchill, Canada, in experiment from Univ. of California at Berkeley to study charged particles in the auroral zone, 1-300 kev electrons, and 1—100 kev protons. Peak altitude was unknown because of loss of telemetry and radar signal. Payload malfunction accounted for failure to obtain complete data. (NASARptSRL)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried payload to peak altitude of 175 km (109 mi) to obtain atmospheric wind and temperature data up to 135 km (84 mi). Grenade and chemical cloud techniques were used by experimenters, Dr. D. Rees, London, England, and Mr. M. Rahmatullah, Karachi, Pakistan. Rocket performed satisfactorily; grenade-explosion timing sequence was late. (NASA Rpt srl)
U.S.S.R. had developed a device that enabled jet aircraft to take off almost straight up, reaching the stratosphere “in a matter of minutes,” Komsomolskaya Pravda reported. Article did not include detailed description of device but indicated it consisted of rocket engines that provided sudden thrust of tremendous force. (AP, NYT, 1/7/67, 10)
involvement in current Middle East crisis. (NASA Ann, 6/20/67; net Proj Off) During week of June 25: Ceremonies at NASA’s Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards AFB marked delivery of the millionth ton of cryogenic rocket propellants and pressurants. Eluids were used by North American Aviation, Inc.’s Rocketdyne Div. to test fire F-l engines prior to shipping them to msfc for use in Saturn V 1st stages, (msfc Release 67-139) June 26: NASA’s Mariner V spacecraft successfully completed two scheduled functions in preparation for Oct. 19 Venus flyby mission by switching its amplifiers to increase radio transmitting power and, 30 min later, turning off its battery charger on commands from Goldstone, Calif., Deep Space Network station. All systems onboard spacecraft, launched from ETR June 14, were continuing to operate satisfactorily. (NASA Release 67-165)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 111.5-mi (179-km) altitude to measure and record spectra of Spica and Zeta Ophiuchi in extreme ultraviolet range. Rocket and instrumentation performed well. (NASA Rpt SRL)
First Indian-developed rocket, Rohini-75, designed to carry meteorological experiments, was successfully launched from Thumba Equatorial Launching Station (terls). (Reuters, NYT, 11/21/67, 5)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, on floor of House praised NASA’s Surveyor program: “It successfully demonstrated the technique of soft-landing [and] . . . with the successfully concluded Lunar Orbiter program, it found and certified manned landing sites....” He said the program had supplied scientists with the first real information on the chemical composition of the lunar surface. In the eastern Sea of Tranquility, for example, Surveyor V determined that the surface was made up of the same elements common to the surface of the earth; namely, oxygen, silicon, and aluminum. He concluded: “Since both Surveyor and its Centaur booster encountered enormous problems in the early stages of development, the eventual success of the program demonstrated the skill, perseverance, and determination of the NASA-industry-university team.” (CR, 11/20/67, H15619)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrlinstrumented payload to 120-mi (193-km) to obtain spectra from a stellar ultraviolet image converter spectrograph and stellar photometric data from two ultraviolet photon counters. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
President Johnson sent $149.8-million FY 1968 budget amendment to Congress which included $91 million for development of Rover nuclear-powered rocket engine. In his message, the President stated: “Government scientists and engineers have now concluded that a much more powerful nuclear engine would have distinct advantages over rockets now in use. I am recommending that . . . [U.S.] move ahead with the development of a nuclear engine having a potential of 200,000 to 250,000 pounds of thrust. “Such an engine could be used for a new and much more powerful third stage for our Saturn V launch vehicle. Because of its high efficiency, it could: [1] permit us almost to double the weight of the present payload of the Saturn V vehicle, [2] increase our ability to maneuver spacecraft, and [3] be used in future manned landings and explorations of far distant planets. . . .” (PD, 3/6/67, 334-5)
usaf SV—5D lifting body was successfully launched from wtr by Atlas booster on reentry mission and telemetered “excellent” performance data to earth before losing its flotation gear and sinking in the Pacific. Released by Adas booster at desired orbital altitude, the 900-1]) vehicle became first spacecraft to perform preprogrammed cross-range maneuvers when it glided away from a straight line and then returnee] to original flight path. Purpose of flight—second of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program— was to further test theory that a vehicle could be designed to operate like an orbital spacecraft and be maneuvered like an aircraft when it reentered and traveled through the atmosphere. First SV—5D vehicle, launched Dec. 21, 1966, performed successfully but was lost when parachute malfunctioned, (afssd Release 77.67; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 23; Miles, LA Times, 3/6/67)
NERVA (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) reactor (NRX-A6) was successfully ground-tested by NASA and AEC at Jackass Flats, Nev., achieving major goal of one-hour duration for nuclear rocket technology program and demonstrating that rocket reactors could be operated for periods longer than those required for most space missions. Test, in which reactor operated for 60 min at 1,100-mw design power, was sixth in series to obtain additional data on reactor characteristics under extended operation duration in joint NASA—aec Rover program, (aec Release K-285; Aero Tech, 1/1/68, 13)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried ARC-instrumented payload to 86-mi (137-km) altitude to collect meteor-itic debris during peak of meteor shower. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Further examination of the 12 collection modules would be required to determine if micrometeoroid particles were collected, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 112-mi (181-km) altitude to observe solar spectrum from 3 A to 400 A in conjunction with Oso III spectrometer instrument [see Mar. 8]. Rocket and instrumentation performance were satisfactory. (NASARptsRL)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to 88-mi (141-km) altitude to determine electron density in lower ionosphere (during period of nonblanketing Sporadic-E), electron collision frequency, electron temperature, and positive ion densities of species in the 8- to 60-a.m.u. range. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and excellent results were anticipated. (NASA Rpt SRl)
France would launch 330-lb Saros comsat—138 lbs heavier than ComSatCorp’s intelsat II comsats—in 1970 from new French Guiana launch site using eldo’s Europa booster, Reuters reported. Saros would provide direct telephone, radio, and television communications between France and French-speaking countries. (Reuters, W Post, 2/23/67, A3)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried instruimented payload to 26-mi (42-km) altitude to gather micrometeoroid particles during a quiet period immediately before the Zeta Perseid/An-etid meteor shower. No scientific data were obtained because “burn-through” near the igniter headcap caused an explosion, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (59-km) altitude, sixth in nots series of seven to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRl)
NASA Areas sounding rocket, launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 33-mi (53-km) altitude, third in nots series to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission, achieved excellent results. Rocket and payload performed properly, (nasa Rpt srl)
Seventh attempt to launch eldo’s Europa I rocket from Woomera, Australia, failed when mechanical fault developed in release system of the French Coralie 2nd stage. (Reuters, C Trib, 7/31/67)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade experiment to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (35—95 km) at the transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
French scientists were teaching monkeys that pressure on one out of five buttons produced a gum drop, in preparation for series of space flights with Vesta sounding rocket from Hammaguir Range, AP reported. Researchers hoped to determine effects of weightlessness on animals’ behavior patterns. (AP, W Star, 1/7/67, A2)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, and carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 141mi (227-km) altitude to obtain data on charged particle (luxes and investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere during auroral displays. Rocket performance was satisfactory, but only partial data were received from electric field experiment. {NASA Rpt SRl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, in experiment on vertical and horizontal variation of auroral light emissions. Peak altitude was not obtained because of heavy fog effect on radar tracking. Rocket and experiment performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
afcrl successfully launched 65-lb payload by Trailblazer II booster from Wallops Station in experiment to study reentry communications problems by carefully measuring plasma sheath properties and their effects. Booster’s 3rd and 4th stage engines fired at 187-mi altitude to propel nosecone downward; at 60-mi altitude rocket achieved a velocity of 18,000	fps creating an envelope of plasma identical to the envelopes which block radio and microwave communications with reentering spacecraft. Since a pure plasma was essential to the success of the experiment, reentry vehicle had no ablative coating and burned up completely in the atmosphere, afcrl would use results of measurements to develop techniques for predicting exact behavior of a radiating system during reentry, (oar Release 67—9)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 128-mi (209-km) altitude to gather data on charged particle fluxes and to investigate distribution of electric fields in the ionosphere during auroral displays. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, but vehicle spin rate was excessive. Most scientific data were lost because nose cone failed to eject properly and antennas failed to deploy, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 109-mi (176-km) altitude to study special uv radiation of star Zeta Ophiuchi. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory; no spectra were obtained because a thin film of oil-like substance covered grating and mirrors. Source of substance was under investigation, (nasa Rpt srl)
Two Boosted Areas I sounding rockets launched from Resolute Bay, Canada, without tracking facilities carried gsfc experiment to obtain D region ionospheric data in vicinity of magnetic north pole. First rocket lost telemetry at seven seconds; recovery search would be attempted if arctic conditions permitted. Second rocket had 255-sec burn (300 + sec planned), so altitude was probably insufficient. Both.experiments used ground-based transmission of rf energy to rocketborne receivers (Fara-day-rotation experiment). These were first U.S. rocket launchings from this facility, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 35 to 95 km at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRl) 324-801 O—69
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in the Pacific northeast of Midway Island to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Series, which began Sept. 2, was first to last as long as scheduled. (upi, NYT, 10/31/67,44; M/S Daily, 10/31/67)
msc awarded Rocket Research Corp. a $405,000 contract to deliver by
eldo Technical Director Dr. W. H. Stephens announced that eldo would develop Europa III following development of Europa II. Europa III booster would have Europa I 1st stage (Blue Streak) and liquid hydrogen-oxygen 2nd stage with two 14,000-lb-thrust rocket engines. Configuration would be able to boost 6,000-lb payload into low earth orbit. Using high-energy 3rd stage, new launch vehicle would be able to place 1,200	lbs into synchronous orbit; adding two strap-on solid rocket motors rated at 420,000 lbs thrust each, launch vehicle could place 4,000 lbs into synchronous orbit. Low-thrust, very-high-specific-impulse systems were being considered, Stephens said, for use in transferring payloads from low to high orbits, and for accelerating to escape speeds. Using Dragon reactor technology, a small reactor could also be employed in such a system. (S/P, 12/18/67, 150)	.
U.K. was considering halting its activities at Woomera Rocket Range because of large expense due to distance between England and the Australian range and because only a few of its missile projects required such an extensive facility, Space Business Daily reported. (SBD, 12/ 6/67, 181)
eldo’s Europa I rocket was launched from Woomera Rocket Range but was automatically destroyed in mid-air after French Coralie 2nd stage failed to ignite. U.K.’s Blue Streak 1st stage performed satisfactorily. Purpose of suborbital flight test was to evaluate performance of the Coralie and separation of the three stages. (AP, NYT, 12/6/67,16; SBD, 12/7/67,189)
Nation’s most powerful 260-in solid-propellant rocket motor, SL-3, developed 5.7 million lbs thrust and burned 1.6 million lbs of propellant in 80-sec test-firing conducted for NASA by Aerojet General at Homestead, Fla. Only flaw was explosion of a portion of the exhaust nozzle at the end of the test. Purpose of firing, third in NASA’s Large Solid Rocket Technology Program, was to test “a large, submerged-type, ablative nozzle; the use of inert slivers to control the burn-out of propellant; elements of a motor failure warning system; and a higher burning rate propellant.” First two 260-in motors, SL-1 (fired Sept. 25, 1965) and SL-2 (fired Feb. 23, 1966), both operated about two minutes and produced 3.5 million lbs thrust in tests to check strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the case propellant, insulation and ablative nozzle, and the repeated performance of test hardware. Managed by LeRC under OART direction, program was designed to demonstrate feasibility of building and operating solid motors of greater size than those in current use for multistage launch vehicle systems carrying heavy payloads into space, (nasa Release 67151; Lewis News, 6/9/67, 1; Reistrup, W Post, 6/18/67, A2; NYT, 6/18/67,6; Marshall Star, 6/21/67,10)
Detector to measure cosmic dust influx into earth’s atmosphere and meteoroid registration would be tested in NASA/German Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) cooperative project, part of continuing program first started July 19, 1967. Influx of cosmic dust would be measured by charge emission in detectors (developed by Max Planck Institute of Nuclear Physics, Heidelberg, Germany), which would be launched on NASA-supplied Nike-Apache sounding rockets from ESRo’s range in Kiruna, Sweden, May or June 1968. NASA would supply rocket launcher and train Germans in rocket preparation and launching, bmwf would provide two payload packages and ground support equipment, (nasa Release 67-288)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced U.S.S.R.’s possible development of a Fractional Orbital Bombardment System [see Oct. 16]. While ICBm’s followed a ballistic trajectory from launch to impact and had an apogee of 800 mi, fobs, he said, was fired into a very low orbit, and before first orbit was completed, rocket engine would slow down payload and cause it to drop out of orbit—payload then following a reentry path like reentry of ICBM. He said that “we suspect [they] are pursuing the R&D of a FOBS . . . [and] it is conceivable that they could achieve an initial operational capability during 1968. Because of the low altitude of their orbits, some trajectories of a fobs would avoid detection by some early warning radars . . . [and] impact point cannot be determined until ignition of the rocket engine [deboosting payload]— roughly three minutes and 500 miles from the target. And the flight time can be as much as 10 minutes shorter than an icbm.” Accuracy of fobs would be significantly less than that of icbm and payload a fraction of that of icbm, according to McNamara, fobs’ disadvantages had compelled dod to decide that FOBS “would not improve our strategic offensive posture . . . while development of [fobs] could be initiated at any time for relatively rapid deployment.. . .” Anticipating that early warning radars (including bmews) could not detect fobs “because of the low altitude cf [fobs] orbits,” McNamara said: “. . . already we are beginning to use operationally over-the-horizon radars which possess a greater capability of detecting fobs than does bmews. These will give us more warning time against a full-scale attack using fobs missiles than bmews gives against a heavy icbm launch.” (Text; DOD Release 1060-67) Communist-Chinese-oriented abm system—deployment approved by DOD Sept. 18—was named the Sentinel System, according to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s announcement, l/g Alfred D. Star-bird (usa) was named Army’s System Manager for new system; currently Director, dca, Starbird would assume new position Nov. 15,1967, and would be responsible for development and timely deployment in a three-pronged organization: Sentinel System Office, Washington, D.C., to be an element of C/Staff’s Office, USA; Sentinel System Command, Huntsville, Ala., to develop, procure, and install new system; and Sentinel System Evaluation Agency (ssea) at wsmr to provide independent evaluation, review, and testing. Existing Nike-X organization, under command of l/g Austin W. Betts (usa) , Chief of r&d, would continue (separately from Sentinel System) to perform: r&d, design of equipment to be used for tests of the penetration capabilities of U.S. offensive missiles, and mission of protecting U.S. against large-scale attacks, (dod Release 1059-67)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 67-mi (108-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performance were only partly successful due to low apogee of rocket, which placed the highest grenade burst at only 42-mi altitude, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill carried Rice Univ.-instrumented payload to 467-mi (752-km) altitude to measure ratio of fluxes of auroral zone precipitated protons, and alpha particles, fluxes and spectra of low-energy protons and electrons, and energy spectrum of protons with energies of 100 to 500 kev. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched three artificial cloud experiments from NASA Wallops Station. In first experiment Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket ejected multicolored barium vapor clouds over eastern U.S. at altitudes of 142 and 200 mi (246 and 322 km) to measure electric fields and wind motions in the upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking ionized clouds. Experiment had been scheduled for March 28 but was postponed because of overcast skies. In second and third experiments Nike-Apache sounding rockets carried separate triethylborane (Teb) experiments to 100-mi (161-km) altitude to investigate distribution of, and radiation from, atomic oxygen. Teb, a new test material, for measuring upper atmosphere wind profiles, was ejected at 90- to 50-mi (145- to 81-km) altitudes and photographed by special photometer as it dispersed. Launches were followed by reported sighting of bright ufo’s. (nasa Release 67—74; WS Release 67-12; AP, W Star, 3/31/67, All)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in second Pacific area near Midway Island to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Tests in other areas had been completed Dec. 13. Series, which began Nov. 28, had been scheduled to last until Dec. 30. (upi, NYT, 12/14/67, 16; SBD,12/18/67,246)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 72-mi (115-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASARptSRL)
Sounding rocket launched by esro from northern Sweden to study aurora borealis reached 116-km (72-mi) altitude. (Reuters, NYT, 2/6/67,3)
Phoebus IB reactor was operated for 45 min—30 min at 1,500-mw design power—in test conducted by aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office at nrds, Jackass Flats, Nev. Primary purpose of test, part of Rover program, was to study high-power-operation effects on reactor— including test conditions to be found in 5,000-mw Phoebus 2, slated for test late this year. Phoebus series would provide advanced technology for solid-core graphite rocket reactors, eventually providing 200,000250,000	lbs of thrust. (Joint aec-nasa Release K—46)
nasa had awarded naa’s Rocketdyne Div. a $1.4-million contract for continued technological investigation of the advanced aerospike rocket engine. Studied by oart for 1% yrs, the engine utilizes a doughnutshaped combustion chamber which discharges exhaust gases against the surface of a short center cone. In conventional rocket engines, gases are expanded inside long bell-shaped nozzles. Current concept specified an engine 8 ft in diameter and 4% ft high—about 50% shorter than conventional bell nozzle engines. A new “aerodynamically compensating nozzle” would permit use of the engine at sea level or high altitude, making it potentially suitable for both lower and upper stages of launch vehicles. Contract completion date was May 31, '1968. (nasa Release 67-221)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Minnesota experiment to 131-mi (210-km) altitude to measure composition of atmosphere and determine temperature in altitude range 62—124 mi (100-200 km) using three mass spectrometers. Two of three spectrometers did not function properly; however, data obtained appeared satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station in third flight test carried 110-lb instrument package to 1,495-mi (3,007-km) altitude before impacting 690 mi downrange in the Atlantic. No recovery was attempted. The 11,600-lb solid-fueled rocket—most powerful sounding rocket in U.S.—transmitted 30 min of data on flight characteristics. From preliminary examination of data test appeared successful, but scientific data on cosmic noise effects were lost because rocket’s spin rate was too high for proper deployment of experimental antennas. Astrobee 1500 was being developed by NASA “to provide a research rocket capable of carrying heavy scientific payloads to high altitudes, with a relative ease-of-handling. . . .” First launch attempt (April 8, 1963) failed 16 sec after launch because of a nosefairing failure; second attempt (Oct. 21, 1964) was successful. (WS Release 67-5)
nasa Nike Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to 149.5-mi (237-km) altitude in a Univ. of Maryland-Geophysics Corp. of America experiment to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes, investigate electron energy distribution in a normal daytime ionosphere, and investigate the use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. One door covering gca antennas prematurely ejected causing a complete loss of experimental data and a rocket apogee 4 mi lower than predicted. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from wsmr, reached 107-mi (172-km) altitude in nrl experiment to obtain stellar spectra in 1,230-1,800 A far uv wavelength range and photometric data on stellar fluxes in 1,050-1,180 and 1,230-1,350 A bands. Attitude-control system programming error-pointed instrument 60° from desired targets; only limited data were obtained, (nasa Rpt SRI.)
Three sets of experiments were continued at Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Point Barrow, Alaska [see January 31]. Last five of a series of six Nike-Apache sounding rockets were successfully launched from Ft. Churchill to obtain wind profiles of upper atmosphere to 96-mi (154km) altitude. Last five of a series of six Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ft. Churchill to study short-term variation of density, pressure, and temperature during 12-hr period where altitudes ranged from 94 mi (152 km) to 102 mi (164 km). In first launch, Nike booster malfunction resulted in payload malfunction; for other four launches, rocket and payload performance were satisfactory. Last five of a series of six Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were successfully launched from Point Barrow at two-hour' intervals to determine short period variations in • upper atmosphere temperatures, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 96-lb payload with joint U.S.-India ionosphere experiment to 88-mi (142-km) altitude before impacting 100 mi downrange in the Atlantic. Purpose of flight was to prove out instrumentation and test new antenna design. Experiment, which measured electron and ion densities and Lyman-alpha flux in lower ionosphere with a riometer—cosmic radio noise absorption device—and a Langmuir probe, was being developed for series of cooperative nasa-incospar launches from Thumba range, India, (nasa Release 67-61; WS Release 67-8)
eldo’s Europa I rocket, launched from Woomera Rocket Range after 10 postponements, crash-landed when French Coralie 2nd stage failed to ignite. Malfunction was traced to equipment associated with the release system designed to separate the Coralie from U.K.’s Blue Streak 1st stage. Rocket, which should have flown 4,828 km (3,000 mi) into the Pacific, landed 965 km (600 mi) north of Woomera in the Simpson desert. (Reuters, NYT, 8/5/67, 7)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket carrying 55-Ib payload to obtain electron density profile was launched from nasa Wallops Station to 121-mi (193-km) altitude. Minutes later, Nike-Cajun grenade experiment was launched over the Atlantic for atmosphere temperature support data at 50- to 56-mi (80- to 90-km) altitudes. Launchings, first two in series of three to study relation of high absorption radio waves in ionosphere to seasonal temperature variations in upper atmosphere, were conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois, gca Corp., and gsfc. Rockets and equipment functioned satisfactorily. (Wallops Release 67-4)
Two sounding rockets were launched from NASA Wallops Station. NikeApache carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 60-mi (96.4-km) altitude to obtain a vertical profile of the density of nitric oxide in region at 47—75-mi (75-120-km) altitude with a scanning uv monochromator. Payload was first to utilize Tomahawk clamshell nose cone. Instruments performed satisfactorily, but late ignition of rocket’s 2nd stage caused 12-mi (20-km) loss in apogee. Nike-Cajun carrying GSFC-instrumented payload used grenade-explosion technique to measure temperature, pressure, density, and wind in region 22—59-mi (35-95-km) altitude in coordination with nitric oxide experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, reaching 68-mi (109.6-km) altitude. The near-simultaneous launches were intended to permit analysis of theory relating nitric oxide concentration to temperature and absorption of radio energy, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with grenade payload was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly circulation to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt srl)
Two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets carrying instrumented payloqds were successfully launched by NASA from wsmr. First rocket carried an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer and input telescope to 97.5-mi (156.8km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of five early stars in 1,100 to 4,000 A wavelength. Second, carrying detectors to observe sky in the infrared, reached 98.5-mi (158-km) altitude. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 44-mi (68-km) altitude to develop experimental atmospheric composition profiles in mesospheric region and to measure ozone distribution in regions of 12—40 mi (20-65 km). Because of malfunction in parachute system only two minutes of ozone data were acquired. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA had successfully completed series of ground tests to qualify improved graphite nozzle insert in FW-4<S solid rocket motor which had malfunctioned during launch of Scout booster in January. Malfunction had caused postponement of Feb. 15 launch of ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C, because FW-4 was 3rd stage of its booster, Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta, (nasa Release 67-60)
Last NASA Areas sounding rocket in series of seven was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (59-km) altitude, in nots experiment to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IVs mission. All experimental objectives were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried instrumented payload to 86.5-mi (139.2-km) altitude; it measured spectral irradiance of two early-type stars in wave length intervals 1100 A to 4000 A. The other two target stars were pointed at but could not be observed through opacity of fuel and oxidizer released through control jets. (NASARptSRL)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station ejected barium vapor at 75-, 115-, and 140-mi altitudes, forming three distinct green and purple clouds visible for hundreds of miles. Experiment was conducted for afcrl to (1) measure electric fields and wind motion in upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking movement of ionized barium clouds, and (2) measure attenuation on passage of radio signals through ionized barium plasmas. (WS Release 67-32; upi, W Star, 10/4/67, D2)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried gsfcinstrumented payload to 98-mi (159-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of Venus. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but telescope and camera separated from recovery body during reentry and were damaged at impact, (nasa Rpt SRL)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk launched from Barreira de Inferno Range, near Natal, Brazil, carried Univ. of New Hampshire-instrumented experiment to obtain data on neutron intensity at different latitudes, solar x-ray fluxes, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionospheric electron densities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL; Tech Wk, 4/10/67, 15)
Two NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets, launched from Andoeya, Norway, carried gsfc electric field experiments. Four barium clouds released by the first were photographed from all sites for analysis of electric fields from motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during aurora condition. The second rocket was launched to correlate electric field measurements with measurements of magnetic fields, flux, and energy spectra of low-energy particles, but failed on loss of radiofrequency signals, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire experiment to provide data on the neutron intensity at different altitudes using a neutron detector, solar x-ray fluxes using an x-ray counter, and 2-10 A Lyman-alpha radiation using a photoionization chamber. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Cone-shaped RAM C-l spacecraft was successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Scout booster at 1:33 pm, edt. On termination of eight-minute ballistic flight, impact occurred 725 mi down-range about 150 nm northeast of Bermuda. Spacecraft, 15 in long and 26 in in dia with 12-in-di^ hemisphere nose, plunged hack into earth’s atmosphere at 17,000 rnph in flight test to study methods for preventing loss of radio .signals from reentering spacecraft. No recovery was attempted. NASA’s Project RAM (Radio Attenuation Measurement) was to measure effectiveness of water addition concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Additional experiments were also included to evaluate X-band telemetry system as a means of overcoming blackout: study plasma and ablation effects on antenna performance; measure attenuation as a function of signal frequency; and obtain measurements of ion densities in the flow field of the spacecraft in the presence of ablation and water injection. Water was injected at three points on spacecraft—on nose cap and on each side—with nitrogen gas as pressurizing agent. Ion density changes, due to varying amounts of water injection, were measured. X-band frequency experiment showed blackout period of communications was reduced by 6 sec, using water-injection method. Series of Arcasonde meteorological rockets were launched from Bermuda before and after RAM C-l experiment to collect upper atmosphere density, temperature, and wind data, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67261; WS Releases 67-33,67-34)
jpl had selected Avco Space Systems Div. for negotiations on a six-month, $240,000 contract to study feasibility of launching a flyby spacecraft and atmospheric entry capsule to Venus in 1972. NASA had approved selection of the firm, which would head a team effort with Northrop Systems Lab oratories. Study, expected to begin in May, would investigate all aspects of launching by an Atlas-Centaur booster a Mariner-class spacecraft weighing about 1,200 lbs. Near Venus, 100-lb capsule system would separate from flyby portion of spacecraft and enter Venusian atmosphere to take direct measurements during descent to surface. Capsule would not be designed to survive impact on Venus, (nasa Release 67-72)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 93-mi (130-km) altitude in flight to measure the radiation from celestial objects in the spectral region, 2,800-1,200 A, 40-50 A, and 2-8 A. Experiments performed satisfactorily, but parachute did not deploy and payload crashed because of faulty wiring. Recovery was not required to obtain scientific data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (58-km) altitude, fifth in NOTS series of seven to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Continuing Brazil/U.S. space cooperation, experiment to measure airglow would be carried out by National Space Commission (cnae) of Brazil and NASA, an Aerobee 150 to be launched from Brazil’s Barreiro do Inferno range this fall [see Oct. 14—15]. A monochromator would measure day airglow in equatorial regions at altitude of about 130 mi in the range of 2,000A. One of two kinds of upper atmosphere’s visible radiation (aurora being other), airglow existed when sunlight interacted with upper atmosphere to create visible radiation. CNAE would be responsible for preparation and operation of launching range and associated facilities, and for providing personnel for training. nasa would provide Aerobee rocket, payload, and mobile launch facility currently located in Brazil, (nasa Release 67-277)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 78-mi (126-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (3595 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket was planned as companion shot with Nike-Cajun launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, April 10. Weather conditions at Wallops Station prevented launch on same day. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Soviet references to low-altitude nuclear weapon that would drop on target before completing full orbit of earth appeared to confirm Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s analysis of dod intelligence reports that U.S.S.R. had a nuclear-warhead missile capable of sudden attack from relatively low altitude. Commemorating U.S.S.R. Rocket and Artillery Forces Day, Strategic Rocket Forces Commander-In-Chief Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov and Col. Gen. Nikolai V. Yegorov described missiles that could deliver “nuclear warheads . . . along ballistic and orbital trajectories.” (Anderson, NYT, 11/19/67,15)
NASA’s broad program of lunar exploration included, according to Space/ Aeronautics, “quickening conversion of data and designs into hardware and techniques for . . . planting a coordinated set of instruments on the lunar surface for remote, year-long readout; bringing back those lunar samples for exhaustive, quarantine-flavored analysis in custom labs; going back with wheels, rocket pogos, and sophisticated drills for more extensive exploration; [and] exploiting, eventually, the moon’s capacities as a base for astronomy, or as a source for fuel.” (S/A, 5/67,68)
Undulating, banana-shaped barium cloud, released from a Nike-Iroquois sounding rocket launched from Eglin AFB in USAF experiment on air currents, touched off dozens of reports of UFO’s throughout southeastern U.S. (upi, NYT, 1/18/67, 48)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried GSFC payload containing pitot-static probe to measure atmospheric density, pressure, and temperature in observing diurnal variation in the fine structure of the region from 15 to 110 km. Probe was launched in conjunction with thermosphere probe experiments. The 2nd stage of the sounding rocket did not ignite because of low current application. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 71.1-mi (114.4-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 35 to 95 km at the transition from wintertime westerly to summertime easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl; Tech Wk, 4/10/67,15)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from nasa Wallops Station, reached 102-mi (167-km) altitude in Univ. of Maryland experiment to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes as research tools. Experiment also investigated electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere and use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Experiment was successful. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrl payload to 107-mi (173-km) altitude on flight to measure, with Euv heliograph and coronagraph, micrometeoritic particles close to rocket and to take pictures of solar disc. Excellent results were obtained; coronagraph package yielded more than 50 photographs of white-light solar corona from three to 10 solar radii, (nasa Rpt srl)
msfc awarded two contracts: (1) a $2.4-million, two-month contract extension to Chrysler Corp. for procurement of long-lead time items for additional Uprated Saturn 11st stages. Extension would enable Chrysler to continue procurements necessary to maintain capability to assemble four Uprated Saturn I boosters annually; (2) a $14,811,540 fixed-price-incentive-fee contract to naa for 60 additional H-l rocket engines for use on 1st stages of Uprated Saturn I boosters. Order increased total number of engines purchased to 322. Delivery would continue through September 1968. (msfc Releases 67-136, 67-138)
NASA Argo D^t (Javelin) sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Syracuse Univ. Research Corp. payload containing vacuum-ion chamber to 625-mi (1,006-km) altitude on flight to measure ion densities in the upper atmosphere. Telemetry signal was received for 18 min. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried a Rice Univ.-instrumented payload to 493-mi (794-km) to determine spatial and temporal variations and transit times of auroral particle fluxes and perform pitch angle studies including backscattered particles. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Puerto Rico in Univ. of Illinois experiment to probe lower regions of ionosphere up to about 125 mi (200 km), achieved satisfactory results. In first of three such rocket flights, measurements were made simultaneously with those of Arecibo Ionospheric Ohservatory’s giant radar-radio telescope, 30 mi from Vega Baja Airport launch site. World’s largest radar-radio telescope took ionospheric readings, using its 1,000-ft-dia wire mesh reflector. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-230; WS Release 67—28)
X—24A (formerly SV-5P), Nation’s newest manned lifting-body vehicle, was publicly displayed and officially turned over to usaf in ceremonies at Martin Marietta Corp.’s Baltimore plant. The 5,000-lb wingless vehicle, constructed by Martin Marietta Corp. under afsc contract, would be air-launched from B-52 aircraft at afftc and would be driven by Thiokol rocket engines to higher altitudes and supersonic speeds before gliding to controlled landing. Flight tests would be conducted by five usaf and nasa pilots in late 1967 under joint nasa/usaf lifting-body program, (afsc Release 59.67; Clark, NYT, 7/12/67, 1)
