Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried arc luster sampling instrument with collection modules, camera, and electronics package to 71.3-mi (114.7-km) altitude to sample material from noctilucent clouds as luster instrument passed through them. Sampling instrument was successfully flown and recovered. Instrument malfunction caused loss of four modules, but remaining eight were recovered in excellent condition. Experiment was considered highly successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
U.K. successfully launched Skylark sounding rocket from Adelaide, Australia, to altitude of 149 mi (239.8 km) after initial delays caused by weather. (Reuters, NYT, 6/2/68, 55)
At awards dinner of National Institute of Social Sciences in New York, Charles A. Lindbergh said, “My hope that aviation would cause better relationships between our earth’s peoples gave way to realization that the airplane’s primary significance lay in its power of destruction. . . . My fascination with the rocket as a space-exploring vehicle has been replaced by my alarm at its ability to wipe out our civilization overnight.” Lindbergh and his wife, Anne Morrow, received gold medals for “distinguished service to humanity” for their work in conservation. (upi, W Star, 11/22/68, A2)
NASA Marc 42A2 Areas booster launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 4.8-mi (7.8-km) altitude in ballistic performance evaluation test. Booster and instruments performed satisfactorily; ballistic parameters agreed closely with predictions, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried National Center for Atmospheric Research experiment to 77-mi (124-km) altitude to retrieve high-intensity air sample from 26.7- to 40.4-mi (43- to 65-km) altitude, using low-temperature condenser. All cryogenic heat exchange and sampler functions performed satisfactorily; recovery parachute deployed and payload survived impact. Sample of eight moles of air was recovered between 26.8-mi (43.2-km) and 38.9-mi (62.8-km) altitudes, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Rice Univ. payload to 121.6-mi (195.6-km) altitude to measure vector magnetic field in region between 90 and 130 km during electron current flow with sufficient continuity and signal strength to deduce altitude profile and absolute strength of current layer. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Clear magnetometer data were received during payload ascent and descent, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to study auroral activity as it developed and dissipated for comparison with data from similar Nike-Apache launch. Flight was unsuccessful because of undetermined failure related to pitch/roll couple. Radar and loss of telemetry indicated payload breakup, (nasa Rpt srl) *	Sixty-day simulated earth-orbited mission, using Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div.’s 12-ft-dia, 40-ft-long space cabin simulator, had begun for four California college students—Jack G. Angaran, Dennis Giroux, Guy H. King, and Robert B. Zeuschner. NASA OART had awarded $200,000 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. to conduct what was believed first test in which crew would subsist in space cabin on “closed water and oxygen loop” for lengthy period. Students would use reclaimed water and oxygen from human waste. Additional missions to evaluation of integrated life support system were evaluation of waste management; crew’s ability to maintain, service and repair life support system; and crew’s physiological and psychological reactions. Life support system resembled that needed for three-year spacecraft mission. Crew’s contact with outside world would be by radio, (dac Release 67—172; St. Louis G—D, 2/21/68)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried payload to 65-mi (104.4-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of atmosphere parameters between 22- and 59-mi (35- and 95km) altitudes with exploding-grenade and falling-sphere techniques. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily except for one of the two spheres; other sphere was tracked for 23 min. Globe Exploration Corp. and Superior Engineering Co. experiments were correlated with firings from Kiruna, Sweden; Fort Churchill, Canada; and Point Barrow, Alaska, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa and German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) were conducting series of four sounding rocket launches from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) to study upper atmosphere near Equator. NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets ejected barium clouds between 90- and 120-mi altitudes to investigate electric fields in upper atmosphere region of intense electric current. Results would be available to world scientific community. BMwF was responsible for chemical payloads, photographic equipment, and cloud observation; Indian National Committee for Space Research provided launch services; and NASA supplied sounding rockets and rocket launcher. (nasa Release 68—58)
Phoebus 2A nuclear rocket reactor was successfully tested by NASA and aec at Jackass Flats, Nev. During 32-min ground test, reactor reached peak power level of approximately 4,200 mw, operating for about 12 min at above 4,000 mw. Power density exceeded that required for 75,000-lb-thrust nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application). Test was part of nasa/aec nuclear rocket program, (aec/nasa Release L-148; W News, 6/27/68, 3)
esro successfully launched Centaure rocket from Kiruna Range in Sweden to collect micrometeoroid data. (SBD, 5/23/68,118)
NASA had concluded agreements for cooperative scientific experiments with space and upper atmosphere research authorities of Brazil, Norway, Spain, and Sweden. Brazilian Comissao Nacional de Ativi-dades Espaciais (cnae) and NASA project would include four sounding rocket launches into upper atmosphere to measure micrometeoroid flux and its variations with latitude in early autumn. Royal Norwegian Council for Scientific and Industrial Research and NASA project would observe earth’s magnetic and electrical fields and charged particle environment during stages of auroral activity by launch in September and October of three barium-release ion-cloud payloads followed by instrumented payloads. Spanish Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) and NASA project would require launch of 24 Boosted-Dart meteorological sounding rockets to 30- to 60-km (18.6- to 37.3-mi) altitudes at two-week intervals throughout 1969 to obtain synoptic wind and temperature data on structure and circulation of upper atmosphere and wind oscillations. Swedish Space Research Committee and NASA project would study D and E ionospheric layers with instrumented payloads on four Boosted-Areas II sounding rockets in autumn 1968. In all projects, principal experimenters would have first rights to data which subsequently would be made available to world scientific community. Each agency would bear full cost of its agreed responsibilities without exchange of funds, (nasa Release 68—138; SBD, 8/5/68, 148)
nasa launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 166.5-mi (268-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes in 1- to 10-kev region while payload was passing through or close to visible auroral display. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; all scientific objectives were achieved. Launch was second in series of four [see Feb. 5], _ Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 6-mi (9.6-km) altitude to study atmospheric parameters of temperature, pressure, and density using Pitot-static-probe technique and measure extreme UV emission to determine energy disposition with altitude of incoming particles. No scientific data were obtained because of vehicle malfunction. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 102.6-mi (165.1-km) altitude to obtain monochromatic picture of sun using spectroheliograph and to measure solar spectral irradiance using photoelectric radiometers. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 92.7-mi (149.5-km) altitude to measure intensity and energy spectra of low energy protons helium nuclei and heavier nuclei present during Polar Cap Absorption (pca) event. Launch was first of six scheduled during solar event. Parachute failed to deploy apparently because of technician’s failure to connect flight system pyro-techniques. Extendable nose cone malfunctioned for undetermined reason. Telemetry functioned for full flight duration, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched two Javelin sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station. One carried GSFC payload to 497-mi (800-km) altitude to observe helium ionization levels in exosphere with vacuum-ion chamber and to observe helium and oxygen-ion resonance dayglow with filtered photometer. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Telemetry signal was received for 16 min 40 sec. Second rocket carried Syracuse University Research Corp. vacuum-ion chamber to observe helium ionization levels in exosphere and Univ. of Southern California filtered photometer to observe helium- and oxygen-ion resonance day-glow to 497-mi (800-km) altitude. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 73.3-mi (118.5-km) altitude to evaluate vehicle performance and measure payload environmental instrumentation, including three-axis acceleration, lateral and longitudinal vibration, three-axis gyro, 10 temperatures, and motor pressure. Rocket performed as predicted and was recommended for acceptance by NASA. All instruments operated to impact, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried 145-lb gsfc payload to 80.8-mi (130-km) altitude to evaluate parachute recovery system for Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun launch vehicles. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; excellent data were obtained from all telemetry channels. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Danish government announced it had banned U.S. rocket flights to probe sunspot effects at high altitudes over Greenland during 1968 because of popular apprehension which followed January crash of nuclear-armed usaf B—52 aircraft near Thule afh. Disappointed scientists noted 1968 was peak in 11-yr sunspot cycle; 1969 would offer hardly enough sunspots for study. (C Trih, 7/6/68, 5)
France had successfully test-fired lex, improved, single-stage experimental hybrid sounding rocket which used liquid oxidizer and inert solid propellant. Developed by Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera), French space agency, lex could carry 14-lb payload with meteorological experiment to 115-km (71-mi) altitude. {SBD, 1/16/68, 74)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Andoya, Norway, carried gsfc experiment to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during auroral condition. All four barium clouds were released in visible aurora as planned, and good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa successfully deployed 40-ft-dia parachute with predicted 10lbpercubic-ft dynamic pressure at mach 3.5. Parachute was ejected from five-foot-long canister which had been propelled to 33-mi altitude by three-stage rocket launched from wsmr. Test was to determine possible use of parachute for aerodynamic deceleration in planetary entry missions. Another test in Project shape (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiments) was scheduled for November, (nasa Release 68-185; AP, NYT, 10/27/68, 66)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Iowa experiment to 500-mi (805-km) altitude to observe frequency-time spectra and measure relative phase and amplitude of magnetic and electric fields of VLF radio noise in 30 hz—10 khz range; measure electric field amplitude of naturally occurring radio noise from 7—70 khz; measure differential energy spectra for protons and electrons over 5 ev—50 kev energy range; and measure DC electric field perpendicular to payload spin axis. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory and all scientific objectives were met. (nasa Rpt srl)
Cone-shaped RAM c—II spacecraft was successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Scout booster at 11:16 am edt. After reentering earth’s atmosphere at 17,000 mph, 264-lb spacecraft completed its eight-minute ballistic flight by impacting 725 mi downrange 150 mi northeast of Bermuda. No recovery was attempted. Primary mission objective of RAM C—II—15-in-long, 26-in-dia spacecraft with 12-in-dia hemisphere nose—-was to measure electron concentrations in flow field at discrete locations along spacecraft during reentry at medium velocity. Secondary objectives were to measure ion concentrations in flow field as function of distance from spacecraft, measure antenna performance and signal attenuation during reentry under specified conditions, and measure spacecraft environmental parameters, including accelerations, pressures and temperatures. Launch was second in NASA’s Project ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) to study methods for preventing loss of radio signals from reentering spacecraft, ram c—i, launched Oct. 19, 1967, had successfully demonstrated effectiveness of water addition to flow field and use of X-band telemetry signals in maintaining communications through ionized plasma sheath, ram program was managed by LaRC under dart direction, ram c—ii spacecraft was designed, fabricated, and tested by LaRC. (nasa Proj Off; LaRC Proj Off; NASA Release 68-146; ws Release 68—17)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska experiment to obtain data on horizontal and vertical spatial variation of auroral light emissions and relationship between their intensities and volume emission rates. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory and experiment was successful. Peak altitude was not determined because radar lost track, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), failed to climb to desired 45,000-ft altitude after air-launch from B—52 aircraft, apparently because of rocket engine malfunction. Vehicle glided to smooth 225-mph emergency landing on Rosamond Dry Lake. Flight from Edwards afb was to have been HL—10’s first powered flight, (nasa Proj Off; LA Times, 10/24/68)
Use of 260-in solid rocket motor as 1st stage for advanced manned launch vehicle was advocated by MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Aerospace Technology reported. Dr. von Braun, whose support for motor was revealed in Oct. 11, 1967, testimony released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, said concept was advantageous for resupply of flights to space stations and for space rescue systems where 80% of emergencies in manned spacecraft in earth orbit were “time critical.” NASA and DOD, in joint study, were considering use of 260-in motor and its development
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station ejected triethylborane (teb) vapor trails during descent from 95.2-mi (153.5-km) altitude to study nighttime airglow and variations in wind structure, determine vertical profile of atomic oxygen with photometer, and measure electron energy distribution in normal nighttime ionosphere with Langmuir probe. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Launch, postponed Feb. 21 to check instrumentation for high voltage breakdown, was one of seven launches in series conducted for gca Corp. under gsfc contract [see Feb. 21-22]. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska payload to examine spatial distribution of ionospheric currents near visual auroral forms with flashing light on rocket used to locate position of rocket on TV film of aurora. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory. Radar did not track vehicle to sufficient altitude to obtain peak altitude data. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 126.5-mi (203-km) altitude to obtain solar extreme UV spectra from 40 to 390 A and from 10 to 390 A using bbrc—spc 300D solar pointing control and recovery system. Despite better than expected performance, no solar spectrum was detected. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Max Planck Institute (Germany) experiment to 114.2-mi (183.5km) altitude to measure micrometeoroids by sensitive microphone detectors and electron emission and to measure electrical fields in ionosphere by static voltmeter. Good data were received. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt SRL)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 180-mi (290-km) altitude to verify performance of quadrupole ion-mass spectrometer and measure electron density by CU propagation technique. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets to 74.6-mi (120-km) and 70.6-mi (113.6-km) altitudes to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rockets and instruments performed satisfactorily; sound arrivals were recorded from 19 grenades on each rocket. Data would be compared with data from launches from NASA Wallops Station and Point Barrow, Alaska, (nasa Rpts srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 180-mi (290-km) altitude to verify performance of quadrupole ion mass spectrometer in D and E regions of ionosphere and measure electron density using CW propagation technique. Rocket and telemetry performed satisfactorily and good results were obtained from spectrometer, but propagation experiment was lost at 43.4-mi (70-km) altitude, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets two hours apart from Point Barrow, Alaska, to 80-mi (128.8-km) altitudes. Purpose of launches was to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating 19 grenades per rocket at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Data would be compared with data from two launches to be conducted from Churchill Research Range Oct. 15. Rockets and instruments performed satisfactorily; sound arrivals were recorded for all grenade ejections. Good data were anticipated, (nasa Rpts srl)
Aviation Week reported anticipated $ 100-million cut in FY 1969 funding could halt contractors’ work on usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) in September, with slippage of flight schedule into 1972. Boeing Co. was working on new launch vehicle at nasa’s Michoud Assembly Facility under Project Scrimp. Booster would be vehicle 75 ft in dia and 80 ft high and use TRW engine based on Boeing lunar module ascent engine experience, with 2-million-lb operational thrust—although usaf had not decided to abandon Titan III—M as launch vehicle. (Av Wk, 7/29/68)
Electric signals out of phase with jet engine noise could be introduced into exhaust flame and converted into sound waves to cancel out engine noise, according to United Technology Center scientist, Dr. A. G. Cattaneo. Idea, in principle, had been demonstrated by recent laboratory experiments in which acetylene torch flame converted electric signals into sound with high fidelity. Evaluation of combustion efficiency during rocket engine tests could be additional application. (Wilford, NYT, 2/11/68, 30)
First launch of British Aircraft Corp.-built Skylark sounding rocket from esrange near Kiruna, Sweden, carried London Imperial College experiment to 105-mi (170-km) altitude to investigate relationship between auroral events and polar “electrojet.” Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (SBD, 4/4/68, 199)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc payload to gather data on charged particle fluxes associated with aurora and to investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere, occurrence of radio noise, and ionospheric electron densities during auroral displays. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; good data were acquired, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 184-mi (296-km) altitude to measure intensity and polarization distribution of hydrogen Lyman alpha at night. Although rocket performance was satisfactory, instruments failed to function, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa was unsuccessful in second Project shape (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiments) attempt at WSMR when parachute was ejected prematurely from five-foot-long canister after three-stage rocket had successfully propelled payload to 33-mi altitude. First test Oct. 23 had been successful, (nasa Release 68—216)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 12-mi (19-km) altitude to obtain variations in temperature profile and atmosphere structure. Launch was one of series scheduled for winter 1968—69 at Churchill, Point Barrow, Alaska, and NASA Wallops Station. Nineteen grenades deployed and exploded as planned. Second stage failed to ignite causing low apogee, which prevented acquisition of useful data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload. Objectives were to detect and identify energetic charged particles that caused aurora, measure local electron density and correlate it with ground measurements of ionization, study aurora light emissions at several wavelengths and detect related electric fields, and investigate auroral ionospheric currents and magnetic fields driving them in ranges 1—15 kev and 2—30 kev and protons from 10—40 kev with electrostatic curved plate analyzers and channel multipliers. Launch was first in series of five to be launched from Churchill. Exact performance was not calculated because of early radar loss; time correlated performance indicated rocket functioned as predicted. Telemetry signals were strong throughout flight. All experimental objectives were achieved, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 26.5-mi (42.7-km) altitude to determine feasibility of launching Boosted Areas II from Areas tube launcher and to obtain data on complete system flight. Booster pressure and acceleration were nominal throughout flight. Pressure transducer produced data until 2nd stage ignition. However, there was no drag separation after booster burnout. Separation occurred at 2nd stage ignition. Radical coning occurred during burn and predicted altitude of 71.5-mi (115-km) was not attained, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried TRW, Inc., experiment to measure: total flux energy, including spectrum of precipitated energetic H atoms; spectrum of precipitated energetic protons and electrons; fluctuating and DC electron fields; H light-intensity altitude profile; and location and intensity of ionospheric current systems. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt SRl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Max Planck Institute (Germany) experiment to 114.2-mi (183.5km) altitude to measure micrometeorites and electrical fields in ionosphere. Preliminary analyses indicated good data were received. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Rice Univ. payload to 500-mi (805-km) altitude to investigate auroral fluxes and backscattered particles. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of California experiments to study flux-energy-spectrum, pitch-angle distribution and time and space variation of mirroring and precipitated charged particles in auroral zone with variety of detectors. Good data were received from all experiments except electric field measurement experiment which had two damaged booms. (NASA RptSRL)
nasa launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from WSMR. First carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to 86.5-mi (139-km) altitude to collect data on location and flux levels of celestial x-ray sources in 1- to 20-kev range using collimator, proportional counters, aspect camera, and attitude control system (acs). acs performance was poor because of timer malfunction; performance of rocket and instrumentation was satisfactory. Second rocket carried GSFC payload to 92.8-mi (149.3-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of four early-type stars in 1,100- to 4,000-A interval, using uv stellar spectrometer and strap system for attitude control. Rocket, instrumentation, and strap performed satisfactorily. Good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown for first time Dec. 22, 1966, made its second flight, following vertical tail fin modifications to direct more airflow over its control surfaces. Piloted by Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), HL—10 was air-launched from mother ship flying at 45,000-ft altitude and 400 mph. Rocket engine for craft was not used during 4)4-min flight and 6,000-lb HL—10 was piloted through “U” pattern to make a 220-mph glide landing. Built by Northrop Corp.’s Norair Div., HL—10 was flight-tested in joint NASA—usaf study of potential as spacecraft capable of maneuvering in flight to a ground landing under pilot control, (frc Release 8—68)
afsc awarded United Aircraft Corp. $3,300,000 initial increment to $33,476,000 contract for advance development program to demonstrate high-performance reusable oxygen-hydrogen rocket engine, (dod Release 4-68)
P. J. Parker listed in Spaceflight “typical examples of space-inspired technology” which had either appeared or were expected to emerge from future space activity: low-weight, high-calorie “spacefoods” developed for mass-feeding undernourished peoples; adaptation of Saturn V air-bearing to other large items such as refrigerators; use of spacecraft automatic monitoring unit in hospitals for relaying data on patient’s heart condition to central point; use of high-pressure oxygen in astronauts’ suits to reduce lung collapse and to save lives of premature babies; potential cure for stuttering from examination of voice communication problems; electric switch adapted for use hy paralyzed patients to operate hospital call boards and wheelchairs; and lunar exploration vehicle redesigned into walking-chair with reciprocating legs. Industrial applications included solar cells used to drive small outboard motorboats and “outback” telephone booster units; heat-resistant coatings for spacecraft used in furnaces, aircraft, and domestic cookers; and new precision tooling methods that worked to nearest millionth of an inch. {Spaceflight, 9/68, 306—7)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Maryland experiment to 150-mi (241km) altitude to study dissipation processes and electron acceleration mechanisms in aurora. Four experiments measured energy spectrum of electrons from 1 ev to 200 kev. Photometers, UV emissions, and plasma probes were included. Three of four electron experiments returned data on energy spectra; no data were acquired from optical and plasma experiments because clamshell nose cone failed to deploy. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 64.4-mi (103.6-km) altitude to determine absolute value of positive ion concentration in D and E regions of ionosphere. Quadrupole mass spectrometer for measuring relative abundance of positive ions malfunctioned and, consequently, launch of two supporting rockets was postponed. Vehicle performance and trajectory were good and experimental related events functioned well and on time, (nasa Rpt srl)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole said poisoning from overexposure to beryllium powder had resulted in 800 known deaths in U.S. during past 15 yr. Beryllium disease expert, Dr. Harriet L. Hardy of Massachusetts General Hospital, estimated total beryllium cases at 2,500, “about three times as many as we’ve heard about.” New uses for lightweight, heat-resistant metal had pushed production to 150,000 lb per year. Battelle Memorial Institute estimated output would grow at 20% rate per year for next five years; NAS estimated 1979 production at six times 1969’s. Beryllium was being used by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for wheel brakes in C—5A transport and heat shields for Poseidon missile. Boeing Co. used it for new Minuteman missile shield. In past three years estimated $25 million had been spent on beryllium rocket research, O’Toole said one scientist claimed test firing in California had so contaminated site that electrician working there developed beryllium poisoning. Neither NASA nor USAF planned to abandon testing beryllium rockets, however, and beryllium use had “kicked off a lively debate inside the Federal Government.” (W Post, 12/15/68, Al)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried NAS-Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to 107.7-mi (173-km) altitude to measure radiation from celestial objects in spectral regions 2,800— 1,200 A, 60-40A, and 15—2A using photometers and gas-filled proportional counters as x-ray detectors. Both x-ray and UV payloads functioned well and acquired data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from vfsmr carried gsfc payload to 129.4-mi (208.2-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of Gamma star in constellation Vela and of Zeta star in constellation Puppis using UV stellar spectrograph. Rocket performance was satisfactory. Instrumentation performance was marred by loss of fine pointing 17 sec before end of second exposure, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried arc payload to 98.7-mi (159-km) altitude to check Solar Pointing Aerobee Rocket Control System (sparcs) and map flight-path magnetic field. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried MIT payload to 84.1-mi (135.3-km) altitude to obtain data on celestial locations and energy spectra of discrete x-ray sources in three regions and to search for weak, undiscovered x-ray sources using proportional counters. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 94.7-mi (152.4-kxn) altitude to measure neutral atmosphere density and temperature profile in 17.4- to 63.4-mi (28- to 120-km) -altitude range, compare day measurements with night measurements by rocket to be launched Aug. 9, and flight-test and evaluate new second-generation Pitot probe system flown without ejectable nose tip. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Pitot tube performed well and seemed capable of reaching higher apogees, even without nose-cone tip, than old system. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 211-mi (340-km) altitude to investigate role of quenching, dissociative recombination, ionospheric decay, and nonthe'rmal electrons on airglow during decay period immediately following sunset. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; peak altitude was as predicted, and 570 sec of telemetry was received. All measuring systems functioned properly and scientific objectives were met. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Maryland and Johns Hopkins Univ. experiments to 186-mi (300-km) altitude to investigate role of electrons in producing day airglow. Rocket and instrumentation—which included five-wavelength filter-wheel photometer with special sunshade, 3- to 800-ev electron spectrometer, and electron retarding-potential analyzer—performed satisfactorily. Data correlating ionospheric electron density distribution with day airglow emissions in ionosphere were obtained. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 90.9-mi (146.3-km) altitude to measure neutral atmospheric density and temperature profile at altitudes of 12.4—74.6 mi (20—120 km), compare night measurements with day measurements by rocket launched Aug. 8, evaluate lunar position sensing device for use in resolving payload altitude, and measure wind velocities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; data were obtained as planned. Launch was to be last of this Pitot static payload configuration. New Pitot probe system would be used in future. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from portable launcher at wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 3.14-mi (5.05-km) altitude to: (1) flight-qualify production lot of VAM—20 variboosters, (2) demonstrate feasibility of Aerobee rail launch, (3) determine exit loads, (4) establish rail-launching procedures, and (5) verify boost-phase dispersion calculations. System was ballasted with water and lead to produce mass and mass distribution of fully loaded rocket with 200-lb net payload. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Booster web burning time, booster pressure, acceleration, velocity, and system impact occurred as predicted. (NASA Rpt srl)
French Armed Forces Ministry announced successful testing of two new long-range ballistic missiles during preparation for Pacific nuclear test series. First missile, sea-to-ground, two-stage, remote-controlled rocket, would be used on France’s first nuclear submarine, to enter service in early 1970. (Reuters, NYT, 7/5/68, 13; W Post, 7/5/68, A27) July 4^8: NASA launched 417-lb Explorer XXXVIII, Radio Astronomy Explorer (rae—a) , from wtr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Delta booster in first of two missions to measure frequency, intensity, and source direction of radio signals from solar, galactic, and extragalactic sources. Spacecraft entered elliptical transfer orbit, where it was spin-stabilized with 3,656.1-mi (5,884-km) apogee, 397.7-mi (640-km (perigee, 157-min period, and 59.4° inclination. Apogee motor was fired July 7, placing Explorer XXXVIII into planned near-circular orbit with 3,654.3-mi (5,881-km) apogee, 3,641.2-mi (5,860-km) perigee, 224.4min period, and 59.2° inclination. On July 8, yo-yo despin mechanism reduced spin rate from 93 rpm to 2.8 rpm. As primary objective, spacecraft would measure intensity and direction of radio signals from cosmic sources in 0.5- to 10-mhz range, not normally observable from earth. Secondary objectives were to place spacecraft into circular orbit of about 3,728-mi (6,000-km) altitude and to obtain useful data during first 30 days in orbit, for detailed study of dynamic spectra and decay rates of sporadic radio bursts. Spacecraft was expected to provide first low-frequency radio map of Milky Way and additional data on low-frequency signals from Jupiter and sun. Explorer XXXVIII was equipped with unique antenna system consisting of two antennas made of four i/j-in-dia booms which could be deployed up to 750 ft each, to form X-shaped array. Configuration was to be gravity-gradient stabilized [see July 22]. Spacecraft was also equipped with damper boom, dipole antenna, and TV cameras to monitor spacecraft performance and determine source of radio signals monitored with upper array. Radio Astronomy Explorer project was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, gsfc constructed, designed, and tested spacecraft and provided scientific instrumentation, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68—109K; Schmeck, NYT, 6/29/68; 8; AP, W Star, 7/5/68; AP, NYT, 7/5/68, 26; W Post, 7/8/68, A6; 7/9/68, A7)
nasa Aerobee 150 A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Kentucky experiment to 101.7-mi (163.6-km) altitude to determine gravity preference of small white rat when subjected to artificial gravity field [see Nov. 21]. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Good data were obtained. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Maryland-Geophysics Corp. of America experiment to 163-mi (262-km) altitude. Primary objectives were to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes, investigate electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere, and evaluate use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Rocket trajectory was nominal, but despin was higher than predicted. Problems were encountered in telemetry. GCA antennas broke off at deployment and no data were received. Clamshell deployed properly and exposed pulse probe as planned, but motor for boom deployment malfunctioned. No useful data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska experiment to 183mi (295-km) altitude to obtain data on horizontal and vertical spatial variation of auroral light emission and relationship between their intensities and volume emission rates. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Experiment was successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 161-mi (258-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes in 1- to 10-kev region while payload was passing through or close to visible auroral display. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; useful data were obtained from all experiments. Launch was last in series of four [see April 30]. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC experiment to 102.5-mi (165-km) altitude to measure UV radiation from several early-type stars. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carried GSFC payload to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during an auroral condition. All four barium clouds were released in visible aurora as planned. Good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites. Peak altitude would be determined from triangulation of photos. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of California payload to 161.9-mi (260.6-km) altitude to study flux-energy-spectrum pitch-angle distribution and time and space variation of mirroring and precipitating charged particles in auroral zone. Launch was one of series of four. Apogee was 11% below predicted; telemetry was satisfactory. Electrostatic analyzers performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Plasma experiment on boom was 100% successful. Boom deployed late, providing satisfactory data from last 30% of flight. Electric field did not produce necessary data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Soviet trade union newspaper Trud said mass production of powerful intercontinental rockets had started at U.S.S.R.’s “Rocket City” because “the conquest of space is expanding.” Device made at the unidentified city “will help our scientists discover new mysteries of the universe for the good of man.” (upi, NYT, 11/22/68, 22)
nasa successfully launched 600-lb Reentry F payload by Scout booster from NASA Wallops Station to obtain inflight fundamental research data on aerodynamic heating and transition from laminar to turbulent flow in boundary layer. Payload, graphite-tipped beryllium cone 13 ft long, tapering from 0.01 in at nose to 27.3 in at base, was designed to measure heat transfer in slender cone at hypersonic speeds for comparison with ground studies. Three of Scout’s four stages were used: 1st and 2nd stages fired during ascent, boosting 3rd stage and payload to 115-mi (175-km) altitude; and 3rd stage drove payload at up to 13,500 mph through earth’s atmosphere. Impact occurred 800 mi downrange, northeast of Bermuda. Reentry F experiment, sixth mission in NASA’s Reentry Heating Project, was designed and directed by LaRC. under sponsorship of NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology. Payload was constructed by General Electric Co.’s Re-Entry Systems Div. (WS Release 68—9)
usaf and United Technology Center announced that hybrid rocket engine using solid propellant and liquid oxidizer had successfully fired Sandpiper missile from F—4 aircraft in secret test Dec. 12, 1967. Ac
NASA announced joint 1969 project with German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) to photograph earth’s magnetic lines of force high in space would involve release of barium vapor by NASA Scout rocket at 20,000-mi altitude. Scientists would use special optical equipment to view resultant glowing ionized cloud along magnetic field lines and visually map electromagnetic forces acting in barium area. Agreement on project called for BMwF to provide payload, two ground observer stations, and data analysis. NASA would furnish rocket, conduct launch from NASA Wallops Station, and provide tracking and communications services, (nasa Release 68—211)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Syracuse Univ. Research Corp. payload to 520-mi (837km) altitude to observe ionization levels of helium in exposure. Data would be related to aspects of sun and earth relative to payload. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa announced award of $1,046,123 contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Elkton, Md., Div. for development of more powerful solid-fuel rocket for automated missions, including possible use as 3rd stage for Centaur and Delta. New 3rd stage was expected to be ready for use in 1971. (nasa Release 68—210)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Pittsburgh-Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to 96.3-mi (155-km) altitude to perform coordinated auroral experiments with spectrometers and photometers. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
ESRO successfully launched first two-stage Centaure rocket fired from Italy at Perdasdefogu, Sardinia, carrying Max Planck Institute (Landau, Germany) payload to 88.5-km (55-mi) altitude in 118 sec. (AP, W Post, 5/9/68)
Nike-Apaehe sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 81-mi (129-km) altitude to gather data on charged particle flux associated with aurora and to investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere, occurrence of radio noise, and ionospheric electron densities during auroral displays. Experimental results were 70% successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in two Pacific areas to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Series, which began May 20, had been scheduled to last until June 30. (SBD, 5/29/68,144)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried nrl experiment to 117.4-mi (188.9-km) altitude to obtain UV photographs of sun’s disk and white light photographs of outer solar corona in conjunction with measurements made by others during total solar eclipse. Payload contained two externally occulting coronagraphs, with Univ. of Colorado solar pointing control. Solar pointing control operated properly, with exceptionally steady pointing; white light corona and streamers were recorded in both coronagraphs with excellent resolution, xuv heliograph and spectroheliograph were recorded with excellent resolution, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 111.9-mi (185.4-km) altitude to measure intensity of spectral lines in 3,400—1,100A band. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched four-stage Pacemaker rocket carrying 52-lb spacecraft from nasa Wallops Station to test performance of phenolic nylon charring ablation material, foamed quartz material, mod v ablation material, and foamed Teflon material. Spacecraft reached 7,200 mph and was lowered into Atlantic by parachute after four-minute flight. Recovery helicopter retrieved payload, which would be evaluated at LaRC. (WS Release 68—12)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC photometers and objective-grating wide-angle camera to 105-mi (168.9-km) altitude to measure radiation from celestial bodies in ^2800—X1300 spectral range. Payload instrumentation performed satisfactorily; Aerobee pointing control system (acs) malfunctioned. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 121-mi (193-km) altitude to take high-resolution spectra of carbon-2 resonance doublet at wavelength 1,334 and 1,336 A; to retake, for comparison, high-resolution spectra of oxygen-1 resonance triplet at 1,302, 1,304, and 1,306 A; and to measure total intensities of these lines. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Analysis of experiment results awaited recovery and processing of flight film, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr, carried Columbia Radiation Laboratory experiment to 88.3-mi (142-km) altitude to examine x-ray polarization of Sco XR—1 in 10- to 25-kev region with x-ray polarimeter. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Experiment worked as expected, but some counter or electronic failure, or both, occurred during early part of flight, (nasa Rpt srl)
Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched from NASA Wallops Station carried payloads to 85-mi (137-km) and 88-mi (141-km) altitudes to investigate D region electron density during solar x-ray flare. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory. Preliminary data indicated launches were accomplished during period of decreasing solar activity, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 99-mi (160-km) altitude to check instrumentation. Random failure occurred in control system, but pointing system acquired two of three target stars. Rocket performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
Team of NASA and Max Planck Institute scientists completed 28-day tour of Argentina, Chile, Netherlands Antilles, Peru, and Venezuela. They had explored potential sites for optical observation of high-altitude ionized cloud experiment proposed as cooperative project of German Ministry for Scientific Research and nasa. Release of barium vapor at 12,000- to 20,000-ft altitudes by Scout rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station was being considered. Barium cloud would be visible from large area of Western Hemisphere. (NASA Release 68-121)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried special parachute and payload to 41.7-mi (67-km) altitude to test parachute deployment at high altitude and to determine ozone distribution in 12- to 40-mi (20- to 65-km) region. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; parachute deployed at approximately 216,000 ft. Recovery attempts, initially unsuccessful because of 65-mi off-range drift, would be continued in attempt to recover onboard camera, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station. First Nike-Cajun carried gsfc experiment to 42.6-mi (68.6-km) altitude to determine ozone concentration and water vapor distribution as a function of altitude and obtain finite data during parachute descent from 43.4-mi (70-km) altitude. Basic payload design proved operational. Rocket performance was good; peak altitude was 6% below predicted. Instrumentation’s tone ranging was lost after payload despin and new AB signal replacing FM signal slowly deteriorated after liftoff. Radar tracked all systems from liftoff to impact. Although parachute was not fully deployed during descent and aluminum oxide hydrometer failed to project because of spring malfunction, key events occurred within two seconds of predicted times and significant data were obtained. Midair-retrieval attempt was not successful, but payload and parachute were recovered. Second Nike-Cajun carried GSFC payload to 73.1-mi (117.6-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of temperature, pressure density, and wind data between 21.8- and 59-mi (35- and 95-km) altitudes by detonating 19 grenades and recording their sound arrivals at ground. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Grenade timer malfunctioned and instead of ejecting 19 grenades during ascent, vehicle ejected 1 grenade after apogee during descent and 12—14 grenades which detonated at sporadic intervals during descent. Final destruct grenade destroyed payload before impact. Some significant data could be correlated from ground arrivals. Areas sounding rocket carried U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Station payload to 34.5-mi (55.5-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration at 18.6- to 37.5-mi (30- to 60-km) altitudes by observing solar UV light attenuation by ozone during parachute descent. Rocket performed nominally; altitude achieved was within 10,000 ft of predicted. Instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Parachute deployed properly and payload was tracked by radar and retrieved in midair, (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 66.4-mi (109.7-km) altitude to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes (1—10 kev) while passing through or close to auroral display. Rocket did not perform as expected; spin rate was below that anticipated. Payload broke away from rocket and no useful data were received from experiment. Launch was third in series of four [see April 23]. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating 19 grenades per rocket at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rockets reached 78.8-mi (126.8-km) and 77.8-mi (123.5-km) altitudes and performed nominally. Sound arrivals were recorded from all grenades. Data would be compared with data from Oct. 14 Point Barrow, Alaska, launches. (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Andoya, Norway, carried gsfc experiment to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during auroral condition. Preliminary results indicated good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites, (nasa Rpt SRL)
