Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) carrying Indian-Japa-nese payload for x-ray astronomy studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 69.6-mi (112-km) altitude to collect data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.7- to 59.0-mi (35- to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming by exploding grenades. All 19 grenades exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was first in series of four to obtain upper-atmosphere data, (nasa Rpt srl)
Canadian Black Brant IIIB sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station reached 134-mi (215.6-km) altitude on first of two flights to evaluate improved Black Brant IIIB single-stage rocket and to provide data for payload environmental test specification [see May 1]. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carried Univ. of Alaska payload to 134.2-mi (216-km) altitude. Objectives were to examine spatial distribution of atmospheric currents near visual, stable, homogeneous and pulsating auroral forms and to examine relationship between electron and proton precipitation and visual auroral distribution produced. Forward experiment portion of payload functioned satisfactorily, but data reduction was difficult. Some data loss occurred on rear portion of payload and additional data reduction was required. One flashing light failed at apogee. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun, one Areas, and three NikeApache sounding rockets from Wallops Station, carrying experiments to measure meteorological, ionospheric, and composition characteristics of upper atmosphere during “winter anomaly”—unusual absorption of radio waves—which occurred during January or early February. Launches would contribute to specimen day program, coordinated investigation of winter variability of ,D region of ionosphere above Wallops. Nike-Cajuns carried GSFC payloads to 75.2-mi (121-km) and 12.4-mi (20-km) altitudes. All 19 grenades on each rocket detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded, but poor vehicle performance of second rocket prevented acquisition of useful data. Areas carried Naval Weapons Center payload to 33.2-mi (53.4-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration in 18.6- to 37.3-mi (30- to 60-km) region during parachute descent, but parachute did not deploy satisfactorily and payload descended too rapidly for recovery. First Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. payload to 141.1-mi (227-km) altitude to investigate winter variability of D region of ionosphere and measure differential absorption, Faraday rotation, and probe current to determine electron density, collision frequency, and temperature. Second Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Colorado payload to 71.5-mi (115-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of nitric oxide density, using scanning monochromoter. Third Nike-Apache carried GSFC payload to 72.1-mi (116-km) altitude to measure degree of polarization and intensity of nitric oxide emission at 2,147 A to determine whether resonance scattering of sunlight was responsible for emission in D and E regions. Secondary objective was to determine altitude profile in 46.6- to 65.2-mi (75- to 105-km) region. Desired spectrum was not observed, apparently because of mechanical failure in payload, (nasa Rpts srl; WS Release 69—3)
Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 63.5-mi (102-km) altitude to evaluate rocket performance for possible use at Resolute Bay, Canada. Vehicle underperformed according to predicted trajectory; peak altitude was below predicted and tone ranging appeared too weak for Resolute Bay. (nasa Rpt srl)
Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried 102-lb gsfc payload to 1,600.0-mi (2,575-km) altitude and transmitted 35 min of data. Primary objectives were to measure cosmic radio noise intensities over 600-khz to 3-mhz frequency band, continue evaluation of Astrobee performance, and verify new Alcor IB 2nd stage. Secondary objective was to test receiver system for Explorer XXXVIII Radio Astronomy Explorer (launched July 4, 1968). Solid-fueled Astrobee 1500 weighed 11,600 lbs and was being developed to provide research rocket to carry heavy scientific payloads to high altitudes with relatively easy handling. (WS Release 69-17; nasa Rpt srl)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies experiment to 481.6-mi (775-km) altitude to study ionosphere-protonosphere transition region by measuring vertical profiles of ionospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Excellent data on electron temperature, ion temperature, and ion composition were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carrying grenade payload for Spain to conduct meteorological studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Observers in Wisconsin, Iowa, Michigan, and Illinois reported sighting large meteorite or space debris flashing across sky and burning itself out as it entered earth’s atmosphere. Several airline pilots had seen it at O’Hare International Airport, Chicago. Northwestern Univ. astronomer James Wray said it probably was large meteor breaking up in atmosphere, ufo expert Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Chairman of Northwestern’s Astronomy Dept., said flash could also have been reentering debris of U.S. or Soviet space rocket, (upi, W News, 1/27/69, 30; AP, W Star, 1/27/69, B4)	...
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carrying grenade payload for Spain to conduct meteorological studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj
msfc announced issuance of RFp’s for 10-mo study to establish design concepts and development requirements for nuclear rocket stage to replace Saturn V 3rd stage for advanced missions in late 1970s and 1980s and payload design concepts and development requirements for flight test and early operational applications of stage using nasa—aec neRVA. Study, for which proposals were due April 17, also would in-' vestigate payloads for nuclear-stage test flights including interplanetary meteoroid experiment (ime) and barium cloud experiment (bce). ime would gather information on meteoroid environment in interplanetary space, particularly in asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, bce would create artificial plasma cloud in space to simulate comet’s tail and to study motions of ionized particles in earth’s magnetosphere. Work would be done at msfc. (msfc Release 69—105)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Columbia Radiation Laboratories payload to conduct stellar spectra studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
msfc announced Dr. Arthur Rudolph, special assistant to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and formerly manager of Saturn V rocket program, would retire Jan. 31. Dr. Rudolph had been awarded NASA Distinguished Service Medal Jan. 13 and on Nov. 15, 1968, had received NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal “for distinguishing himself by meritorious achievement” as manager of Saturn V program from August 1963 to May 1968. Starting career in rocketry in Germany in 1930, he later received patents for liquid-fuel rocket engines and demonstrated operation of liquid-fuel rocket. He came to U.S. with more than 100 other rocket experts in “Operation Paperclip” in December 1945. (msfc Release 69—10)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to 139.2-mi (224-km) altitude to examine isotropic component of cosmic x-rays in wavelength region of A> 5 A, using collimated, thin-window gas proportional counters. Peak altitude was 3.5% over predicted but x-ray counters failed to reach design pressure, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to collect data on air-glow. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements, (nasa Proj Off)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology payload to 83.2-mi (133.8-km) altitude to study neutral composition of polar atmosphere with neutral mass spectrometers. Rocket underperformed; burnout occurred at 42 secs. All instruments worked perfectly. Useful data were obtained in 68.4- to 87.0-mi (110- to 140-km) region, (nasa Rpt srl)
Engineer, journal of Engineers Joint Council, published “The Engineering Profession: A New Profile.” Management, not design or development, was most common job function of engineers. Only about 10% of engineers worked directly for Federal Government and 12% in total aircraft, missile, and rocket area. Median age of engineers was 43 and profession was more than 99% male. (Text)
Milton Klein, Manager of aec—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of Space Nuclear Systems, AEC, testified in NASA authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that for second decade “what is clear is that regardless of the specific directions the space program may take, if it is to be a progressive one, nuclear energy will play an increasingly important role. As payloads become larger and energy requirements become greater to move these payloads farther from the earth, the nuclear rocket will become a workhorse propulsion system. As we move farther from the sun or as the power requirements increase for the more sophisticated payloads, electric power generated from radioisotopes or nuclear reactors will similarly become more and more important. (Transcript)
Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched by NASA from Resolute Bay, Canada, carried gsfc payload to 68.4-mi (110-km) altitude to obtain electron-density and collision-frequency profiles of high-latitude quiet D region and positive ion-density measurements. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket carrying GSFC payload was launched by NASA from WSMR to conduct stellar uv studies, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried TRW Systems Inc. payload to 161.6-mi (260-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure total flux and energy, including spectrum of precipitated energetic (1—20 kev) H atoms and precipitated energetic protons and electrons; fluctuating DC electron fields; Hb light intensity altitude profile; and location and intensity of ionosphere current systems. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily; good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
Canadian Black Brant IV sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Barreira do Inferno, Natal, Brazil, carrying msc and Univ. of California payload to provide detailed scientific measurements of charged particle environment in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Secondary objectives were to measure magnetic field strength and flight-evaluate payload telemetry-system performance. Rocket reached 532-mi (856-km) altitude, with performance higher than expected. All experiments performed satisfactorily and data were obtained on all channels. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket with VAM—20 booster launched by nasa from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 116.5-mi (187.5-km) altitude. Primary objective was to obtain solar x-ray spectra from 2 to 400 A. Secondary objective was to obtain integrated solar flux from 8 to 20 A. Data would be used to check calibration of spectrometer on board Oso V (launched Jan. 22). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Harold R. Kaufman, Assistant Chief of Electromagnetic Propulsion Div., LeRC, would receive James H. Wyld Propulsion Award for “outstanding leadership in the field of electric propulsion, including the conception design, and development of the world’s most successful ion rocket” at aiaa 5th Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference in Colorado Springs, Colo., June 9—13, aiaa announced, (aiaa News; Lewis News, 5/9/69, 1)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology payload to 115.6-mi (186-km) altitude to study neutral composition of polar atmosphere with neutral mass spectrometers. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and experimental data showed “some extremely interesting results*” (nasa Rpt SRl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc payload to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density during period of atmospheric warming by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals on ground. All grenades were ejected and exploded as programmed. Launch was first in series of four to be launched from Point Barrow, (nasa Rpt srl)
In first test of nerva inflight configuration at Jackass Flats, Nev., engine was held to 1/10 maximum power development of 1,100 mw or 55,000 lbs thrust, during three 25-sec warmups. Full power tests would be held in April by Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory, when nerva was expected to produce electrical energy equal to one fourth that developed by Hoover Dam. Test-—to 110 mw and 5,500 lbs thrust to duplicate engine startup procedures in space and verify system performance with liquid hydrogen fuel—marked first test of rocket with nozzle down and thrust blasting into water-cooled firing pit. Engine had produced sufficient energy to boil ton of water every two seconds, (aec/nasa Release M—54; LA Times, 3/23/69)
U.S.S.R. announced it would conduct series of rocket tests in Pacific from April 17 to June 15. Aircraft and ships were asked to avoid 55-nm-dia circular area north of Midway Island with center at 35°23' north latitude and 172°24' west longitude, (upr, W News, 4/17/69, 9; SBD Space Log supplement, 4/18/69)
NASA Launch Vehicle Review Board recommended resumption of launch operations for spacecraft using Delta booster. In interim report board said recommendation was based on findings of Failure Review Board which had investigated failures of Delta 71 (July 25) and Delta 73 (Aug. 27). Delta 71, carrying Intelsat-111 F—5, had failed because of motor case rupture or nozzle failure; Delta 73, carrying Pioneer E, had failed because of vibrating relief valve which caused hydraulic oil leak. Failure Review Board suggested additional internal insulation, pressure tests, equipment x-rays, installation of specially tested and selected valves, and new acceptance tests of hydraulic system. Next mission scheduled with Delta was U.K.’s Skynet comsat Nov. 21. (nasa Release 69—152)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster carried GSFC experiment to 101.5-mi (163-km) altitude to search for cosmic x-ray radiation near Scorpius and north pole of galaxy. Rocket and experiments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to 85.1-mi (137-km) altitude for comprehensive investigation of auroral disturbances during active auroral event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 65.9-mi (106-km) altitude to measure density of hydroxyl radical between 43.5- and 62.1-mi (70- and 100-km) altitudes, using scanning uv monochromater. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and all experimental objectives were achieved, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried mit payload to 97.7-mi (157.9-km) altitude to study x-ray spectrum of Crab Nebula at long wavelengths and to search for weak x-ray sources associated with supernova remnants or with galaxies outside Milky Way. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket with VAM—20 booster, successfully launched from WSMR, carried Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to 103.2-mi (166-km) altitude. Primary objective was to measure vacuum uv spectral emission lines from Venusian atmosphere. Rocket and instruments worked satisfactorily, but experiment failed to receive strap acquisition and Acs failed to receive tracker lock-on. Except for terrestrial airglow, no useful spectral information on Venus or Pro-cyon was received, (nasa Rpt SRL)
France successfully tested Diamant-B carrier rocket 1st stage (L—17) for 112 secs at Vernon, France. Test was first in series of four planned in initial phase of qualification testing. (Interavia, 11/69, 1751)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying gsfc grenade experiment to collect data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Naval Research Lab. payload to 116.8-mi (187.9-km) altitude to record photographically 18 euv spectra of solar photosphere, chromosphere, and corona, using sparcs and flight-design verification unit of high-resolution spectrograph planned for ATM—A and ATM—B. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt sru)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying GSFC grenade experiment to collect data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj
. NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc payloads. First launch was to develop experimental techniques for determining atmospheric composition profiles in mesospheric region and to measure distribution of ozone by chemiluminescent technique and of water vapors by aluminum-oxide hygrometer in 40.4- to 12.4-mi (65- to 20-km) region. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Second rocket was launched to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in support of first launch by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Rice Univ. payload to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, second in series of four [see Jan. 17] in NASA—SSRC—SRC cooperative program, was successfully launched from Kiruna, Sweden, to study sudden upper-atmosphere warming conditions by detonating grenades between 24.9- and 55.9-mi (40- and 90-km) altitudes. Vehicle underperformed but satisfactory scientific data were expected, (nasa Release, 69—16; NASA Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp. payload to 130.5-mi (210-km) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere at vernal equinox during sunspot maximum. Rocket and dual-frequency propagation experiment for air-glow photometer performed satisfactorily. Langmuir-Smith probe and UV experiment produced no data and payload did not come out of calibration until near impact, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc experiment to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rocket, last in series of four launched during period of atmospheric warming [see Jan. 30], performed satisfactorily. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
dod announced Martin Marietta Corp. would receive $2,313,740 supplemental agreement to previously awarded usaf contract for design, development, fabrication, and delivery of Titan III booster. Contract would be managed by Space and Missile Systems Organization, (dod Release 1003—69)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster carried mit payload to 97.9-mi (157.5-km) altitude to determine precise position of two or more x-ray sources and evaluate small photoelectric detector. Rocket and instruments—including several bands of proportional counters, slot collimators, modulation collimators, aspect cameras, and attitude control system-—functioned satisfactorily. All collimators gave expected rates and modulation on star X—1 in constellation Scorpius (calibration) and on Sagittarius. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 Mr sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr with VAM—20 booster to 111.2-mi (179-km) altitude. Objectives were to obtain stellar spectra with 1 A resolution in 1,000—1,600 A far uv wavelength range and to obtain photometric data on stellar fluxes in 1,050—1,180 A, 1,230—1,350 A, and 1,350—1,470 A wavelength ranges. All experimental objectives were achieved and payload was recovered promptly, (nasa Rpt srl)
LeRC announced award of $2.5-million letter contract to United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. to build and test 18 RL-10 A3—3 rocket engines. Engine, developed in 1958 and first liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen engine to be flown in space, would be used on Centaur high-energy upper-stage rockets in early 1970s. (LeRC Release 69-68)
Harry F. Guggenheim said in Washington Evening Star article that rocket expert Dr. Robert H. Goddard “was to the moon rocket what the Wright brothers were to the airplane.” Guggenheim, administrator of Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics during period it helped support Dr. Goddard’s research, traced career of “Father of modern rocketry” from early experiments in 1908. Among Goddard’s inventions were: first liquid-fuel rocket, first smokeless powder rocket, and first practical automatic steering device for rockets. It was no wonder American Rocket Society had conceded to Goddard “the almost single-handed development of rocketry ‘from a vague dream to one of the most significant branches of modern engineering.’ ” He had left “testimony to the power of one solitary individual to effect change and to transform the future.” While Dr. Goddard had died without fame which had accrued to Wright brothers in their lifetime, “he died still believing that man would one day shatter the fetters of Earth’s gravity and stride majestically into the vast reaches of space. I wish he were here now to share this moment. It belongs to him.” (AP, W Star, 7/16/69, A15)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) and British Science Research Council (src) payload to 72.1-mi (116-km) altitude. Launch, third in series of four [see Jan. 19], was made to obtain data on atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density during atmospheric warming by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; 17 of 25 grenades detonated and were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
Canadian Black Brant IIIB sounding rocket was launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station to 133.6-mi (215-km) altitude. Primary objective was to evaluate improved Black Brant IIIB single-stage rocket, using flight-performance instrumentation. Flight, second of two (first was Feb. 28), was successful and sounding rocket was recommended for consideration as operational vehicle in NASA sounding rocket program, (nasa Rpt SRL; NASA Release 69-9)
NASA and AEC announced successful completion of NERVA nuclear experimental rocket engine (XE) testing in Jackass Flats, Nev. Tests, from March through August, had included 28 successful engine startups and 3 hrs 48 min cumulative operating time, with 3.5 min at full power (55,000-lb thrust). XE program had explored wide variety of operating modes and pressure and temperature conditions, demonstrated automatic startups using bootstrap techniques, demonstrated stability of nuclear rocket engine performance, and validated design and operation of engine test stand No. 1. XE engine runs concluded series of successful technology tests over several years. Design and development of flight-rated 75,000-lb-thrust nerva rocket was being initiated on basis of information produced. Nuclear rocket program was managed by AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, (nasa Release 69—134; AEC—NASA Release M-216)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) attempt to place Italian eldo F—8 spacecraft into polar orbit from Woomera Rocket Range failed when West German 3rd stage of Europa booster malfunctioned. U.K. 1st stage and French 2nd stage performed satisfactorily. (SBD, 7/16/69, 14; AP, W Star, 7/3/69, A3; nasa Int Aff)
NASA Wallops Station recovered parachute and payload launched on two-stage Sidewinder-Areas meteorological sounding rocket. Recovery—by fixed-wing Cessna 206 aircraft—was third success to date. Flight investigated performance of Sidewinder-Areas rocket system and demonstrated deployment of 16-ft-dia, disc-gap-band parachute at high altitude. Wallops scored first aerial recovery Nov. 9, 1966, when payload launched on Argentina Orion II sounding rocket was snatched by helicopter. (WS Release 69—7)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, with VAM—20 booster carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 102.3-mi (164.6-km) altitude. Objective was to search sky for diffuse and point x-ray sources in %- to 10-kev range and for possible existence of soft x-ray galactic corona and x-ray emission from Magel-lenic clouds. Rocket—first live Aerobee 150 launched from rail launcher—functioned satisfactorily. One source counter failed after one-third of flight; other counter operated perfectly, but door failed to open. Objective was not achieved, but some data on x-ray sources were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
April 12—14: NASA successfully launched series of three Nike-Apache sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc payloads to study energy spectra and relative abundances of various charge species of solar cosmic radiation during period of solar maximum. Each rocket carried three nuclear emulsion stocks and solid-state detector sensitive to protons above 30 mev. Rockets reached 98.4-mi (158.4-km), 96.4-mi (155.2-km), and 100.0-mi (161.0-km) altitudes and instruments performed satisfactorily. Payloads were recovered in good condition, (nasa Rpts SRL)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to investigate auroral disturbances. Mission was unsuccessful, (nasa Proj Off)
U.K.’s three-stage Black Arrow booster exploded 50 secs after launch from Woomera Rocket Range during first full-scale test, (upi, W Star, 6/28/69, A3)
Four-stage Pacemaker rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 58-lb instrumented payload to 65,000-ft altitude and reentered atmosphere at 7,000 mph. Primary objective was to evaluate performance of carbon phenolic, synthetic resin, as ablative material. Secondary objective was to evaluate performance of low-density ablative materials—pyronne foam, polymer blend, and phenolic nylon—for possible use on manned lifting-body reentry vehicles. (WS Release 69—12; WS Pio)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) carrying Indian-Japa-nese payload for x-ray astronomy studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 80.4-mi (129.4-km) altitude to provide data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.8- to 59.0-mi (35-to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming. All 19 grenades ejected and exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded on ground. Mission was launched in conjunction with Nike-Cajun launch from Arenosillo, Spain, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully deployed and recovered 40-ft-dia parachute in final Project SHAPE (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiment) test to evaluate possible use of parachute for aerodynamic deceleration for soft landings on planets with thin atmospheres. Parachute was ejected from five-foot-long canister carried to 33-mi altitude and 1,800 mph (mach 2.7) by three-stage rocket. Previous tests had been conducted Oct. 23 and Dec. 11, 1968. (nasa Release 69—95)
NASA Wallops Station announced award of 40-mo, $936,311 contract to Rice Univ. to investigate relationship between field-aligned currents and auroral particle fluxes and document and summarize findings. Rice would construct and test suitable flight and ground instrumentation for three Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket payloads; prepare and preflight-test payloads; and acquire, record, reduce, analyze, and publish resulting magnetic and auroral particle data. (WS Release 69—14)
U.S.S.R. announced completion of rocket tests begun in Pacific April 17. Tests had been scheduled to end June 15. (SBD, 5/26/69, 109; W Post, 5/24/69, A12)
NASA successfully launched first two in series of Nike-Apache sounding rockets carrying chemical cloud experiments from NASA Wallops Station. Rocket launched at 5:22 pm est carried sodium experiment which created reddish-orange cloud visible for hundreds of miles. Rocket launched at 7:30 pm EST carried trimethylaluminum (tma) experiment which created bluish-white cloud. Primary objective was to measure wind directions and speeds in 25- to 135-mi (40.2- to 217.2-km) region and temporal variations that occurred throughout night. Four tma experiments and two acoustic grenade experiments, postponed because of cloud cover, would be rescheduled. (WS Releases 69-19, 69-20)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Churchill Research Range carrying Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to investigate auroral disturbances. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was successfully launched from Kiruna, Sweden, to study sudden upper-atmosphere warming conditions by detonating grenades between 24.9- and 55.9-mi (40- and 90-km) altitudes. Launch was first in series of four scheduled under agreement between Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc), British Science Research Council (src), and nasa. ssrc provided ground equipment, instrumentation, and grenade payloads and was responsible for launch operations, nasa supplied Nike-Cajun rockets and dovap transponders. Second launch would be conducted Jan. 19. (nasa Release 69—16; NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster to 106.6-mi (171.5-km) altitude carrying Univ. of Colorado payload to measure height profile of nitric oxide, nitrogen, and ionized nitrogen and to test Mariner-Mars UV spectrometer. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA announced award by Lane of $2.5-million contract to LingTemcoVought Aerospace Corp. to design, develop, and flight-qualify larger lst-stage solid rocket motor for Scout booster. New Algol III motor would have 44- or 45-in dia, 4 or 5 in wider than Algol IIB, and would enable Scout to place 400-lb payload, 100 lbs more than IIB capacity, into orbit with 300-mi altitude, (nasa Release 69/126)
NASA launched four sounding rockets from Wallops Station to obtain upper-atmosphere data on normal winter day. Areas carried Naval Weapons Center payload to 34.9-mi (56.1-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration at altitudes between 18.6 and 37.3 mi (30 and 60 km), using photometer and optical filter wheel. Failure of recovery parachute to open satisfactorily caused fast descent and prevented payload recovery. Obtaining useful information was expected to be difficult, but good data were expected.	. Nike-Cajun carried gsfc payload to 79.4-mi (127.7-km) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded. Nike-Apache carrying Univ. of Colorado payload reached 72.7-mi (117-km) altitude on flight to obtain vertical profile of nitric oxide density in 15.5- to 65.3-mi (25- to 105-km) region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Second Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Illinois payload to collect data on ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts SRL; NASA Proj Off)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 127.2-mi (204.7-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution spectrograms of belt and sword stars of Orion. Excellent spectrum of star zeta in Orion was obtained and good spectrum of star epsilon in Orion was recorded, (nasa Rpt SRl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc grenade experiment to obtain data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Proj Off)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC payload to 125.5-mi (202-km) altitude to obtain solar euv spectra from 40 to 390 A and from 10 to 390 A using bbrc—SPC 330D solarpointing control and recovery system. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp. payload to 127.4-mi (205-km) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere on quarterly world day. Payload included dual-frequency propagation experiment. Rocket altitude was nominal but range was only one-fourth that predicted. Instrument performance was excellent and good data were expected from all experiments, (nasa Rpt SRL)
nasa launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc experiments. First rocket was launched to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was third in series of four launches from Point Barrow during stratospheric warming [see Jan. 26]. Second rocket was launched in conjunction with Jan. 11 launch to develop experimental techniques for determining atmospheric composition profiles in mesosphere and to measure ozone and water vapor distribution in 12.4- to 40.4-mi (20- to 65-km) region by separating
Areas sounding rocket Was launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carrying Swedish payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
Bullpup Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 45.1-mi (72.5-km) altitude to study capability of Bullpup Cajun as sounding rocket system and to test prototype ozone payload. Rocket performed satisfactorily but loss of signal at payload separation prevented analysis of payload performance. Parachute deployed as planned but payload was not recovered, (nasa Rpt SRJ.)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Wisconsin payload to 129.9-mi (209-km) altitude to examine auroral directions and intensities of isotopic component of cosmic x-rays. Magnetometer and startracker functioned as planned but doors and covers shielding proportional counters failed to eject and no x-ray data were received. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Harvard Univ. payload to conduct solar studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc grenade payload to obtain data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 80.2-mi (129-km) altitude to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket, last in series of four launched from Churchill during stratospheric warming [see Jan. 30], performed satisfactorily. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated as planned. Sound arrivals were recorded for 14—15 grenades because of power failure at receiving station, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and gca Corp. payload to 117.4-mi (189-kni) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere at midnight. Secondary objective was to test mechanical delay igniter and monitor, its performance. Simultaneous launch from Chamical, Argentina, studied particle precipitation and transport effects across equator. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried Columbia Univ. payload to 99.6-mi (160-km) altitude to study polarization of x-rays from Crab Nebula in 10- to 25-kev energy region, using x-ray polarimeter with lithium scattering blocks and gas proportional counters. All systems were perfect; good data were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Colorado payload to measure Vegard-Kaplan (1,500—1,700 A and 2,300—3,000 A) and Lyman-Birge-Hopfield (1,300—1,500 A) bands of nitrogen in uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Payload penetrated aurora, and data were excellent. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried 223-lb Cal Tech payload to 146-mi (234.9-km) altitude to study intensity, spectrum, and degree of isotropy of diffuse x-ray background in 0.1- to 20-kev range and to study energy spectrum of star X—1 in constellation Scorpius in 0.1- to 15-kev range. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained in all 12 prime data channels, (nasa Rpt SRL; WS Release)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried GSFC payload to 79.4-mi (127.7-km) altitude to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.8- to 59.0-mi (35-to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming. Seventeen of 19 grenades ejected and exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded. Mission was launched in conjunction with Nike-Cajun launch from Arenosillo, Spain, (nasa Rpt srl)
Initial thermal and vacuum testing of flight model of SERT ii (Space Electric Rocket Test) in preparation for fall 1969 launch had been completed, LeRC announced. SERT II, second flight test in development of ion propulsion for space use and first LeRC orbital spacecraft, would be launched from WTR by Thorad-Agena booster into 621-mi (999.4-km) circular orbit to evaluate inflight performance of electron-bombardment engines for six months or more, sert I had carried first ion thruster to operate in space on suborbital mission July 20, 1964. (LeRC Release 69-2)
Hans H. Maus, Director of Executive Staff at MSFC, and Dr. George N. Constan, Director of Michoud Assembly Facility, retired after combined total of 51 yrs Government service. Maus, expert in rocket development and production engineering, had received usa’s Exceptional Civilian Service Award and number of citations for development of manufacturing methods, process automation, assembly, and tooling concept development. Dr. Constan had served with USA at Milan, Joliet, and Redstone Arsenals before his appointment to Michoud in 1961. (msfc Release 69-167)
Japan successfully launched her largest rocket to date—four-stage, 75ftlong, 4.5-ft-dia, 43.8-ton MU3D—Kyodo News Service reported. Rocket reached 100-mi (160.9-km) altitude in 4% min, with last stage reaching 1.8 mps—about half speed thought needed to orbit satellite—and splashing down in Western Pacific after 7 min 35 secs of flight. (B Sun, 8/18/69, A4)
At Third International History of Astronautics Symposium Oct. 10, organized by IAF in connection with its 20th Congress, A. Ingemar Skoog of Swedish Interplanetary Society traced rocket development in Sweden from 1807, when military first understood possibilities of rockets in warfare, to mid-1860s, when rockets were taken out of service. “An examination of the rockets preserved at the Army Museum in Stockholm, has shown that all 14 rockets are still fitted with their original propellant. This will be tested by propellant experts later this year in order to find out the properties of a 140 years old propellant.” (Text) W. Geisler of Polish Astronautical Society had submitted paper on history and development of rocket technology and astronautics in Poland before 1949: use of rockets on Polish territory by Tartars in 13th century probably had marked introduction of use of rockets in Europe. (Resume) Frederick I. Ordway, III, of Univ. of Alabama delivered paper “The Alleged Contributions of Pedro E. Paulet to Liquid Propellant Rocketry.” “Paulet, a Peruvian chemical engineer-turned-diplomat, spent much of his professional foreign service career in Europe. . . . his claim to being a precursor of liquid propellant rocketry rests in a letter he wrote from Rome on the 23rd of August 1927 that was published in the 7 October 1927 issue of the Lima, Peru, newspaper El Comercio. Therein, he describes liquid propellant rocket engine experiments he had conducted ... in Paris thirty years earlier. . . . Relying on this source and derivatives, many subsequent writers have accorded Paulet a perhaps undeserved place in the history of rocketry.” (Summary)
NASA launched Areas sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying Pennsylvania State Univ. payload to study ion composition. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (NASA Proj Off)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carrying Swedish payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nik e-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFc payload to 77.1-mi (124-km) altitude to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades were detonated and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was third in series of four rockets to be launched from Churchill during stratospheric warming period [see Jan. 22]. (nasa Rpt SRI.)
Pakistan had successfully launched her first rocket, a two-stage vehicle to investigate upper atmosphere, Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee announced. (AP, W Post, 4/2/69, A7)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster, carried Univ. of Hawaii payload to 108,4-mi (174.4-km) altitude. Objectives were to obtain high-resolution spectra of solar disc from 1,800 to 2,000 A, using high-resolution echelle-grating spectrograph pointed by Univ. of Colorado biaxial pointing control. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and photographic spectra were obtained on both camera cycles, (nasa Rpt SRL)
U.S. authorities reported U.S.S.R. had conducted mid-February testfiring of defense rocket that could intercept attacking missiles at 100 to 450 mi from its launch site. Rocket appeared comparable to U.S. Spartan interceptor planned for U.S. ABM system. U.S.S.R. also was reported making progress on phased-array radar judged essential for swift detection and handling of several attacking missiles at once. (Corddry, B Sun, 3/3/69, Al)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to 826-mi (133-km) altitude to investigate auroral disturbances. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and payload was recovered successfully, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket, launched by nasa from WSMR with VAM—20 booster, carried Univ. of Colorado Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics payload to 124-mi (199.5-km) altitude. Objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of Carbon IV resonance doublet at 1,548 and 1,550 A using high-resolution, narrow-band spectrograph with echelle as principle dispersing element and sparcs solar pointing control. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried Brazil-Univ. of California payload to conduct stellar x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
