Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks, carrying GSFC payload to make simultaneous measurement of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released during disturbed magnetic conditions and good photographic coverage was obtained. Rocket was launched in conjunction with series begun March 1. (NASA Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying Univ. of New Hampshire payload to study energetic particles. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried Columbia Radiation Laboratories payload to 230.9-km (143.5-mi) altitude to study soft x-ray sources and diffuse background. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Michigan experiment to study airglow. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried mit payload to 146.2-km (90.9-mi) altitude to obtain precise position of two or more x-ray sources. Instruments functioned satisfactorily, but timer on rocket closed shut-off valves at 46 secs. Good data were collected from first target, but data from second target were not expected to be useful. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA successfully conducted first test firing of experimental solidpropellant rocket motor with 1.07-m (42-in) diameter and built-in thrust stopper at Eniwetok Atoll in Pacific. Motor burned 34 secs at 53 400-newton (12 000-lb) thrust before it was stopped by internal water-quench system. Motor had been constructed by Hercules Inc., for jpl. (NASA Release 70-12)
SAMSO had successfully tested thrust vector control system (tvc), improved steering mechanism for Titan IIIC booster, afsc announced. TVC was lighter and less complicated than present system and would permit orbiting of heavier payloads by Titan IIIC. Mechanism had ring of 24 electrical valves that injected liquid nitrogen tetroxide from pressurized tank into flaming exhaust to deflect hot gases and steer booster. Operational system already in use had hydraulic valves with spaghetti-like collection of hydraulic lines, heavy pumps, and separate tanks for liquid and pressurizing gas. (afsc Release 17.70)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets. Rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Pittsburgh experiment to study atmos- , pheric composition. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. Rocket launched from Eglin afb, Fla., carried Univ. of Michigan experiment to study atmospheric structure. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Scientific data on March 7 solar eclipse collected by nasa Aerobee 170 sounding rocket at 173.8-km (108-mi) altitude had been recovered from 1783 m (5850 ft) under water by USN cable-controlled underwater recovery vehicle (curv III), Wallops Station announced. NRL payload carrying four cameras had photographed solar flash spectrum in eclipsed sun’s chromosphere, but parachute failed to open and payload sank 120 km (75 mi) off coast of Wallops Island, Va. After recovery, water-soaked film was maintained at 275 K (35°F) while scientists devised special processing techniques to restore film. Photos containing prime uv spectrum during total eclipse were salvaged. (WS Release 70-5)
NASA launched three Aerobee 150 sounding rockets. Two from wsmr carried mit experiment to study stellar spectra and Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to study uv spectra. One launched from Woom-era Rocket Range, Australia, carried Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to conduct x-ray studies. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying nrl experiment to study stellar uv. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Island carried experiment to study helium geocorona. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Sert II (Space Electric Rocket Test), launched Feb. 3, had reached halfway point of six-month endurance test in space with ion engine operating satisfactorily for more than 2000 hrs, NASA announced. Experiment to determine whether electric rocket operation would interfere with radio communications between spacecraft, electric propulsion system, and nearby space indicated there would be no problem. Experiment to measure effects of ion thruster efflux on silicon-cell solar array showed solar cells were being adversely affected. As ions were emitted through molybdenum grid, small particles of grid broke off (sputtered) and were deposited on nearby surfaces, reducing ability of test patches to convert solar energy into electric power. Controllers had turned off electric bombardment engine for sever-. al hours March 7 to avoid damage during solar eclipse when Serf II intersected eclipse path on two orbits with sharp loss in electric power from solar cells. After engine was restarted it continued to function satisfactorily. Only problem had been Feb. 7 failure of miniature electrostatic accelerometer, one of four methods of measuring engine’s thrust. (NASA Release 70-69)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, ejected barium cloud at 900-km (560-mi) altitude in cooperative experiment with Max Planck Institute of Munich, Germany, to study earth’s electric and magnetic fields. Red-tinged green cloud was visible for hundreds of kilometers along East Coast. Similar launches would be conduced Oct. 7 and in spring 1971. (WS Release 70-14)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170—new 12.5-m (41-ft)-tall sounding rocket configuration consisting of liquid-fuel Aerobee 150 sus-tainer and solid-fuel Nike booster—from Wallops Station at 10:51 am EST, carrying 95.7-kg (211-lb) instrumented payload. Primary objectives were to flight-test first Aerobee 170 production vehicle, flight-test new water recovery system and conduct water recovery operation like one to be conducted during solar eclipse March 7, and fllght-qualify new telemetry instrumentation. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; payload and Aerobee sustainer were recovered. (WS Release 70-2)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carrying Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from WSMR, carried MSC payload to 56-km (34.8-mi) altitude to measure, simultaneously, hydroxyl airglow and ozone distributions during day and night. Results would be used to calculate atomic hydrogen distributions in 75-90-km (47-56-mi) region. Rocket trajectory was low and clamshell nosecone separated at liftoff. Data were not useable, but payload was recovered in reusable condition. (NASA Rpt srl)
ILK. launched Skylark SL-971 sounding rocket from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carrying rotation collimator x-ray telescope to detect x-ray stars in region of Scorpius and Sagittarius. (Spaceflight, 12/12/70,484)
Marshal Nikolay Krylov, Commander of U.S.S.R.’s strategic rocket forces, said in Pravda that forces had carried out “exceptionally important” military construction “in the last few years.” Equipment in all branches of service was being continuously improved for “final victory in contemporary war.” Strategic rocket troops would become “main shock force” in nuclear war. (Starr, C Trib, 11/20/70,12)
LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin established review board to investigate failure of Atlas-Centaur booster during launch of OAO-B Nov. 30, H. Warren Plohr, Chief of LeRC Advanced Systems Div., was named chairman. (NASA Release 70-208)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to study ionosphere. Mission was partially successful and met minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
U.S. and Australia would begin construction of top-secret communications station at Woomera rocket range, Australia, AP reported. Australian Defense Minister Malcolm Fraser had announced $4-million contract had been let to Australian firm. U.S. would pay about three fourths of construction bill. Facility would be used for space and defense programs. (PBull, 1/8/70, 3)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Pacific Missile Range carrying gsfc experiment to study ozone in atmosphere. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Minnesota payload to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Bob P. Helgeson, former NASA Director of Safety, died of cancer at age 49. Helgeson had retired from NASA in September 1969 because of illness. He had been Deputy Manager of aec’s Hanford Atomic Works and Director of aec-nasa nuclear rocket development station in Jackass Flats, Nev., before becoming Director of Safety in January 1968. (W Post, 1/19/70, D4)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to study airglow, but mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. Aerobee 170 carried GSFC experiment to study x-ray spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. One carried gsfc payload to 210-km (130.5-mi) altitude to measure extreme uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, but door covering photometer did not deploy. Second rocket carried Univ. of Maryland payload into bright aurora to 252-km (156.6-mi) altitude to make detailed observations of visual aurora. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained. (NASA Rpts srl)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of Alaska payload to examine spatial distribution of ionospheric currents near visual auroral forms, examine relationship between electron and proton precipitation and usual auroral distributions produced by precipitation, and track flashing light on payload with image orthicon TV system while simultaneously observing aurora. Payload penetrated intense auroral arc forms near northern edge of auroral breakup. All experiments operated successfully and TV system tracked rocket through aurora. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Texas at Dallas experiment to study ionosphere. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (NASA Rpt srl ; SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Cal Tech experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Retrorocket parachute—with rocket to provide upthrust to descending parachute carrying heavy and delicate equipment just before it hit ground—was among items shown in Soviet film purchased for U.S. market, AP reported. Half-hour movie made to show Soviet people power of their armed forces, depicted what it called “awesome arsenal” including small rocket that skittered just off ground in search of enemy tanks. (C Trib, 3/29/70,1 A)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying gsfc experiment to study stellar uv. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 494-km (307-mi) altitude. Objectives were to observe auroral protons and electrons over energy spectrum from thermal levels to several hundred kilovolts and to study electric fields and their relation to particle fluxes; density, temperature, and motion of ionospheric plasma currents; alpha particle and neutral fluxes in aurora; and auroral radiation. All experiments functioned satisfactorily and useful data were obtained. (NASA RptSRL)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to conduct auroral studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list) During February: In afsc Newsreview editorial Gen. James Ferguson (USAF), afsc Commander, praised command’s two decades of “distinguished progress” in science and technology: “When the F-15 air-superiority fighter outclasses everything in the air—when the B-l advanced bomber is operational—when a new generation of icbms helps to maintain peace—when a million-pound airplane can remain on station indefinitely because of nuclear power—and when military men maneuver into and out of space orbits, at will, from conventional airfields—all these, and more, will have been possible not only because of what we learn today and tomorrow, but because of all the things we learned in our first two decades.” (afsc News-review, 2/70,2)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying arc experiment to collect dust particles. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying nrl experiment for stellar studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements, but instruments on board rocket detected molecular hydrogen in interstellar space for first time. Although much indirect evidence for presence of large amounts of molecular hydrogen in space had been accumulated, detection by Aerobee 150 was first direct measurement. (SR list; Naval Research Reviews, 7/70, 31)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 557-km (346-mi) altitude. Objectives were to observe auroral protons and electrons over energy spectrum from thermal levels to several hundred kilovolts; study electric fields and their relation to particle fluxes; study density, temperature, and motion of ionospheric plasma currents; and study alpha-particle and neutral fluxes in aurora. All experiments performed satisfactorily and excellent data were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried GSFC experiment to obtain data on atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
dod and aec conducted nonnuclear, high-altitude test with Thor booster at Johnston Island in Pacific. Test vehicle carried test simulator and stellar x-ray package to locate and identify stellar x-ray sources and transmit data to earth. Purpose of launch was to ensure that delivery system could transport test device for detonation at predetermined time and point in space. Test Was part of dod-aec readiness tests conducted since limited test-ban treaty became effective in 1963. (aec-dod Release N-66; dasa Release)
Experimental InterAmerican Meteorological Rocket Network (exametnet)—joint project of U.S., Argentina, and Brazil—released Annual Report, 1968 (NASA SP-231), describing 1968 activities with summary of meteorological rockets and data and list of publications, reports, and related handbooks, exametnet provided scientific measurements of upper atmosphere to facilitate research into structure and circulation of atmosphere in Northern and Southern hemispheres. (Text)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets 11 min apart— one from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, and one from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks—carrying gsfc payloads. Primary objective was to make simultaneous measurement of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released from each rocket and good photographic coverage was obtained from ground stations. Similar launches had been conducted March 1 and 3. (NASA Rpts srl)
Japanese government had asked U.S.S.R. to suspend series of carrier rocket tests begun in Pacific March 21, Space Business Daily reported. Japan said tests so close to Japanese islands of Kuriles, Shikoku, and Niigaia would disrupt shipping, air service* and fishing and warned that continuing tests could damage Soviei-Japanese relations. (SBD, 3/30/70, 138)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying gsfc payload to conduct stellar studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
usaf’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Gerauld R. Gentry (USAF), successfully completed first powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 12 200-km (40 000-ft) altitude. XLR-11 rocket engine burned 160 secs, boosting vehicle to 13 700-km (45 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.8 before it glided to landing on Rogers Dry Lake, Calif. Objective of flight, 10th in X-24A series, was to check operation of rocket propulsion system, stability and control system, and handling characteristics duringpowered flight. (NASA Proj Off; afftc Release 70-3)
Aerobee 150MII sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr by VAM-20 booster, carried Univ. of Wisconsin payload to 168.3-km (104.6-mi) altitude to measure uv flux from three stars in constellations Lyra, Cygnus, and Ursa Major to provide check on prelaunch calibration of Wisconsin oao payload. Rocket functipned satisfac-tonly, but program stars were not acquired and experiment collected no data. (NASA Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket, launched by nasa from Wallops Station, ejected barium cloud at 257.5-km (160-mi) altitude to provide data on electric and magnetic fields in geomagnetosphere. Barium-release payload was first to use liquid fluorine. Fuel tank contained hydrazine mixed with barium salts. Fluorine oxidizer, carried in separate tank under cryogenic conditions, reacted hyperfolically with fuel via valve, manifold, and burner system. Resulting arium cloud was photographed and tracked from several sites along East Coast. Similar launch had been conducted Oct. 5. (WS Release 70-15)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. announced completion of Pacific carrier rocket tests begun
Col. Gen. Nikita V. Yegerov, ideological chief of U.S.S.R.’s strategic rocket forces, died at age 62. (WPost, 5/7/70, B14)
Black Brant IV sounding rocket was launched by Brazilian space team for NASA from Natal, Brazil, carrying MSC experiment to study energetic particles in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Rocket and instruments—including positive ion telescope, integral flux spectrometer, and two magnetometers—functioned satisfactorily. Launch was first of two in series; second would be launched Sept. 29. (SR list; MSC Release 70-105)
House concurred in S.C.R. 49, providing for congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum. Action cleared measure for President’s approval. (CR, 9/14/70, H8620)
Tass announced U.S.S.R. would conduct carrier rocket tests in Pacific from July 25 to Aug. 25 and warned ships and aircraft to avoid area 966 kin (520 nm) northwest of Midway Island with 74-km (40nm) radius between noon and midnight local time, (upi, W Star, 7/20/70, Al)
NASA successfully launched 1500-kg (3300-lb) Serf II (Space Electric Rocket Test) from wtr at 6:49 pm pst by Thorad-Agena booster. Spacecraft entered orbit with 1008.9-km (626.9-mi) apogee, 998.4-km (620.4-mi) perigee, 105.2-min period, and 99.1° inclination. Deployment of solar panels, disabling and dumping of Agena attitude control system, and transfer of Agena horizon sensor to spacecraft were accomplished satisfactorily. Spacecraft attitude was being maintained by gravity gradient forces and control moment gyros to well within required limits. Primary mission objective was to operate electric ion thruster system in space satisfactorily for six months. Secondary objectives were to determine variation of thruster power efficiency with mission time; measure rf noise from ion beam in frequency bands associated with interplanetary communications systems; measure extent of coupling between ion beam and space plasma; measure magnitude of ion engine’s thrust by electrostatically suspended accelerometer, orbit change, or thruster measurements; measure long-term effects of ion thruster efflux on silicon-cell solar array; and measure change in equilibrium temperature of optically reflective coating in space environment. Sert II system had large solar array, cylindrical spacecraft support unit (ssu), and spacecraft ring housing two ion engines, electric propulsion experiments, power conditioning, power switching and signaling equipment, and reacquisition control system, ssu housed two telemetry transmitters, two command systems, two tape recorders for data storage, power distribution system, battery for reacquisition control, and four control moment gyros. Serf II was second mission in sert project, sert i, launched on suborbital mission July 20, 1964, had proved that ion engines could produce thrust in space, sert project was managed by LeRC under oart direction. Tracking and data acquisition were conducted by gsfc. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 70-8; LeRC Release 70-2)
Fire in KSC rocket gantry extensively damaged “clean room” under reconstruction at Launch Complex 17, Pad B, one of two pads used to launch unmanned spacecraft by Delta boosters. There were no injuries. (WPost, 11/18/70, A8)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Aerobee 150MI launched with VAM-17 booster carried Johns Hopkins Univ. and Univ. of Pittsburgh payload to 164.4-km (102.2-mi) altitude. Objective was to measure neutral and ion composition in auroral discharge, visible emission features of aurora, primary and secondary electron energy distributions, and auroral height profile. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of Colorado payload to 235-km (146.0-mi) altitude to measure Vegard-Kaplan and Lyman-Birge-Hopfield bands of nitrogen in uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Prototype parachute recovery system, being tested for first time, failed and payload was not recovered. (NASA Rpts SRL)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks. Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two rockets from Wallops Station. Four-stage Trailblazer II launched at 6:56 pm est carried 34-kg (75-lb) AFCRL payload to 321.9-km (200-mi) altitude to measure plasma effects upon microwave systems during reentry. Launch supported USAF program to study techniques for improving transmission of radio signals from aerospace vehicles during reentry. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload reentered at 5.5 km per sec(18 000fps). Three-stage, solid-propellant rocket, launched at 10:17 pm est, carried 103.4-kg (228-lb) nrl payload to 1600-km (1000-mi) altitude before it impacted in Atlantic 25 min after launch. Primary objective was to measure, over wide range of wavelengths, the intensity, spatial distribution, and altitude variation of the diffuse far-uv radiation of the night sky and thereby determine its source. Secondary objective was to measure, over a wide range of wavelengths, the far-uv radiation from stars and other discrete sources. (WS Releases 70-21, 70-22)
Senate passed S.C.R. 49 to provide Congressional recognition of Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Goddard Rocket and Space Museum. (CR, 4/7/70, S5153)
Meteorological rockets were being launched from EC-121 “Super Constellation” ailcraft at pmr for first time to test new sounding rocket system, pmr announced. EC-121 carried line of six rockets that were launched at 45° angle to rear of aircraft, curved to 91 000 m (300 000 ft) above flight level, and transmitted atmospheric data to aircraft while parachuting to ground, (pmr Release 1084-70)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of carrier rocket tests begun in Pacific March 21. Tests, scheduled for completion April 10, had been protested by Japanese government March 30. (AP, W Post, 4/1/70, A17)
U.S.S.R. began series of carrier rocket tests in the Pacific about 725 km (450 mi) north northeast of Midway Island and warned ships and aircraft to stay away from area with 177-km (110-mi) diameter until completion of tests April 10. (AP, NYT, 3/22/70,7)
Serf II Space Electric Rocket Test, launched Feb. 3 to accumulate 4383 hrs of electric ion thruster operation, was adjudged unsuccessful by NASA. Thruster No. 1 had operated 3782 hrs and No. 2, 2011 hrs. Both had failed apparently because of electrical shorts in high-voltage system. Although endurance objectives were not met, secondary objectives were met and mission was considered significant contribution to advancement of ion system. (NASA Proj Off)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Wallops Station carrying Univ. of Michigan payload to study atmospheric structure. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Space Business Daily reported dod had confirmed that U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos CCCLXV (launched Sept. 25) had been FOBS test launched by modified SS-9 booster. (SBD, 9/30/70, 129)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Areas sounding rocket launched by nasa from pmr carried gsfc experiment to study ozone in atmosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
JPL and USAF officials commemorated 25 yrs of rocket engine testing at Edwards Test Station, Edwards afb, Calif., by placing historical marker at approach to ETS administration building. Plaque cited April 2, 1945, date of arrival at Muroc Dry Lake of first cadre of 10 jpl engineers and technicians. (Boron, Calif Enterprise, 4/2/70)
Sert II spacecraft with experimental electric rocket engine (launched Feb. 3) was already setting endurance records and returning valuable technical data, NASA announced. Endurance test begun Feb. 14 was continuing satisfactorily. Only problem was failure of miniature electrostatic accelerometer, one of three instruments for measuring thrust. (NASA Release 70-34)
Black Brant IV sounding rocket launched by Brazilian space team for NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried MSC experiment to study energetic particles in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Launch was second in two-rocket series; first had been launched Sept. 25. (SR list; MSC Release 70-105)
MSFC announced McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. had received $60 918 000 modification to $97 340 000 NASA contract for conversion of original orbital workshop to be launched by Saturn IB booster to completely outfitted workshop for launch by Saturn V. (msfc Release 70-178)
Bullpup-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried gsfc payload to 41-km (25.5-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in mesosphere and stratosphere and ozone in 20-to 65-km (12- to 40-mi) region. Rocket underperformed because of pitch-roll lock-in during 2nd-stage burn, which increased coning angle. Instrument performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying ncar experiment to collect air samples. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried arc experiment to study dust particles in atmosphere. (SR list)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by nasa from Wallops Station, carried noaa and Univ. of Michigan payload to 115.7-km (71.9-mi) altitude to measure ambient atomic oxygen between altitudes of 80 and 110 km (50 and 68 mi). Payload—including four silver probes calibrated to measure atomic oxygen, lateral magnetometer, solar-aspect sensor, and photocell to monitor nosecone ejection—was being flown for first time. Apogee and impact were less than predicted; instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
Papers of U.S. rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, recording his life work, were published by McGraw-Hill Book Co. of New York. (AFJ, 4/18/70, 6)	.
nasa launched two sounding rockets. Areas launched from Ft. Sherman, Canal Zone, Panama, carried GSFC payload to 60-km (37.3-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IVsatellite overpass. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Launch was second in two-rocket series; first had been launched Nov. 6. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and irn struments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL; SR list)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Areas carried Univ. of Houston payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Texas at Dallas payload to study ionosphere, but mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
AP said Tass had reported construction of meteorological rocket launch complex at Molodezhnaya, Soviet station in Antarctica. Powerful radio was being constructed to speed information to Moscow and other world weather centers. (C Trib, 6/6/70)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Peter A. Hoag (usaf), successfully completed 36th flight at frc, demonstrating and evaluating powered approach to landing for first time. After air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude, HL-10 reached mach 0.07 and fired three hydrogen-peroxide rocket engines to approach landing on 6° glide slope instead of usual 18° slope used on unpowered flights. (NASA Proj Off)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, carrying gsfc payload to measure electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Rocket, last in Alaska series [see March 4], released four barium clouds that were photographed from ground, (nasa Rpt srl)
Otto Hirschler, last U.S. Army employee among 118 German V-2 rocket experts brought to U.S. by Dr. Wernher von Braun, had lost his $25 000-a-year job as electronics expert with Army Missile Command in USA personnel cutback, Reuters reported. Most of other German rocket experts had transferred to NASA. (NYT, 7/5/ 70,2)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried GCA Corp. and Univ. of Illinois payload to 142.8-km (88.7-mi) altitude to measure electron concentration, electron collision frequency, electron temperature, and electric field intensity during daytime intense-blanketing sporadic E at altitudes of 100-110 km (62-67 mi). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and usable data were obtained. (NASA Rpt srl)
Dozen veterans of 118-member German V-2 rocket team of Dr. Wernher von Braun had received notice of demotion or layoff from nasa at msfc. New York Times reported. At least seven would lose their jobs altogether before Oct. 1 because of manpower reductions. Notices had come as team was planning October reunion to mark 25th anniversary of its arrival in U.S. (Wilford, NYT, 9/3/70, 1)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried gsfc payload to 87.8-km (54.6-mi) altitude. Objectives of mission, first Aerobee 350 launch from wsmr, were to demonstrate suitability of complete Aerobee 350 system for scientific research and to investigate solar and stellar x-ray phenomena. Rocket performance was unsatisfactory because premature sustainer-thrust termination seriously limited apogee. Payload recovery system operated successfully and ACS turned on and tried to erect. No useful x-ray data were obtained, but good performance data were recorded. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by_ NASA from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carried msc experiment to study uv spectra. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR fist)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from TERLS carrying Indian payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Areas sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Cold Lake Range, Primrose Lake, Canada, carried GSFC payload to 67.5-km (41.9-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IVsatellite overpass. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Payload transmitter stopped transmitting 40 secs after ejection, but prefailure data were of good quality. Launch was first in two-rocket series; second would be conducted Oct. 17. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets simultaneously—one from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, and one from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks—carrying GSFC payloads. Primary objective was to make simultaneous measurements of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released from each rocket and were photographed by cameras at six sites in Alaska and one in Canada. (NASA Rpts srl)
