Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr carrying Lockheed Aircraft Corp. x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Boosted Areas I sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to measure low-altitude x-ray spectrum and electron flux above 30 500 m (100 000 ft). Rocket reached 59.1-km (36.7-mi) altitude and mission was 100% successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
Discovery of polar caps on sun by Dr. Werner M. Neupert and team of GSFC astronomers was announced by NASA. Measurements made by Oso 7 (launched Sept. 29) had shown black areas on sun’s north and south poles with temperature of 1000 000 K (1800 000°F). Hot areas on sun associated with solar flares registered temperatures of 3 000 000 to 4 000 000 K (5 400 000°F to 7 200 000°F). Data from sounding rocket experiments that preceded solar polar cap discovery indicated seasonal variations in cap sizes. If data were accurate, caps were largest during time of least solar activity and might disappear near most active times, (nasa Release 71—237; nasa Special Release 12/6/71)
Launch of Intelsat-IV F-j8 by nasa for ComSatCorp, postponed from Dec. 6 following failure of usaf Atlas-Agena booster, had been rescheduled for Dec. 18, ksc announced, nasa project officials recommended that sensor probe be added to Atlas sustainer system to provide information on engine temperature between gas generator and turbine inlet and that temperature readouts be monitored during Atlas ignition sequence before liftoff, (ksc Release 274-71)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to study stellar uv. Rocket and instru- -ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Churchill Research Range carrying trw Inc., experiment to conduct auroral studies. (SR list)
Harry F. Guggenheim—financier, philanthropist, sportsman, and publisher—died in Sands Point, N.Y., at age 80. His enthusiasm for aviation as pilot in World War I had led him to persuade his father, Daniel Guggenheim, to establish Guggenheim School of Aeronautics at New York Univ., first university school of aeronautics in U.S. Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics, Inc., of which Harry Guggenheim was president, helped establish aeronautical engineering schools at MIT, Georgia Institute of Technology, Cal Tech, Univ. of Washington, Stanford Univ., and Univ. of Michigan. Fund aided Charles A. Lindberg after first transatlantic crossing. Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation, established in 1924, sponsored much of pioneer rocket research by Dr. Robert H. Goddard. (NYT, 1/23/71,1)
NASA launched two sounding rockets to obtain data on ionosphere. NikeApache, launched from Univ. of Michigan’s Keweenaw Rocket Launch Site (icrls), carried gsfc payload to 121.9-km (76.2-mi) altitude to obtain data during magnetic activity in ionosphere while radiofrequency absorption in 2- and 10-mhz region of spectrum was high. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Boosted Areas II, launched from Wallops Station, carried gsfc experiment to 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude to study enhanced ionization of lower ionosphere and its relationship to precipitation of energetic electrons. One telemetry channel with one RF probe was lost; all other instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska, carrying gsfc experiment to study magnetic fields. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying GSFC experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi) by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, reached 110.8-km (68.9-mi) altitude, with all 19 grenades exploding as planned. Rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19 grenades to 124.4-km (77.3-mi) altitude; 17 soundings were recorded. Rocket launched from Wallops Station carried 31 grenades to 114.3-km (71-mi) altitude; all 31 detonated and were recorded on ground, (nasa Rpts srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying MSC experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and Joint Committee on Atomic Energy on NERVA space nuclear propulsion program: “As we prepared our FY 1972 budget request, we were faced with one of three choices for nerva”—to continue with full scale development of flight engine; proceed at reduced rate, emphasizing technology and long-lead time development; or cancel nerva program. “Because there is simply no need to proceed with full scale development now, and in view of fiscal constraints, we decided to . . . continue with the development of long lead items and technology, but to not proceed with the full development effort. This will preserve the technology that has already been gained, and the hard core capability that now exists, without requiring a major expenditure of funds.” nasa and aec support of nerva project was “clear example of sustained support over many years of an advanced development even though we have not yet come to the point of proposing the specific missions on which it would be used.” While best chemical propulsion systems operated at specific impulse of 450 sec, “with nuclear propulsion we have demonstrated . . . equivalent specific impulse of 825 seconds and have every confidence that the technology we are developing . . . can raise this to at least 900 seconds. Thus, our justification for the large and continuing investment in the nerva program is that we have a way of breaking one of the principal limiting constraints on space flight by doubling our propulsion efficiencies for many important classes of large space missions.” Dr. Low, in response to questions, testified that nasa plan to stretch out nerva development program would necessitate immediate employment cutback from 2500 persons to 800. U.S. had invested $1.4 billion in nerva since 1955. (Transcript; W Post, 2/24/71; B Sun, 2/24/71, A7) Milton Klein, Manager, nasa-aec Space Nuclear Systems Office, testified on nerva program status: “Eighteen rocket reactors have been tested, each adding importantly to our knowledge. Two experimental engines, which couple the reactor with the other principal components necessary to form a complete nuclear rocket engine, have been operated. The last of these engines, XE, was started up 28 times and tested over a wide variety of Conditions. We have accumulated over 14 hours of system operating experience, including more than four hours at or near design power.” Specific impulse “of 825 seconds has been demonstrated for extended durations in a flight size reactor. A range of thrust levels, including 75,000 pounds [34,000 kg], has been demonstrated over a wide range of conditions, including the ability to throttle down to about one-half design thrust at full specific impulse. The ability to stop and start at will has been demonstrated. Finally, this system has proved to be quite predictable, an important feature from a development and operational standpoint. All of the technology goals of the program have been met and the potential for performance growth shown.” (Transcript)
Initial results from U.S.S.R.’s Vertikal-2 rocket launched Aug. 20 were reported by Tass. Experiments had been conducted at altitudes between 100 and 463 km (62 and 288 mi). Photos had registered image of sun in several spectral ranges and had indicated that solar flares took place during rocket’s flight. Data had been obtained on temperature, electron density, and other parameters of sun’s corona and on flux of particles causing ionospheric turbulence. (fbis-Sov—174-3, 9/8/71, L2)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Cajun, launched from Kourou, French Guiana, carried GSFC experiment to 125-km (77.7-mi) altitude to measure upper atmospheric pressures, temperatures, densities, and winds near equatorial latitudes and to verify operation of ground instrumentation in preparation for future grenade missions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. All 18 grenades detonated and were recorded on ground. Launch was last of four in Kourou series. Previous launches had been conducted March 5 and March 15-16. Nike-Tomahawk, launched from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska, carried experiment to study electric fields. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL; SR list)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d Grant L. Hansen discussed space shuttle at Air Force Assn, meeting in Bethpage, N.Y. NASA and USAF work on shuttle engine had been helpful to shuttle program in areas of reusability and higher-pressure-engine technology, usaf had supported advanced development efforts on liquid-fuel rocket engines and had concluded hydrogen and oxygen high-performance-engine demonstration program. Work on XLR—129 reusable rocket engine had provided basis for shuttle’s reusable high-pressure-rocket concept. Residual hardware of usaf XLR—129 program had been turned over to nasa for shuttle engine program. Development of shuttle main engine was to be conducted at usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center, usaf would continue in 1972 to develop technology for high-energy orbit-to-orbit stages compatible with a shuttle to accomplish maneuvering missions for late 1970s and early 1980s. (AF Mag, 12/71, 34)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carried gsfc experiment to investigate polar cap absorption event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; payload recovery was delayed until Sept. 3 because of adverse weather. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Mikhail K. Yangel, Soviet scientist and rocket expert, died of heart attack at age 60. Tass later quoted obituary, signed by Soviet leaders, as saying Academician Yangel had “made an inestimable contribution to the cause of development and perfection of rocket-space engineering and exploration of near-earth outer space.” (fbis-Sov-71-207, 10/27/ 71, L3)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
paet Planetary Atmosphere Experiments Test was launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 3:31 pm edt on four-stage Scout booster. Primary objective was to investigate means of determining structure and composition of unknown planetary atmosphere. Secondary objectives were to determine profile of water vapor in earth’s atmosphere, with altitude, from absorption measurements of reflected sunlight in infrared; investigate effect of radio signal attenuation on relay communications when transmitting from aft hemisphere of a blunt entry
NASA announced issuance of RFPs for eight-month study of applications of dual-mode nuclear rocket engine to propel spacecraft and generate electrical power for use on board, (nasa Release 71—157)
Storage lifetime of seals, O-rings, and gaskets in rocket engines and Saturn IB and Saturn V booster stages had been extended from 8 to 10 yrs in program of rocket test firing at MSFC, msfc announced. (msfc Release 71—91)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from terls carrying Indian experiment to study luminescent clouds. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR List)
afsc announced plans to launch 1500-w frusa (flexible rolled-up solar array) in fall 1971. Two panels would roll into cylinder 25 cm (10 in) in diameter for launch and would unroll in space to overall length of 10 m (32 ft), oriented to sun and held rigid by parallel extension arms, frusa would be placed in 740-km (460-mi) polar orbit by Thor-Agena booster for six-month flight to test electrical and dynamic characteristics, (afsc Release 309.70)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr carrying GSFC payload on test and support mission. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Four-stage Javelin rocket, launched by nasa from Wallops Station at 4:44 am edt, carried noaa experiment to 662-km (411-mi) altitude. Objective of mission was to investigate region of ionosphere above maximum electron density, where it could be treated as electron gas. Data was to be compared with data from gsfc Langmuir probe in payload and with measurements taken simultaneously by nbs Ionosphere Sounding Station at Wallops Island, Va. Mission was unsuccessful. ( WS Release 71—12; SR List)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment for auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched three sounding rockets from WSMR. Two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets, one carrying nrl experiment to study stellar spectra and one carrying GSFC experiment to conduct x-ray studies, were unsuccessful. Boosted Areas II carried gsfc experiment to 70-km (43.5mi ) altitude to measure mobility of charged particles in lower D region. Rocket functioned satisfactorily, but some anomalous data were received. Data would be correlated with data from two Nike-Cajun launches scheduled for Aug. 31. (SR list; nasa Rpt srl)
Tass reported death of Soviet rocket designer Aleksey Isayev and identified him for first time as designer of engines for Vostok and Voskhod rockets and Soyuz manned spacecraft. Tass said Soviet unmanned “interplanetary stations” also had been created under Isayev’s direction. Izvestia said in biographical sketch that Isayev was one of main creators of aircraft that had made world’s first jet powered flight on May 5,1942. (AP, W Star, 6/27/71, All)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from terls. One carried India-Japan experiment to study ionosphere. Mission was partial success. Second rocket carried Indian experiment to study luminescent clouds. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Wallops Station carrying Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory payload to study x-ray polarization. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying MSC experiment to study uv spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Michigan experiment to observe airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 7:43 pm est, carried 440.4-kg (971-lb) Columbia Univ. payload to 196.3-km (122-mi) altitude to search for x-ray polarization of Crab Nebula. Rocket and instruments—including two polarimeters sensitive to x-rays at 2.6 kev and 5.25 kev—functioned satisfactorily. Payload recovery would be attempted after daybreak Feb. 22. (WS Release 71—1)
NASA launched series of three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying gsfc grenade experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi) by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19 grenades to 124.9-km (77.6-mi) altitude with 18 grenades detonating as planned and 16 sound arrivals recorded. Rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried 31 grenades to 108.8-km (67.6-mi) altitude with 31 explosions and 30 sound arrivals recorded. Rocket launched from Wallops Station carried 19 grenades to 135.8-km (84.3-mi) altitude, with 19 explosions and sound arrivals recorded, (nasa Rpts srl)
Launch of Intelsat-IV F—3 comsat, scheduled for Dec. 6 by Atlas-Centaur booster, would be postponed indefinitely pending review of Dec. 4 failure of usaf Atlas-Agena mission, NASA announced. (NYT, 12/7/71, 18) ...
U.S.S.R. and France had successfully completed joint program of sounding rocket launches from Soviet ship Professor Zubov off coast of Kourou, French Guiana, Tass announced. Purpose of launches was to study upper atmosphere. (fbis-Sov-71-251, 12/30/71, L2)
Largest influx of immigrant scientists, engineers, and physicians over past 20 yrs was reported by nsf for FY 1970. After sharp decline of 21% between 1968 and 1969, rise of 30% in 1970 had brought number of entries to over 13 000 level, (nsf Highlights, 4/22/71, 1) April 23-25: U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz 10—carrying Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov, Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov—was launched from Baykonur at 4:54 am local time April 23 (6:54 pm est April 22). Orbital parameters: apogee, 224 km (139.2 mi); perigee, 200 km (124.3 mi); period, 88.2 min; and inclination, 51.3°. Tass said spacecraft would conduct joint experiments with Salyut 1 building spacecraft and conducting launch operations. NASA provided Scout booster, two experiments, technical consultations, launch crew training, and spacecraft tracking and data acquisition. (NASA Release 71-63; nasa Proj Off; gsfc SSR, 4/30/71)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 132.5-km (82.3-mi) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily with 14 of 19 grenades confirmed by sound. Launch was part of series of similar experiments from three sites [see Jan. 7], (nasa Rpt SRl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Univ. of Hawaii solar astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying NRL experiment to conduct solar studies. Mission was partial success. (SR list)
Black Brant VC sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station on test and support mission to evaluate flight performance. Vehicle developed aerodynamic instability and payload broke off. (SR list; Proj Scientist)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr carrying MSC experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Joint West German and NASA barium-ion-cloud (bic) probe was launched from Wallops Station by Scout booster at 7:31 pm edt. Objectives of cooperative project were to study behavior of barium ion cloud released at several earth radii and to determine what broad features of earth’s magnetic and electric fields could be deduced. Barium was released into space at 11:05 pm edt above Central America. Cloud was visible over North and South America and observations were made from all prime ground-based optical sites for one to one and one half hours. Parameters of 4th-stage burnout were 31 479-km (19 560-mi) altitude, 6.77° N latitude, and 74.26° W longitude. Barium cloud was visible to naked eye for approximately 10 min. Cloud elongated along its local magnetic field line to length of about 10000-km (6200-mi), nasa provided vehicle support necessary to accomplish mission and to make observations at nasa sites. (nasa Proj Off; WS Release 71—19)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried Gca Corp payload to 176.4-km (109.6-mi) altitude to determine winds from vapor trail using arc CV—990 instrumented aircraft as observing platforms, test narrow-band camera filters on chemical releases with bright sky background, and provide real-time checkout of observational equipment and procedures for bic experiment with low-altitude barium release. Payload contained standard barium and sodium-lithium canisters. Cloud was photographed by both ground and CV—990 aircraft cameras. Flight was first of two; second rocket would be launched Sept. 16. (nasa Rpt srl)
Award to Global Associates of $4-million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide institutional support services at MTF was announced by MSFC. Selection had been made following competitive negotiations during which eight firms had submitted proposals. Contract included maintenance of rocket stage testing facilities in standby status and support services for other Federal agencies using mtf. (msfc Release 71—117)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Michigan experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying GSFC experiment to study stellar spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
LeRC announced award of $4 264 734, fixed-price, supplemental agreement to United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. for 12 RL-10 rocket engines for Centaur boosters. (LeRC Release 71—11)
NASA launched series of Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying gsfc grenade experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi). First rocket, launched from Churchill Research Range, carried 19 grenades to 122.4-km (76.1-mi) altitude, with all 19 grenades exploding as planned. Second rocket was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, with 31 grenades, but electrical power to dovap ground transmitter was lost and no trajectory data were recorded beyond 4.5 sec get. All grenades exploded and were recorded, but data were not useful without trajectory data. Third rocket, launched from Point Barrow as backup, successfully carried 19 grenades to 94.5-km (58.7-mi) altitude, with all grenades detonating and recorded as planned. Fourth rocket, launched from Wallops Station, carried 19 grenades to 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude. All 19 grenades detonated as planned and 14 sound arrivals were recorded, (nasa Rpts SRl)
NASA launched three sounding rockets. Areas launched from Barking Sands, Kauai, Hawaii, carried GSFC experiment to 56.7-km (35.2-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IV overpass. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered successfully. Black Brant VB, launched from Wallops Station at 8:14 pm est, carried 216.8-kg (478-lb) nrl instrumented telescope to 281.6-km (175-mi) altitude for infrared astronomy studies. Telescope was doublewalled with unique helium cooling system that maintained unit’s temperature at 5.4 K (—■450° F) to prevent telescope’s own radiation from interfering with measurements. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; payload would be recovered after daylight Feb. 25. Aerobee 150, launched from wsmr, carried arc experiment to study micrometeorites. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl; WS Release 71-2; SR list)
faa certification of 201 series Guppy cargo aircraft and sale of one aircraft to Airbus Industries of France, European cargo airline, were announced by aircraft’s manufacturer, Aero Spacelines, Inc. New aircraft was sixth in Guppy series, created to airlift space booster components for nasa. With fuselage 7.6 m (25 ft) in diameter, new Guppy could lift 24 500 kg (54 000 lbs) of cargo and fly it for 3200 km (2000 mi) nonstop at 470 km per hr (290 mph). First 201 series Guppy would move wing and fuselage assemblies of Concorde supersonic transport and 300-passenger European airbus from points of manufacture to Toulouse, France, for assembly. (C Trib, 9/2/71)
nasa launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets. Rocket launched from wsmr carried msc experiment to study atmospheric composition. Mission was partial success. Rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC grenade experiment and functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
nasa launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Alaska. Rocket launched from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, carried gsfc experiment to study electric fields. Rocket launched from Fairbanks carried Univ. of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Colorado airglow experiment. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying Univ. of Pennsylvania Ionospherics experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Detection of “possible spinar”—celestial object which could be link between galaxies and quasars in outer space—was described by NRL team headed by Dr. Herbert Friedman in Astrophysical Journal. Spinar, 200 million light years from earth, could be entire galaxy of collapsed and rotating neutron stars or single, massive pulsar. Object had been found by x-ray detector aboard Aerobee sounding rocket. In interview with Washington Evening Star later, Dr. Friedman said new source, classified as a Seyfert Galaxy, emitted “soft x-rays.” Spinar would radiate 1000 times less visible light than quasar and 12 000 times more infrared than visible light energy—approximately what had been found in Seyfert Galaxy. But x-ray emissions perhaps as much as 10 trillion suns indicated it might be powered by same mechanism as pulsar. Dr. Friedman speculated that pulsar such as spinar could be missing link between conventional galaxy like Milky Way and quasars and that spacecraft-mounted x-ray detectors would find “tens of thousands” of such sources. (Astrophysical Journal, 3/15/71, L-81—5; Lannan, W Star, 3/19/71, B5)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying GSFC solar astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Cal Tech soft x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Growing climate in U.S. of “irrational hostility” toward science and technology was scored hy Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in speech before Washington, D.C., chapter of Aviation/Space Writers Assn.: “It is irrational precisely because those most vocal . . . are the very ones professing the greatest concern about poverty, poor housing, hunger, and the quality of the environment. All of these problems of society depend in varying degree upon our technological capabilities, and certainly on increased productivity for their solutions. Some . . . require advanced research into the nature of the environment and ecological interactions.” Anti-science and anti-technology voices were doing U.S. “great disservice. The problems they are rightly anxious and concerned about cannot be solved by a return-to-nature cult.” Resources of knowledge that awaited man in space had “great significance to man, to Earth environment, and to the ecology. We are learning of the relationships between Earth and Sun and their effects on our lives which could be learned in no other way save by means of the rocket and spacecraft.” (Text)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from terls carrying India-GSFC experiment to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 170B sounding rocket was launched by nasa from WSMR to 191.5-km (119-mi) altitude on flight performance mission. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered. (SR list; Proj Scientist)
Fritz von Opel—engineer, pilot, and industrialist—died in St. Moritz, Switzerland, at age 71. Von Opel had flown in rocket-propelled glider in 1929 and had developed rocket car which he drove at more than 3 km (2 mi) per minute in 1928. (upi, NYT, 4/12/71, 38)
NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from Wallops Station to measure diurnal oxygen, density, pressure, and temperature and to obtain comparisons of pitot and active-sphere density measurements. Rockets were launched during daylight hours and data would be compared with data from similar series to be launched during darkness Aug. 20. Viper Dart carried WSMR experiment to 135-km (83.9-mi) altitude to provide density, temperature, pressure, and wind data from 40 to 130 km (25 to 80 mi). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with Robinette sphere ejecting and inflating as programmed. Nike-Cajun carried Univ. of Michigan and NOAA experiment to 126-km (78.3-mi) altitude to measure diurnal variation of atomic oxygen in 80- to 120-km (50- to 75-mi) region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan and gsfc experiment to 171-km (106.3-mi) altitude to obtain diurnal measurements of density, pressure, and temperature and obtain comparisons of pitot and active-sphere density measurements. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts SRL)
U.S.S.R. latmched Vertikal-2 cooperative geophysical research rocket to 463-km (287.7-mi) altitude to study solar UV and x-ray emissions, ionospheric parameters, and meteor particles. Nose section of rocket consisted of instrument compartment and recoverable container carrying scientific equipment for heliophysical research and Hungarian-Czechoslovakian-Soviet instruments to study micrometeors. Instrument compartment carried equipment for heliophysical and ionospheric research designed by Bulgarian, East German, Czechoslovakian, and Soviet scientists. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered. (Tass, fbis-Sov—163-3, 8/23/71, LI)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Kenya, Africa, carrying gsfc experiment to conduct stellar astronomy studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched series of three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying GSFC experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, reached 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude, with all 19 grenades exploding as planned. Rocket launched from Wallops Station reached 130.9-km (81.3-mi) altitude, with 16 of 19 explosions confirmed by ground. Third rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa issued invitation to scientists to participate in definition phase for Planetary Explorer missions to Venus. Emphasis would be on low-cost approach using spin-stabilized Explorer spacecraft launched by Delta booster. From respondents to invitation NASA would select scientists to play active role in defining typical payload for initial missions in 1976 and 1977 and to make recommendations for subsequent orbiter and probe missions in 1978 and 1980. (Text; nasa Release 71-124)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Univ. of Michigan’s Keweenaw Rocket Launch Site (krls), carried GSFC payload to 184.8km (114.8-mi) altitude to obtain data during magnetic activity in ionosphere while radiofrequency absorption in 2- and 10-mhz region
Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev had been guiding Soviet space research and rocket engineering since 1963, Wall Street Journal reported. Information had been contained in article circulated to Moscow correspondents by a Soviet news agency. (WSJ, 4/14/71, 1)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and gsfc experiment to study solar x-ray emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr carrying MSC experiment to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NR Rocketdyne Div. had been granted $26 228 158 contract modification for continued support on Saturn launch vehicle rocket engines, MSFC announced. Contract—effective July 1, 1971, through Dec. 31, 1972— allowed analysis of F-l, J-2, and H-l engine performance, field engineering, logistics, and retention of Rocketdyne problem-solving group for remainder of Saturn program, (msfc Release 71—97)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gca Corp. experiments. Payloads ejected trail of sodium and lithium during ascent from 80-km (50-mi) to 170-km (105-mi) altitude and then ejected barium at 170-km altitude. Both trails produced glowing, colored clouds over mideastem U.S. coastline. Data on wind conditions were obtained by photographing motion of vapor trails and clouds from cameras aboard arc Convair 990 aircraft. (WS Release 71-18)
