First European Conference on Space and Youth was sponsored in Paris by National Assn, of Aerospace Clubs of France and International Coordinating Committee (cic) for out of school scientific activity. Delegates from aerospace groups in 23 European nations were invited to conference to plan first program of intra-European cooperation for youth in aerospace field. Meeting established conference as annual event and approved resolutions on future cooperation in technical meetings, exchange of materials, establishment of secretariat, and origination of joint youth rocket projects. (Government Executive, 4/72, 28-9)
NASA launched Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Univ. of Colorado solar ultraviolet spectrometer. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not satisfied. (SR list)
Two sounding rockets were launched by nasa from Wallops Station. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Rlinois payload to 185-km (115-mi) altitude in first of three launches to measure ionospheric properties on three anomalous days: (1) “L,” day with very low electron densities in 70- to 80-km (40- to 50-mi) region with 10-day minimal magnetic storm activity proceeding; (2) “Hi,” day with very high electron densities with same altitude and magnetic storm prerequisites; and (3) “H2,” day with very high electron densities in same region with two or three days of major magnetic disturbance and magnetic storm aftereffects. Nike-Apache was fired on L day and measured electron densities, temperatures, and collision frequencies. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Super Areas launched 44 min after Nike-Apache carried Pennsylvania State Univ. payload to 85-km (52.8-mi) altitude to collect data on positive and negative ion conductivities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl)
Boosted Areas I launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Houston payload to 57-km (35.4-mi) altitude. Primary objective was to supplement comprehensive investigation of auroral zone disturbances conducted by Black Brant carrying Univ. of Texas payload and launched 60 sec later. Secondary objective was to study auroral phenomena in region above altitude already investigated, using balloons, and below altitude investigated, using rockets. Rocket and instrumentation performed nominally although one of two telemetry receivers provided marginal response. Recovery could not be effected because winds blew payload over Hudson Bay. NASA Black Brant, launched from Churchill Research Range 60 sec after Boosted Areas, reached 240-km (149.1-mi) altitude. Primary objective of Univ. of Texas payload was to provide complete data on auroral precipitation events, analyze particle spectrum over wide energy range and observe spectrum in and above aurora, and observe optical emissions and ionospheric parameters. Rocket performed nominally but only one of nine experiments was successful because of faulty nosecone ejection mechanism. Nosecone did not deploy until descent portion of trajectory. Payload was recovered. (NASA Rpt SRL; NASA proj off)
Canadian-built Black Brant VC rocket was launched from Natal, Brazil, carrying West German and Brazilian payload. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (Reuters, W Post, 3/10/72, F3)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Thumba, India, carrying Indian langmuir probe experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Use of laser holography as nondestructive test technique for inspecting case-bonded solid-propellant rocket engines would be evaluated for NASA in program under negotiation with Lockheed Space & Missiles Co., Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Technique consisted of viewing stressed test article through hologram produced when article was in unstressed condition. (Av Wk, 2/14/72, 11)
Single-stage Nike rocket, carrying 47.2-kg (104-lb) payload, was launched by nasa from Wallops Station to 11 600-m (38 000-ft) altitude to obtain precise records of vibrations and accelerations caused by small variations in burning process of solid-fueled rocket motor. Flight data would be compared with similar measurements made in ground vibration tests and captive firings and was expected to provide improved knowledge of effects of rocket-motor burning on payload dynamics for more efficient payload design. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned. (WS Release 72-2; WS PAo)
Skylab statistics were released by NASA. Spacecraft, to be launched by two-stage Saturn V rocket in spring 1973, would contain 370 cu m (13 000 cu ft) of working and living space. More than 13 000 individual items weighing total of 5000 kg (11 000 lbs) for long-duration space mission would be stowed, including 910 kg (2000 lbs) of food, more than 2700 kg (6000 lbs) of water, 60 changes of astronaut jackets and shirts and trousers, 210 pairs of shorts, 30 constant-wear garments, 15 pairs of boots and gloves, 55 bars of soap, 96 kg (210 lbs) of towels, 1800 urine and fecal bags, 156 rolls of teleprint paper, 104 film magazines, medical kit, 108 pens and pencils, and vacuum cleaner. (nasa Special Release)
NASA launched two Booster Areas I sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Houston experiments to investigate auroral zone disturbances and study auroral phenomena at altitudes previously unstudied. Data would supplement data from three Canadian Black Brant sounding rockets launched by Canadian National Research Council during substorm movement. Rockets reached 53.1- and 60-km (33- and 37.3-mi) altitudes and functioned satisfactorily, with each set of instruments providing data for one hour. (NASA RptS SRL)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to measure brightness of sun. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Michigan auroral aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. auroral fields and particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. and India began third phase of cooperative meteorological rocket program with launch of 76th M-100 rocket from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls). Rockets launched during third phase would measure atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure. (Delhi Domestic Service, FBis-India, 6/22/72, 01)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian particles and fields experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota auroral studies experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. auroral particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. was deploying multiple warheads on its intercontinental ballistic missiles, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said in speech before Veterans of Foreign Wars in Washington, D.C. (Text) March 7:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, compared nasa FY 1973 budget program with FY 1972 plans in testimony before opening session of House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans hearings on FY 1973 budget: “We have reconfigured our plans so that a substantially higher level of appropriations will not be required in future years to complete the programs in our FY 1973 budget” and to continue “useful and significant . . . new projects in space science, exploration, and practical applications, in advanced technology, and in aeronautics.” FY 1972 program would have required NASA appropriations in future years to approach $4 billion per year. Run-out costs to complete program as planned would have risen to $3.7 billion in FY 1973 and $3.95 billion in FY 1974. Revised program estimated run-out costs at $3.37 billion in FY 1974, $3.3 billion in FY 1975, $3.2 billion in FY 1976, and $3.1 billion in FY 1977. NASA could “by properly phasing-in the start of needed future new programs . . . hold NASA appropriations in future years to approximately the current total appropriations level in current dollars.” Previous program would have committed U.S. to “higher NASA budget in future years, or to the waste from termination of programs in midstream,” but revised plan would “give the Nation a good, viable, and balanced program in aeronautics and space at a cost it can afford.” Dr. Fletcher believed “realistic long-term plan in which the Nation’s commitment is limited to budgets of approximately the current size is the proper posture for NASA from the standpoint of responsible management” and “should go far in alleviating the concerns that have been expressed that in embarking on the new space programs of the 1970’s we are committing the Nation to a program that it cannot afford. “To achieve this posture, we have had to make some basic changes in our planning and accept yet another stretch-out of the period over which our continuing and long-term objectives in space exploration and space science will be achieved.” Principal change has been in space shuttle program. Shuttle now planned would cost $5.5 billion, about half what configuration envisaged year before would have cost. Second significant change was cutback in planned program for exploration of outer planets, reducing plans to explore all five outer planets on Grand Tour missions in late 1970s to new focus on Jupiter and perhaps Saturn, with less expensive spacecraft. Third significant change was termination of nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program, now including in budget request $8.5 million for defining with Atomic Energy Commission smaller nuclear rocket engine and making trade-off studies of preferred propulsion system for missions to distant planets some time in 1980s. Final major change was increased emphasis on aeronautics, in response to strong urgings of committees of Congress. (Transcript)
Tass announced successful completion of Soviet carrier rocket launchings in Pacific and declared restricted area free for sea and air navigation. (fbis-Sov, 12/14/72, A4)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) and development effort to level “at least equal to that of the Soviet Union.” Convention adopted 1972-1973 Statement of Policy Sept. 19. Statement said new environment created by Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt) “places a high premium on added protection for our current strategic bomber force, on improved ballistic missile technology as an antidote to numerical inferiority, on more accurate and consistent surveillance capabilities, and on more secure and dependable communications.” Nothing in salt agreements impeded size and momentum of U.S.S.R.’s research and development effort. Soviet effort “for the past several years has surpassed that of the United States by a wide margin. Tlje possibility of technological surprise has not diminished under salt, unless the United States undertakes and maintains a military research and development program that is comprehensive, consistent, and competitive.” If U.S. emphasized efforts on qualitative force improvement, enhanced forces survivability, and improved conventional weapon delivery, “risks involved in the SALT agreements can likely be kept within tolerable limits.” AFA awards presented during convention included Theodore von Karman Award to l/c Donald G. Carpenter, Commander of 18th Surveillance Squadron, Air Defense Command, for “advancing the nation’s space defense capability.” David C. Schilling Award was presented to 1st Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron, Beale Air Force Base, Calif., for “pioneering operational long-range flight while performing vital defense missions with the SR—71 aircraft.” Award was accepted by Col. Jerome F. O’Malley, Commander of 9th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing. (AF Mag, 11/72, 809, 54-5, 60-1) September 18:	New York Times published interview with Harris M. Schurmeier, Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s manager of proposed 1977 Jupiter-Saturn mission. Two 680-kg (1500-lb) spacecraft launched by Titan IIIE-Centaur boosters would swing past Jupiter in 1979 and, gaining velocity from pull of Jupiter’s gravity, speed past Saturn by 1981. Mission would cost between $250 million and $350 million— less than half cost of Grand Tour mission proposed earlier. Since mission would provide first close-up observation of Saturn, some 200 scientists had already submitted proposals for experiments. Proposals were being evaluated and spacecraft design would begin by end of 1972. (Wilford, NYT, 9/18/72, 15)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. solar physics experiment. Docket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. auroral studies experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Super Areas sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried Pennsylvania State Univ. experiment to 66.8-km (41.5-mi) altitude to measure electrical conductivity in upper atmosphere with parachute-borne payload and to flight-certify payload and vehicle for later launches. Although some data were missed because of lower apogee than planned, flight was judged successful. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying National Center for Atmospheric Research aeronomy experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not satisfied. (SR list)
NASA launched Black Brant VC from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Minnesota fields and particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Wisconsin x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Colorado astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Soviet newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya had published article on “curious stories” from Cape Kennedy, Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin reported. Article had said angry alligator had tripped alarm system protecting rocket at launch site few seconds before launch; Polaris rocket had exploded about 0.8 km (0.5 mi) from launch site causing bush fire that frightened poisonous snakes into buildings; and woodpecker near electronic equipment had caused launch delay. (P Bull, 6/25/72)	'
nasa-aec Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nev., was “first ghost town of the space age,” New York Times reported. Since announcement (in Administration’s FY 1973 budget request on Jan. 24) of termination of nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) project, 259-sq-km (100-sq-mi) area had been littered with “$200-million worth of deserted engine test stands, enormous assembly bays with birds nesting in the rafters, empty administration buildings, and aluminum and steel chards of pumps, turbines and motors.” Only 200 employees made 290-km (180-mi) round trip between station and Las Vegas each day. “Eight years ago 56 buses provided commuting service for the station’s 3,000 workers; today there are only three.” (Lyons, NYT, 3/26/72, 57) Parade magazine printed letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, from Chairman Raymond L. Bisplinghoff of Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board, National Academy of Engineering: “The board members would like to reaffirm their continuing belief that a shuttle-like vehicle is the key to a forward moving and economical space program beyond 1980.” (Parade, 3/26/72)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Andoeya, Norway, carried National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration experiment to 208-km (129-mi) altitude. Objectives were to obtain information on precipitating charged-particle flux associated with quiet auroral form and measure electric-field strengths in and near auroral form. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range carried Univ. of Colorado payload containing six ultraviolet photometers and telemetry transmitter to 123-km (77-mi) altitude. Flight objective was to measure variation with altitude of atomic oxygen at night and to determine spectral distribution of night-glow continuum in altitude region between 85 and 110 km (53 and 68 mi). Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian auroral energy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. was dismantling huge booster rocket at Tyuratam launch site [Baykonur Cosmodrome] near Aral Sea, unidentified U.S. intelligence sources told New York Times. Ground support equipment also had been removed. Booster had not been used for manned launch, but it was not known whether it had been used for unmanned mission. (Lyons, NYT, 10/1/72, 9)
European Sounding Rocket Range (esrange) in Kiruna, Sweden, was handed over officially by European Space Research Organization to Swedish authorities. Ownership had been transferred to Sweden following December decision by esro Council to abandon sounding rocket activities. (SR, 9/72)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N.Mex., carrying Univ. of Colorado solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Use of energy in cosmic plasma to launch spacecraft inexpensively was discussed in Science by Dr. Hannes 0. Alfven, Univ. of California at San Diego physicist. Energy for space propulsion was being used in “extremely inefficient” way because of low exhaust velocity of rocket gases. Total start weight of spacecraft “must be two or three orders of magnitude larger than the payload.” By plasma ejection, “one can easily reach exhaust velocities of several tens of kilometers per second” so that “the ejected mass may be of the same order of magnitude as the payload and the efficiency very high.” Energy for launch could be supplied from solar wind, tapping voltage of 1000 v if transfer resistance between ends of conductors and solar wind could be “made small.” Or energy could be supplied by transfer from ground through plasma channel in atmosphere. “When Apollo 12 was launched, there were low clouds but no thunderstorm. When the spacecraft had disappeared in the clouds, lightning was observed . . . where the spacecraft had last been seen. This effect was interpreted as due to the exhaust gases which facilitated a discharge of electrostatic charges in the clouds down to the ground. One cannot avoid thinking that it would be preferable to transfer power up to the spacecraft in this way.” If spacecraft at launch was “accelerated by two plasma guns at a large distance from each other, and electric arcs are produced between each . . . and the corresponding electrodes on the ground, it is possible that these arcs can be maintained during the launch through the atmosphere.” (Science, 4/14/72, 167-8)
First launch of British Skylark sounding rocket to test techniques for high-altitude photography of earth resources was made from Woomera, Australia. Primary objectives were to test stabilization control system and remote sensing hardware. Advantages over conventional methods of high-altitude photography were that single frame was equivalent to 650 frames photographed from 15 000 m (50 000 ft), making assembly of photographic mosaics easier and more accurate, and that entire area could be photographed under identical conditions. Project was developed by United Kingdom’s Dept, of Trade and Industry to assess mineral, agricultural, and other resources inexpensively. (SF, 8/72, 282-286)
Philippines successfully launched Bong Bong II, its first liquid-propellant rocket. Rocket was successfully retrieved from South China Sea. {SBD, 3/22/72, 121)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Wisconsin soft x-ray experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. announced appointment of Gen. Vladimir F. Tolubko, rocket specialist serving near Chinese border, as commander of Soviet strategic missile forces. (Shabad, NYT, 5/10/72)
Physicists were studying possibility that magnetic substorm was created by experiment conducted by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory and Univ. of Alaska Geophysical Institute. Experiment attempted to trace line in earth’s magnetic field from pole to pole by injecting barium ions into upper atmosphere by rocket. Launch of Sandhawk Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat near Fairbanks, Alaska, March 6 had caused unusual one-hour auroral display, accompanied by sudden appearance of very-low-frequency (vlf) radio signals, 17 min after barium injection. (Av Wk, 5/15/72, 11; Los Alamos pio)
NASA launched Strypi 4 sounding rocket from Kauai, Hawaii, carrying National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration artificial aurora experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Collection of sketches and notes on rockets and spacecraft and original manuscript on astronomy by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA. Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, were placed on permanent exhibition at Alabama Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. Display opening coincided with rocket pioneer’s 60th birthday. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 3/24/72)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Kiruna, Sweden, carrying Swedish auroral aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of Pittsburgh experiment to 141-km (87.6-mi) altitude. Primary objective was to confirm initial observation of nitric oxide in auroral zone and collect additional information on processes that produced nitric oxide in an auroral arc. Secondary objective was to measure density of major atmospheric constituents in D and E regions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ, of Colorado experiment to measure solar ultraviolet light. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Spaceflight reported development of high-pressure topping-cycle, liquidoxygen and liquid-hydrogen rocket engine with thrust of 196 to 245 kilonewtons (44 000 to 55 000 lbs) by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm in Ottobrunn, West Germany. Engine was planned for second stage of European Launcher Development Organization’s Europa III launch vehicle. (SF, 8/72, 301)
nasa launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Chicago solar physics experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to measure composition of neutral atmosphere between 95 and 125 km (59 and 78 mi). Structural failure of undetermined origin caused vehicle to break up three seconds after launch, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. First carried Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy and soft x-ray experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, but scientific objectives were not met. Second rocket carried Univ. of Wisconsin astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
