Four sounding rockets in a series of six [see Jan. 30 and Feb. 8] were launched in Canada to investigate growth and decay of aurora phenomena. NASA launched two Super Areas sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range carrying a Univ. of Houston payload to supplement investigation of auroral zone disturbances, with emphasis on the explosive phase of auroral substorms, and to study auroral phenomena in the region of atmosphere above that investigated by balloons and below the altitude investigated by rockets. The first rocket reached 84-km	(52.2-mi) altitude. Probable parachute-system malfunction caused rapid descent and rendered most data unusable. The second reached 81.2-km (50.5-mi) altitude; rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The Canadian National Research Council launched two Black Brants. A Black Brant IIIB launched from Gillam, Manitoba, carried a 63.5-kg (140.0-lb) payload to 191.7 km (119.1 mi) to investigate plasma properties of upper-atmosphere radio aurora plasma. Black Brant VB launched from Churchill Research Range carried a 175-kg (386-lb) Univ. of Belgium payload to 325 km (202 mi) to investigate the expansive phase of an aurora storm. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The third Black Brant was postponed because of dissipation of the aurora substorm into which it was to be launched [see Feb. 8]. (nasa Rpts srl; nrc prog off)
NASA launched an Aerobee 170A sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a California Institute of Technology payload to a 199.6-km (124-mi) altitude to map extended x-ray sources using multiwire proportional counters. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying a Norwegian Defense Research Establishment magnetospheric physics experiment to a 254.3-km (158-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island carrying a Univ. of Illinois payload to a 184.3-km (114.5-mi) altitude. The objective was to measure electron temperature and electron density profile of intense blanketing of the sporadic E-region at 100- to 120-km (60- to 75-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. All experimental objectives appeared to have been achieved, (nasa Rpt srl)
The Canadian National Research Council launched the sixth and final sounding rocket in a series to investigate growth and decay of auroras [see Jan. 30 and Feb. 2], The series had included two NASA launches. A Black Brant IVB carried a 84-kg (185-lb) payload from Churchill Research Range to 729-km (453-mi) altitude to investigate the quiet pre-breakup of the early evening aurora. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nrc prog off)
NASA launched a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska, carrying a Univ. of Alaska aeronomy and barium-cloud-release experiment to a 552.0-km (343-mi) altitude. The cloud release was observed and tracked by ground camera sites and the Skylab 4 crew, launched Nov. 16 to man the Orbital Workshop. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
The Atomic Energy Commission announced it would propose issuance of a construction permit and operating license to the Univ. of Utah for a research reactor on its Salt Lake City campus, (aec release R-101) March 13:	nasa Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson testified on the shuttle technology programs before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during FY 1974 authorization hearings: With the shuttle under development, the program had been converted from preparing technology to assisting in development. With this transition, “we have reduced in fiscal year 1973, and will further reduce in fiscal year 1974, our rate of Shuttle-oriented resource investments,” but wind tunnels and arc jets would play a key Tole in shuttle development. Aerodynamic and heat-transfer investigations at subsonic through hypersonic speeds in simulated shuttle ascent would focus on effects of the rocket plume and separation of rocket engines. Wind-tunnel and structural laboratory vibration tests of scale models would provide vehicle dynamic-response characteristics. Additional tests in high-temperature wind tunnels would determine structural behavior and integrity of thermal protection systems and supporting structure for simulated earth-atmosphere-entry environments. About 14 wind tunnels would be used in the program. Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology in OAST, testified on power production for long-distance space communications: “For future spacecraft requiring 500-2000 electrical watts, our work is focused on the Brayton dynamic conversion system. This system uses thermal energy from the isotopic sources to heat a working gas which expands through a turbogenerator to produce electricity at four to five times the approximately 6 percent efficiency of current rtg’s [radioisotope thermoelectric generators]. Work in fiscal 1974 will be focused on the design and fabrication of the components of an experimental conversion system. Our technology goal is to demonstrate 50,000 hours of operation.” (Transcript)
A new low-cost high-performance sounding rocket was being developed by Bristol Aerojet Ltd. and Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial of Spain, Spaceflight announced. The two-stage rocket, INTA 300, would lift a 50-kg (110-lb) payload to 320 km (200 mi) with low dispersion. First test flights would be held in 1974. (SF, 2/73, 69—70)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a National Center for Atmospheric Research aeron-omy payload to a 111.4-km (69.2-mi) altitude. The rocket and strumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched three sounding rockets, two from Wallops Island and one from Andoeya, Norway. A Nike-Apache launched from Wallops carried a Univ. of Illinois payload to a 157-km (97.5-mi) altitude. The launch was the second of three to measure ionospheric properties on three kinds of anomalous days: (1) “L,” a day with very low electron densities in the 70- to 80-km (40- to 50-mi) region and a 10-day minimal storm activity preceding; (2) “Hi,” a day with very high electron densities and the same altitude and magnetic storm prerequisites; and (3) “H2,” a day with very high electron densities in the same region with two or three days of major magnetic disturbance and magnetic storm aftereffects. The Nike-Apache was launched on an Hi day and measured electron densities, temperatures, and collision frequencies. The rocket underperformed but the scientific objectives were satisfied. The first launch in the series had been Dec. 5, 1972. A Super Areas, launched from Wallops Island 34 min after the NikeApache, carried a Pennsylvania State Univ. payload to a 95.1-km (59.1-mi) altitude to collect data on positive and negative ion conductivities. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. A Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Andoeya, Norway, carrying a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration experiment to a 280.0-km (174-mi) altitude to collect data on energetic fields and particles and to study the aurora. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl; gsfc proj off)
nasa launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Pittsburgh payload to a 117.1-km (72.8-mi) altitude. The experiment studied mesopheric composition with an optical mass spectrometer measuring both the minor atomic and the molecular species in the presence of major atmosphere constituents. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt Srl)
nasa launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island carrying a Univ. of Illinois payload to a 187.8-km (116.7-mi) altitude. The objective was to measure electron temperature and electron density profile of intense blanketing of the sporadic E-region at 100 to 120 km (60 to 75 mi). Data would be compared with data from a Nike-Apache launched Aug. 3. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. All experimental objectives appeared to have been achieved. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Columbia Univ. x-ray astronomy experiment to a 175.9-km (109.3-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily but the telemetry data were severely compromised by radio frequency interference. (gsfc proj off)
The Canadian National Research Council launched the first in a series of six sounding rockets, including two to be launched by NASA Feb. 2, to investigate growth and decay of auroras. A Black Brant IVB launched from Churchill Research Range carried a 84-kg (185-lb) payload to 714-km (443.7-mi) altitude to investigate the quiet prebreakup of the early evening aurora. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nrc prog off)
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying a Univ. of Pittsburgh aeronomy experiment to a 724.2-km (450-mi) altitude. The rocket and experiment performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched two sounding rockets, one from Sweden and one from White Sands Missile Range. A Nike-Tomahawk launched from Kiruna, Sweden, carried a Swedish Space Corp. aeronomy experiment to a 180.2-km (112-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. A Black Brant VC was launched from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of California astronomy experiment to a 212.4-km (132-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily but the payload was damaged in recovery, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched an Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. solar physics experiment to a 245.3-km (152.4-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying a Univ. of Michigan aeronomy experiment to a 179.9-km (111.8-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flats. Alaska, carrying a Univ. of Minnesota and Univ. of New Hampshire auroral studies experiment. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily but the tracking radar lost the signal at 55 sec. (gsfc proj off) March 17:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, reported on NASA’s contribution toward environmental improvement, in a speech before the 37th Annual Meeting of the National Wildlife Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “No part of the changing, moving face of the globe we inhabit is free of human influence or removed from human interest. We therefore can afford to leave no part unmonitored. From forest fires to hurricanes, from the slow erosion of granite hills to the short-lived volcanic eruption or avalanche, from the atmospheric particulates to crop diseases to oil spills—we need to know the condition of our environment, minute by minute.” From this knowledge would flow the interrelated set of local, national, and international measures “that will make our planet what we want it to be.” The key was “to know how they will be deployed and how they will be used. I personally believe that the greatest lag today is in the development of mature social and political institutions to collect, manage, and act on the whole new level of environmental information we are able to generate.” The major impact of current activities, largely data collection by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by NASA July 23, 1972), would be “to force the development of a new level of maturity on society.” NASA’s jobs were to extract, display, and use the information its tools could provide. “We must develop and expand natural and predictive models of the new environment ... to provide . . . real assessments so necessary in real-world decision making.” The larger job was the “development of competent local, regional, national, and global institutions that will build and operate such systems.” (Text)
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Natal, Brazil, carrying a Univ. of California and Max Planck Institute ionospheric physics experiment. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 23:	Recent discoveries had brought the number of kinds of molecules detected in the Milky Way galaxy to 23, the New York Times reported. Many were precursors to the chemistry of life and almost all were termed “organic” compounds because it had long been thought that they could be produced only by living organisms. While it had later been shown that they could be synthesized, scientists had been surprised that the simpler molecules, at least, had been formed in deep-space vacuum. Univ. of Minnesota scientist Dr. Philip M. Solomon had said, “The question of how far chemical evolution in the interstellar medium has proceeded toward biochemistry is not yet answered, but it has clearly gone much further than anyone would have estimated five years ago.” (Sullivan, NYT, 11/23/73, 1)
