NASA announced plans for a joint mission with Great Britain in June 1975 to launch an x-ray telescope on a British Skylark sounding rocket to study the Puppis A supernova remnant. NASA would design, fabricate, and assemble the flight telescope; the British would integrate the payload into the sounding rocket and provide the high-resolution position-sensitive detector, launch facilities, and operations. The combination of the Wolter Type I glancing incidence telescope and the detector would permit the structural details of the regions responsible for the supernova’s soft x-ray emission to be studied with unprecedented resolution, (nasa Release 74-179)
Lockheed Propulsion Co. asked the General Accounting Office to set aside NASA’s 20 Nov. 1973 selection of Thiokol Chemical Corp. for negotiation of a $106-million contract to design and develop the space shuttle’s solid-fueled rocket motor. Lockheed charged that it had an edge in technical evaluation of the engine and that it had been the low bidder before NASA had made “improper adjustments” in its bid. Lockheed also maintained Thiokol’s transportation costs from Utah to Florida would be higher and that Thiokol’s proposed design would not meet program objectives without major revision, (latns, Today, 10 Jan 74; NASA Release 74r-130)
France reluctantly decided to cut back construction of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner and to scrap production of the Mercure short-range twin-jet airliner, at a special meeting of Premier Pierre Messmer and five ministers. France had been demanding production of eight Concorde aircraft but would now accept as few as six in the knowledge that, with a Labor Party victory in the 28 Feb. British elections, the U.K. might be willing to scrap the entire project. The press said the French decision came after a report from France’s rocket testing center suggesting a $90-million fuel-tank modification to boost range at the expense of reduced transatlantic loads. A suggested 10% increase in engine thrust, requiring 8% more wing area at a cost of as much as $400 million, was believed rejected at the meeting. The decision to scrap the 120-seat, 1200-km range Mercure was taken after an initial production run of 10 aircraft and writeoff costs reported by the press at $120 million. Competition from the already established DC-9s and Boeing 727s and 737s was too great for the Mercure, whose one buyer was Air Inter, the internal French airline. (Randal, W Post, 17 Feb 74, Al)
