Soviet scientists told U.S. scientists and journalists touring Soviet scientific facilities that they had successfully used) a rocket engine and gigantic magnets to produce large amounts of less expensive electricity with less pollution than other methods. Called magnetohydrodynamics and first proved feasible in the U;S. in the early 1960s, the new system was one of the cooperative programs between the two countries. j A recent test that produced 12.4 mw of power for 1.5 hr wa£ the first time the system had achieved that power and duration. Based on the knowledge-that electricity could be generated by passing a charged gas through a magnetic field, the Soviet experiment burned 55 kg per sec of natural gas with oxygen-enriched air into which a potassium compound was injected to create a plasma of positive and negative particles; when passed between the poles of a great magnet, the charges separated onto electrodes and created large voltages. The Washington Post later reported that the Soviets were committed to budding, by 1981, a 1000-mw magnetohydrodynamic plant with expected conversion efficiency of 50%. Conventional steam-turbine plants using oil or coal for fuel operate at 40% efficiency, those using nuclear fuel at 33%. (Toth, LA Times News Service, WPost, 28 March 75, A3)
After spending some $1.5 billion over more than 10 years, the United States, through the loss of its will to go forward in space, gave up on this next generation of rockets even though the nuclear technology worked,” Gary L. Bennett said in a letter to the editor of the Washington Star. Noting that U.S. basic rocket technology was close to 40 yrs old, Bennett wrote, “We have shown no inclination to develop new rocket concepts despite the fact that these concepts have definite terrestrial advantages in terms of energy and employment. It’s sad to think that we came so close to realizing our destiny in space and then we gave it all up for a senseless enervating policy of introspection.” (W Star, 30 June 75)
NASA was conducting design studies and component testing for an experimental laser-energy system using a nuclear-fission reactor fueled with gaseous uranium or a gaseous uranium compound such as hexafluoride, Dr. Karl Thom said in an article released by NASA. Whereas conventional laser power used various processes of energy conversion that required costly equipment and resulted in net loss of energy, a nuclear system could produce large amounts of high-grade power very cheaply and efficiently. Some scientists were using various nuclear-powered lasers for experiments, but most used systems that transferred energy from external reactors to the laser gas within the laser tube. NASA with its interest in gaseous fuel reactors as high-performance space power and propulsion systems, was looking at a more efficient system in which the fission fragments that energize laser gas were energized within the laser tube itself creating, at fission, a powerful chain reaction. Dr. Thom said that, in combination with the research on nuclear-pumped lasers, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientists were testing gaseous fuel reactors using components, reflectors, and controls salvaged from the nuclear rocket program. If the system proved practical “a new era of nuclear energy utilization will begin, in space and on Earth.” Space engineers could create a nuclear-powered laser station in earth orbit to beam power via lasers to various customers in space, to other space probes for propulsion, to lunar bases for their power needs, and to earth for clean and abundant energy. (NASA Release 75—169)
High-temperature core reactors, fueled by fissioning uranium plasmas, could be used to “burn up” or eliminate radioactive wastes produced in the fission process, NASA announced. In a NASA-sponsored program to develop advanced nuclear-powered rocket propulsion, scientists had found that long-lived radioactive wastes could be transformed into harmless materials by bombarding them with neutrons. The uranium-compound fuel could be circulated and returned to the reactor to burn up the materials produced in the fuel. Computer analyses showed that a gaseous fuel reactor could establish a balance in rates of production and elimination of the waste produced after 3 yr of operation; once this equilibrium was established, no additional long-lived radioactive wastes would be produced. The gaseous fuel reactor also could be designed to burn wastes from conventional nuclear-fission reactors. (NASA Release 75—44; Schneider et al., Nuclear Technology, Sept 75, 34—50)
NASA launched a two-stage solid-propellant Nike-Hawk sounding rocket from Wallops Island, carrying an 84-kg payload to a 164-km altitude. The flight, to demonstrate successful mating of a surplus Hawk engine with the Nike M—88 first stage, also tested a newly developed recovery system for both the single-stage Hawk and the Nike-Hawk vehicle. The system, designed for both land or air recovery, could return up to 136 kg of payload by parachute. The sounding rocket carried a Univ. of Pittsburgh high-resolution photoelectron spectrometer to measure daytime photoelectron energy distribution with a very high-energy resolution. The payload impacted 178 km downrange and was retrieved by the research vessel Annan-dale. (WSC Release 75—10)
Soviet and French scientists had completed the “Araks” study of the earth’s magnetically interlinked points, Izvestiya reported, by observing what happened when a bundle of electrons was artificially injected into the magnetosphere. French Eridan sounding rockets— equipped with electron accelerators, plasma generators, and instruments for measuring and recording wave radiation and particle streams—were launched on 26 Jan. and 15 Feb. 1975 from Kerguelen Island. During the ascent the accelerator emitted electron impluses at various angles to the line of magnetic force while the plasma generator emitted a stream of cesium plasma to compensate for the positive charge of the rocket. At the same time Soviet and French specialists in Arkhangelsk Oblast made optical observations using supersensitive TV installations, photometers, and electron optical-image intensifiers. Radar and radio spectrographs in Kostroma and Vologda Oblasts observed the dispersal of radio waves and radio emission in the area where the electrons penetrated the dense strata of the atmosphere. From the Araks data, scientists hoped to determine the true position of the magnetically interlinked spot and to learn more of the interaction between the electron bundle and its medium. (Izvestiya, FBIS— Sov., 13 March 75, E2) ’
Japan’s N booster launched, from Tanegashima launch site, its first payload—Kiku, an 83-kg spacecraft designed to measure launch vibrations and spacecraft temperatures in space. Kiku entered orbit with a 1104-km apogee, 977-km perigee, 106-min period, and 47° inclination. The launch vehicle consisted of a Rocketdyne MB— 3 first-stage engine, modified from the U.S. Thor program, with three Thiokol Corp. Castor 2 solid-rocket strap-ons. The second stage, designated LE—3, had been designed by Japan’s National Space Development Agency with Rocketdyne assistance. The third stage was a Thiokol TE—364— 4 solid-rbcket motor. (GSFC WklySSR, 4—10 Sept 75; Av Wk, 22 Sept 75, 50)
Arnold Engineering Development Center was studying the feasibility of the secondary burning—called external burning—of fuel-rich exhaust to increase the efficiency of solid rocket motors. The concept called for the diversion of the exhaust of burning propellant through ports that ring the rear end of the motor casing, and its injection at right angles into the airstream. Miniature nozzles in each port would accelerate the exhaust gas to sonic speed. Turbulent mixing of the fuel-rich sonic gas and the supersonic airflow would cause a secondary combustion, increasing pressure at the base of the motor and overall thrust of the propulsion system. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 12)
