The 2000th major missile launch from Cape Canaveral took place at 4:30 pm EDT when an Army Pershing missile was launched by troops of Battery C, 3d Battalion, 84th Field Artillery, of the U.S. 7th Army from Europe. First launch from “the Cape” had occurred 26 yr previously on 24 July 1950, when Bumper 8, a captured German V-2 rocket capped by a WAC Corporal second stage, lifted off the then sparsely settled area. (KSC Spaceport News, 12 Nov 76, 1)
Gerald A. Mossinghoff, NASA’s Assistant General Counsel for general law since Jan. 1974, was appointed Deputy General Counsel effective this date. He joined NASA in 1963 as a patent attorney in the Office of General Counsel; in 1966 he was named director of the Office of Legislative Planning at the U.S. Patent Office, and returned to NASA in Dec. 1967 as Director of Legislative Liaison. He received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1971. A registered patent attorney, Mossinghoff had received a B.S. in electrical engineering from St. Louis University and a J.D. with honors from George Washington University. (Admr.’s announcement, 31 Mar 76) During March: Launch of RCA’s Satcom 2 this month was the second launch of a Delta vehicle using 9 large Castor IV solid rocket boosters instead of the standard 9 Castor IIs. (First to use the larger rockets was the Delta that launched Satcom 1 on 12 Dec. 75.) RCA had underwritten development expenses of adapting the NASA “workhorse” Delta to use the larger rockets, in a unique NASA-customer-launch vehicle contractor arrangement that had enabled RCA to design its domestic comsat to be the heaviest to date without having to use a larger and more expensive launch vehicle. The Castor IV boosters would permit a Delta to put into synchronous orbit a payload weighing about 900 kg, compared to about 700 kg for a vehicle equipped with the Castor IIs. NASA was thinking of the more powerful Delta as a standard launch vehicle for other customers who could use the increase in permissible weight of about 29% in many areas of spacecraft design: weather forecasting, scientific exploration, and communications. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 1)
According to a story in the Chicago Tribune, the USSR on an undisclosed date had fired a submarine-launched missile farther than ever before. An SSN-8 missile had landed in mid-Pacific slightly more than 9000 km from its launching point, presumably a submarine in the Barents Sea. (The longest-range U.S. submarine-launched missile could reach just under 4700 km.) U.S. intelligence sources were reported unsure whether the additional range of the SSN-8 resulted from extra rocket power or a lighter warhead; SSN-8 had previously been identified as a single-warhead weapon used in the USSR’s 17 new Delta-class missile submarines. Commenting on the report, the New York Times said the Soviets’ test shot was “good news paradoxically” for the U.S. and the whole world: in contrast to large land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles, the submarine-based missiles were neither large enough nor accurate enough for effective first-strike counter-silo use, and their concealment and mobility would make them ideal second-strike weapons useful only as deterrents. As long as the USSR had no submarine-launched missile, there was little possibility of lowering the ceilings set in a previous agreement to a level that would head off a Soviet first-strike capability. The ceilings had allowed each side to have 2400 strategic bombers and missiles, of which 1320 could carry multiple warheads; if the USSR should agree to deploy half its multiple-warhead missiles at sea as the U.S. did, such an agreement could eliminate the possibility of either side’s constructing a high-confidence first-strike force and would help ensure stability of the nuclear balance for a long time. The NYT favored such an agreement, which would call a halt to ongoing missile programs. (C Trib, 4 Dec 76, 2-5; NYT, 6 Dec 76, 32)
A 3-yr International Magnetospheric Study that began 1 Jan., sponsored by the International Council of Scientific Unions, would be coordinated by a steering committee set up by the Special Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics, chaired by Juan G. Roederer, professor and senior research physicist at the University of Denver. The 20 or more countries participating in the study had already submitted more than 1000 individual research programs, including ground-based, balloon, rocket, aircraft, and spacecraft experiments as well as networks of magnetic, auroral, and other geophysical observatories. Among major spacecraft projects planned by the European Space Agency, Japan, the Soviet Union, and the U.S. would be use of ESA’s Geos spacecraft in geostationary orbit. ESA and NASA would join in an International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE) program to measure properties of different parts of the magnetosphere simultaneously. About 40 other spacecraft launched before and during the study period were expected to contribute sun-earth physics data to the study. Roederer told the National Academy of Sciences that the international coordination differed from that used in the International Geophysical Year, relying on interlocking spacecraft missions and quick and active exchange of information and scheduling. (NAS News Report, Mar 76, 1) April 1976
A British Aircraft Corp. team had successfully launched the second of a series of Skylark 12 high-altitude research rockets from the Andoya Range in arctic Norway to investigate auroral activity for the U.K. Science Research Council and other groups investigating the intense phenomena above the Arctic Circle, the London Press Assn, reported in a broadcast. The rocket reached an altitude of more than 680 km, sending scientific data to ground receivers for 14 min of the flight. First launch of the new three-stage Skylark, capable of carrying payloads to three times the altitude of earlier versions, took place 21 Nov. (FBIS, London Press Assn., 17 Dec 76)
Tass announced that the USSR expedition Polar Experiment North-76 had begun work in the high latitudes of the Arctic. Using 10 scientific ships, as well as planes, radar, and installations for rocket probing of upper atmosphere layers, a team of scientists would observe ice floes in the polar basin, including the geographic North Pole. The expedition, said to be the largest in the history of Arctic exploration, would simultaneously determine the heat balance deep in the ocean, in the atmosphere, and in floating ice in the North Pole area. Ice floes in the polar basin had been found to forecast climate changes in the densely populated and economically developed areas of the northern hemisphere. From the beginning of the century to the 1940s, the floes had receded from continental coastlines, indicating a relative rise in global temperature; they had begun to appear further south again, indicating a cold phase, and the appearance had been correlated with difficulties in northern navigation and fisheries and unusually snowy winters in western Europe, droughts in Asia, and unexpected cyclones and hurricanes. (FBIS, Tass in English, 7 Apr 76)
Astronomers at the University of Massachusetts had clocked pulsars— superdense remnants of collapsed stars—at speeds over 2 million kmh, making them the fastest movers in earth’s galaxy, the National Science Foundation reported. Some of the objects exceeded galactic escape velocity, meaning they could pull free from the Milky Way and spin off into intergalactic space. First discovered in 1968, pulsars were defined as dense bodies in which a sun-size mass had been compressed into a sphere 16 km in diameter. The material was said to be so dense that a teaspoonful would weigh a billion tons. With its collapse, the body would spin increasingly faster and its magnetic field would increase in intensity; the newly formed pulsar would send out electromagnetic signals that pulsed like a radio beacon with each turn (hence the name pulsar). The high velocities were thought to be caused by the intense magnetic fields, up to a trillion times that of earth’s magnetic field: a slight displacement of the pulsar’s magnetic field could release large amounts of electromagnetic energy in one direction, upon which the pulsar would move in the opposite direction as would a rocket. (Pasadena Star-News, 9 Apr 76, 5)
