MSFC announced completion of pressure and structural-load tests on the liquid hydrogen tank that would be part of the Shuttle external tank being built at the Michoud assembly facility by Martin Marietta Aerospace. The tests to certify that the tank met design and manufacturing standards included filling the tank with nitrogen at 42psi for 14hr and applying hydraulic loads as high as 600tons where the orbiter and solid-fuel rocket boosters would be attached. Largest of 3 major elements of the external tank, the hydrogen container about 30m (97ft) long and 8.3m (27.6ft) in diameter would now go for cleaning, corrosion protection, and insulating. (MSFC Release 77-83)
MSFC announced it had begun the first of a series of tests on the external propellant tank of the Shuttle to verify its ability to stand the structural stresses of launch. The proportions of the tank required conduct of the test in phases; the first tests would check out the intertank structure joining the two main segments of the external tank and containing the forward attach points for the two solid-fuel rocket boosters carried by the Shuttle. The heaviest loading would occur at these points, both while the Shuttle was on its pad and while the boosters were thrusting during flight. The tests would apply upward loads as great as 4.35 million lb to the intertank cylinder subjected to opposing downward forces. The loads would come from computer-actuated hydraulic jacks, 28 on the forward end of the test article and as many as 10 in the center section. Chuck Verschoore, MSFC test engineer, said the forces exerted by the jacks could simulate bending and twisting effects as well as straight up-and-down loading, and could go as high as 140% of the tank’s design limits. Test engineers would receive data from as many as 2800 measurement channels. Follow-on tests would check the external tank segments containing the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen propellants. (MSFC Release 77-149)
NASA announced it would conduct sounding-rocket tests with the USSR Hydromet Service for 2wk in Aug. to compare U.S. and Soviet measurements of upper-air temperatures and detect discrepancies in their meteorological instruments. NASA would launch a series of rockets from Wallops Flight Center and the Hydromet representatives would launch rockets from the research ship Akademik Korolev off the U.S. east coast. Under a 1971 agreement on space sciences and applications, the two nations in 1972 had begun exchange of data that had shown the temperature field in the eastern hemisphere to be consistently colder than that of the western hemisphere. Both sides had evaluated their rocket systems for sources of error; direct comparisons made in 1973 at Kourou, French Guiana, had again shown discrepancies in temperature and wind data. Improvements in instruments and techniques since 1973 had made further comparisons necessary, NASA said. (NASA Release 77-133)
LeRC announced it had awarded a $2 895 750 contract to Teledyne Industries, Inc., of Northridge, Calif., for management, engineering, and repair services to Centaur digital computers and remote multiplexers. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract would run for lyr beginning Nov. 1. The digital computer would work with the Centaur inertial guidance system to compute and adjust flight without ground command, permitting the Centaur to deliver its payload to a preselected orbit; the remote multiplexer would work with the digital computer to supply inflight data during launch. Centaur, first U.S. liquid hydrogen/liquid oxygen high-energy rocket, had been a second stage on both Atlas and Titan III. Recently it had assisted the launch of the Voyagers, and was scheduled during the coming yr to launch several commercial comsats and the Pioneer mission to Venus. LeRC would manage the Atlas-Centaur and Titan-Centaur through all phases of manufacturing, testing, and launch. Teledyne would perform its job as contractor both at Northridge and at KSC in Fla. (Lewis News, Dec 9/77, 2)
KSC reported successful conclusion of the first open-sea tests on Shuttle retrieval equipment staged Dec. 5-16 from Port Everglades, in strong winds and seas from 3 to 6ft that had hampered operations both wks. Test manager Bob Everette said the hugh waves created conditions vital to the test although “it was hard even to stand up on the boat” and the aft section of the 158-ft offshore-support vessel was often under a ft of water. The first group of tests simulated parachute recovery; retrieval of the 6 main parachutes and 2 drogues would use 2 support vessels, each responsible for recovering 3 main chutes and a drogue. The second series of tests was to verify performance of the nozzle plug in open waters. The plug was designed to “swim out” from the ship to a booster casing floating vertically, dive to the bottom of the casing, secure itself to the aft portion and pump out the water. The booster, rotating to a horizontal position, would be ready for tow to the Spaceport for refurbishing. The tests were also to confirm the deck layout of the support vessels and how they kept position while the plug was docking with the booster. Everette said retrieval gear would be modified according to the test results. More ocean tests would follow about lmo before the first launch of the Shuttle, pre-mission exercises to train personnel who would work on the recovery. Everette praised the teamwork of the support agencies taking part in the test: staff from KSC and MSFC; Tracor Marine, operator of the support vessel; Everglades Towing Co.; the Naval Ocean Systems Center; U.S. Booster, Inc.; Battelle Memorial Institute; Pioneer Parachute Co.; the U.S. Navy supervisor of salvage; and Martin Marietta. (Spaceport News, Dec 23/77, 4) •
Wallops Flight Center announced it would welcome visitors to the rocket launching facilities on Wallops Island Apr. 23-24 as part of a special observance by federal activities in the area. Assateague Natl. Seashore Park, Chincoteague Coast Guard Base, Chincoteague Natl. Wildlife Refuge, the Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Wallops Flight Center had all planned special exhibits or tours. Visitors to Wallops Island could drive their own cars to see launch pads, rocket storage structures, long-range tracking radars, weather towers, blockhouses, rocket assembly shops, actual launch vehicles, and related range facilities. Cameras would be welcome. The main NASA base would not be included in the visit. (WFC Release 77-2)
The USAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory had successfully test-fired small solid-fuel rocket motors having nozzles molded into the end of the propellant grain instead of externally mounted, AvWk reported. Use of integral nozzles would reduce costs of manufacture and would allow more propellant per rocket. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
NASA announced that the Soviet ship expected to participate in comparisons of atmosphere-measuring instruments [see July 1] would arrive off the Virginia coast about Aug. 7 to serve as the platform for USSR rocket launches. The tests would consist of paired launches of about 22 U.S. Super Lokis and about 33 USSR M-lOOBs, plus 6 Super Loki sphere systems to be launched by Wallops; statistical evaluation would require from 14 to 22 successful paired launches. (WFC Release 77-8; NASA Release 77-151)
Analysis of telemetry data and flight films from the SPAR III mission launched Dec. 14 at White Sands Missile Range indicated successful performance of the electromagnetic levitation device designed to provide the first “containerless” way to process materials in space, MSFC announced. Containerless processing, in which materials could be suspended, melted, and resolidified without touching a container, was thought to permit a degree of purity never before achieved in high-temperature processing, as the material in a conventional container would always exhibit contamination in some degree from the container itself. Apparatus used on SPAR III to process beryllium satisfied all operational requirements, like two other items in the payload: thermal migration of bubbles, and liquid mixing. An apparatus anomaly resulted in only “probable” success of an experiment on epitaxial growth; a fifth experiment, on coalescing of viscous bodies, apparently failed but would be carried again on a later flight. SPAR III rocket flights could offer 5min of nearweightlessness in suborbital coast. (MSFC Release 77-23)
Today newspaper reported that two launch failures in Sept, at Cape Canaveral (explosions of an Altas Centaur and a Delta rocket) had altered the schedule to include launch of a Meteosat Nov. 17 on a Delta; an Intelsat Dec. 8 on an Altas Centaur; and the Japanese comsat (originally scheduled for launch Dec. 8) Dec. 14 on another Delta. ESA’s Meteosat, originally scheduled to go on Nov. 15, had been put off 2 days for further checkout of the Delta; the Intelsat was put off from Nov. 10 to Dec. 8 for further checkout of the Atlas Centaur. The 15 missions scheduled for launch from the Cape next yr had risen to 17: a FltSatCom launch for the Navy originally scheduled for Dec. 15 had been pushed forward to 1978, and a launch of ESA’s OTS backup had been added to replace the one that failed. (Today, Nov 5/77, 1A)
MSFC announced it would conduct on Dec. 1 at the Natl. Parachute Test Range in Calif, the third airdrop test of a parachute system designed to recover the Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters. Royce Mitchell of MSFC said the test article, a 48 0001b (21 773kg) dummy booster carried under the wing of a B-52 aircraft, would encounter 30% more dynamic pressure than the system should experience during a real deployment. To test the durability of the drogue chute that would open first to pull out the main chutes, fins added to the test article would increase its speed and reduce drag. The drogue would deploy at a speed of about 420mph (676kph) 20sec after the plane released the dummy booster at an estimated speed of 230mph (370kph) and an altitude of about 19 400ft (5913m). The 2 boosters to be used on each Shuttle launch would separate after burnout at an altitude of about 27mi (43.5km), descending slowly by parachute into the ocean for recovery and reuse. (MSFC Release 77-221)
MSFC announced receipt from Bendix Corp., Teterboro, N.J., of the first two integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle’s solid fuel rocket boosters. Each SRB would contain 2 electronic assemblies to control communications and internal power distribution. (NASA Release 77-68)
The Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science at the Univ. of Tokyo announced postponement (until Feb. 15 or later) of the launch of a satellite-carrying MU-3H rocket, because of mechanical trouble. An inspection had revealed problems with the rocket’s attitude-control system, the announcement said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 1/77)
MSFC announced it had successfully tested the recovery system for the Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters June 15 at the Natl. Parachute Test Range. Engineers had used an SRB simulator, a drop-test vehicle weighing more them 21 773kg (48 0001b) released from beneath the wing of a B-52 aircraft at a speed of about 85 meters per sec (190mph) and an altitude of about 5500m (18 000ft). Primary purpose of this test was to measure the maximum load on the drogue chute that would open first to stabilize the vehicle and pull out the other chutes. The measured load, about 114 000kg (a quarter of a million lb), was about that expected. The next test, scheduled for late July or early Aug., would measure loads on the other parachutes. Each Shuttle launch would use two SRBs, jettisoned at about 43km (27mi) altitude to descend by parachute into the ocean and be towed to shore for reuse. (MSFC Release 77-115)
Researchers from the Soviet ship Akademik Korolev, anchored off the coast of Virginia near Wallops Flight Center for joint U.S.-USSR rocket launches, had discovered the charms of the Eastern Shore and were enjoying their contacts with the natives, according to reports in the Washington Star and Washington Post. The meteorological soundings had been completed by the last week of August, the newspapers said, and the 134 Russians waiting on the ship for results to be correlated had time to visit the mainland on trips planned by local officials in cooperation with NASA. Coming ashore in groups of about 50, the visitors (mostly young) had seen Pocomoke City, Md., a small U.S. city; the village of Chincoteague, Va.; the Assateague wildlife refuge; and a tour of Accomack county that included a visit to a private home, a farm, and a chicken-processing plant. Through NASA interpreters, the visitors asked scores of questions on topics from labor relations at the plant to the history of local buildings. They had joined in a Frisbee game with local youngsters, eaten largely of the local seafood, and bought out the entire beer supply of a local general store. Capt. Oleg Rostovsev, commanding officer of the 409ft research ship, said he had found the visit “a very interesting experience.” His assistant for scientific affairs, Evgeny Nelepov, said that many of the researchers had visited U.S. cities before, but that major cities everywhere had become more and more alike, “losing the individual characteristics and cultural tradition ... To find these national characteristics one must go to the small villages and rural areas where traditions and local culture endures. That is why this visit here has meant so much to us.” The Russians had held a press tour and reception on the Akademik Korolev as a thank you before the ship departed for Baltimore. (WStar, Aug 28/77, D-1; W Post, Sept 1/77, A-l)
MSFC reported it had purchased 5 large solar collectors to heat an exhibit at the Ala. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The collectors would provide 70% of the heat for the Lunar Odyssey, a space voyage simulation in a modified Saturn launch vehicle. (MSFC Release 77-65)
MSFC reported that a new pattern of painting Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters for orbital flight tests in 1979 and 1980 could save the agency an estimated $300 000. The center’s system dynamics laboratory had changed the 6 black stripes running the length of the giant motors to 4 large rectangles in a spiral pattern that would let engineers measure roll and pitch rates of the boosters on reentry. (MSFC Release 77-150)
MSFC reported that parachutes to recover the Space Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRB) were undergoing dynamic testing at Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, Colo. Scheduled for completion Mar. 31, the tests simulated in-flight parachute deployment from the SRB. (MSFC Release 77-44)
