On Dec. 12, the U.S. Coast Guard would receive its first lightweight portable firefighting module, developed under direction of MSFC’s Technology Utilization Office, the Marshall Star reported. The manufacturer, Northern Research and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., would deliver it to NASA representatives in Boston for transfer to the Coast Guard on completion of an acceptance test. Since MSFC had developed technology for lightweight highly efficient pumps in rocket engines, the Coast Guard had requested help in designing a unit small enough to be lowered onto the deck of small craft but capable of pumping hundreds of gallons of water per min. The module was 4ft wide, 5ft high, and 6ft long, and weighed 2500 lb, including fuel for 3hr of operation, and all equipment stored internally. Two people could set it up rapidly without tools, and it could deliver full output flow within lOmin.; a special feature was a pair of fiberglass water cannons, or monitors, weighing 401b. The module could draw water from the sea through a lift up to 20ft long and pump at least lOOOgal per min through each monitor. Commercial applications included use on light trucks by local fire departments, on docks and ships for harbor fires, and for forest, offshore oil rig, and high-rise building fires, as well as an emergency booster pump for municipal water and for flood control and military operations. Aubrey Smith, head of TU activities at MSFC, said the firefighting module showed “how NASA-developed technology and expertise can be adapted for down-to-earth uses.” (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 1)
NASA announced it would participate in a joint American-Soviet particle-intercalibration (JASPIC) project to compare techniques used by both countries to measure intensity of energetic electrons and protons entering the lower ionosphere. At a 1975 meeting of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics in Grenoble, France, U.S. and Soviet scientists had agreed that the first question to be resolved was instrument credibility. Joint measurement of energetic electron and proton intensity at the same time and same place would be a first step in reconciling the conflicting results reported in the scientific literature. A Soviet research ship, the Professor Vize, off the Va. coast near Wallops Flight Center would serve as the Soviet launch platform. The researchers would study the role of the particles in creating ionization in the lower ionosphere at night at mid-altitudes. They would compare data from 4 sounding-rocket launches from Wallops Island and 5 Soviet MR-12 rocket launches from the ship. One of the Wallops-launched rockets would release a chemical cloud possibly visible to east coast residents. Each organization would be responsible for its own countdown and launch operations. (NASA Release 78-71)
FBIS reported the USSR announced it had fired a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 7, to a height of 1500km for research on the ionosphere and on shortwave radiation. The instrument package, which separated at 175km on the ascent trajectory, contained equipment prepared by scientists from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and the Soviet Union. Launch apparently took place from the facilities at Kapustin Yar, site of previous Vertikal launches. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 3/78)
A space processing applications rocket, SPAR V, was launched at 11am CDT September 11, from White Sands, N.M., the Marshall Star reported. The SPAR V science payload contained 4 experiments to be processed during about 4min of near-zero gravity achieved by the suborbital flight. The flight appeared, from limited data, to have gone extremely well, lasting about 15min and reaching a height of around 102.5 statute mi. The payload was recovered about 55 to 60mi down range in a low mountain area. The payload had no external damage and had been returned to the missile range. Two of the experiments studied resolidification of molten materials in low gravity, from photographs made at 1-sec intervals during the process. Another experiment verified results of a SPAR II experiment during which an immiscible liquid processed in an electric furnace exhibited unexpected massive separation. The fourth experiment both melted and crystallized several samples of materials during the low-gravity processing period, while a camera recorded particle behavior. (Marshall Star, Sept 13/78, 1; 6/78, 1)
JPL announced that more than 100 scientists from universities and corporations in the U.S. and Europe had attended its solar-probe science workshop at CalTech May 22-23 to discuss the proposed closest encounter with the sun. The proposed mission, being studied at JPL under NASA’s Office of Space Sciences, would launch a uniquely designed spacecraft in 1985 into an orbit 2 100 000km (1.3 million mi) above the sun’s surface, arriving in 1989. Scientists had theorized that the sun probe would yield valuable new insights into solar physics, providing data on solar wind, solar particles, the solar magnetic field, and interplanetary dust. The workshop had reviewed new technologies needed for a spacecraft orbiting so close to the sun. JPL had begun studies of a new heat shield design, a high-powered telecommunications system with dual X- and X-band frequencies, new selenide-isotope power generators, and a drag-free spacecraft whose small rocket motors could counteract opposing external forces to keep the craft in correct solar orbit. (JPL Universe, May 26/78, 1)
The Marshall Star reported on a unique suspension system that would use air bags and cables to hang the Space Shuttle’s orbiter Enterprise and its external tank in the test tower, for the first phase of 1978 ground tests scheduled to begin in Apr. The system would consist of a large overhead truss fitted with air bags and cables, installed like a crossbeam at the 65.8m (216ft) level between two walls of the tall test stand. Although the orbiter and external tank would weigh about 544 320kg (1.2 million lb), the suspension system would allow the freedom of movement needed to obtain test data. Suspension of the orbiter and tank in this first phase of testing would duplicate as nearly as possible the flight conditions of the Shuttle at high altitudes, after the solid rocket boosters drop off at 43.5km (27mi) 2min into the mission. Later tests of the entire Shuttle assembly would use a different suspension system. The first Shuttle test phase would begin with the external tank temporarily fastened by knee braces to the stand, the orbiter lowered into place and mated as it would be for an actual flight. With the orbiter in place, engineers would install the suspension system overhead, attach cables from the air bags to the external tank, and remove the knee braces so that the cables would take the weight of the orbiter and external tank; lateral restraints would prevent sideways movement. The design of the truss, 25.3m (83ft) long and weighing 63 504kg (70 tons), would permit less than 2.5c (lin) deflection when fully loaded. Supporting members were of high-strength steel. (Marshall Star, Mar 29/78, 4)
MSFC announced plans for two runs by a high-speed sled in Feb. at the Sandia sled track, Albuquerque, N.M., to test the “broadside deployment phase” of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster parachute-recovery system. The sled tests would deploy only the pilot chute to determine if the nosecap when ejected would clear the vehicle without becoming entangled, as boosters would come in flat, not sideways like an arrow, and air would flow across the nose cone at right angles. MSFC had developed the SRB and its recovery system. (Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 4)
NASA reported it had launched a 2-stage Nike-Apache sounding rocket at 1:30 am EDT Sept. 27 from Wallops Island to investigate ionization sources in the upper atmosphere during geomagnetic activity. The experiment had been postponed day to day since June 2, awaiting an intense magnetic storm that usually followed solar flares. The rocket payload had reached a peak altitude of 183km (114 statute mi), and preliminary results indicated that all instrumentation performed satisfactorily and obtained good data. The launch was the last in a series for the Joint American-Soviet Particle Intercalibration (JASPIC) Project to compare U.S. and Soviet particle-measuring instrumentation [see May 15]. The two nations had jointly conducted eight rocket-borne experiments in June from the Wallops range and the Soviet research ship, Professor Vize, located off Va.’s eastern shore. (WFC Release 78-1)
NASA announced that mission controllers at ARC had completed final course adjustments for the Pioneer 11 encounter with Saturn Sept. 1, 1978. Controllers reported Pioneer 11 had locked on a trajectory that would bring it within 30 000km (18 OOOmi) of the edge of Saturn’s outer ring; any approach closer to the ring edge would risk impact with fragments in the ring. Pioneer 11 would then swing under the plane of the rings to a point 25 000km (15 OOOmi) from the planet’s surface. Without the course correction, Pioneer 11 would have flown by Saturn at a much greater distance (100 000km or 60 OOOmi). Pioneer data transmitted to NASA tracking stations indicated the spacecraft had responded perfectly to a day-long series of commands calling for timed rocket thrusts to alter its trajectory. (NASA Release 78-113)
MSFC reported that the final airdrop test of a system to retrieve Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters by parachute had demonstrated that the system could save the boosters for reuse. The sixth and final airdrop Sept. 12 had successfully tested a main parachute under forces exceeding those expected during flight. A test vehicle released at about 6100m (20 000ft) altitude from beneath the right wing of a B-52 aircraft had deployed a test parachute when vehicle speed reached about 660km per hr (410mph). Although actual booster recoveries would use three main parachutes each, the test had used only one because the test vehicle weighed only about a third as much as a booster would during recovery, and the B-52 aircraft could lift only 22 700kg (50 0001b). Use of only one parachute had sufficed for the main parachute structural test, however, as it had sustained' the necessary load. Actual weight of the boosters to be recovered after Shuttle launches would be about three times the present world-record weight of 24 948kg (55 0001b) for parachute recovery; each empty booster would weigh about 78 000kg (172 0001b) during descent. MSFC engineers had conducted all six drop tests at the National Parachute Test Range, El Centro, Calif. (Marshall Star, Sept 19/78, 1)
NASA reported that about 7da after a Delta rocket was scheduled to launch Nimbus-G into polar orbit from WTR, the second stage of the Delta would separately release two chemicals. Project Cameo (chemically active materials ejected in orbit) would consist of a single 90sec release of lithium over northern Scandinavia and a separate release of barium over northern Alaska, to study solar energy and plasma flows and electric fields in Arctic regions. Release of the lithium would create a huge bright-red cloud visible from Greenland, Scandinavia, and other parts of Europe for a maximum of 5min. Release of the barium would create a bluish white cloud visible from the Soviet Union, Canada, and northwestern parts of the U.S. for a maximum of a half hr. NASA had timed the releases during Arctic twilight or early morning, to ensure best lighting for ground-based and aircraft photography to pinpoint the position and configuration of each cloud as a function of time. Primary objective of (he barium experiment was to trace the flow of plasma (ionized particles) in and above the earth’s ionosphere, with particular emphasis on the transition in earth’s electric field between the polar ice cap and the auroral zone over Alaska and Canada. Primary objective of the lithium experiment was to detect electric fields oriented parallel to the earth’s magnetic field. (NASA Release 78-142)
Av Wk reported that the Soviet Union had launched its 15th killer-satellite test since 1968, less than a mo before the scheduled start of antisatellite-limitation talks with the U.S. The USSR had launched on May 19 an interceptor, Cosmos 1009, toward a target, Cosmos 967, launched Dec. 13, 1977, which had also been target for the USSR’s 14th unsuccessful killer-satellite test Dec. 21, 1977. (AvWk, May 29/78, 23) May 30-June 1: NASA launched Pioneer Venus 1 from Cape Canaveral at 9:13am EDT May 20 atop an Atlas Centaur rocket. It would launch a Venus lander toward the planet 3mo later, about Aug. 7. Pioneer Venus 1,	an orbiter, should reach its destination by Dec. 7, 1978; Pioneer Venus 2,	a multiprobe spacecraft, would arrive 5days later after splitting into a bus and 4 atmospheric-entry probes 13 million km (8 million miles) and 20days out from the planet. Most engineering systems and the interplanetary experiments had signaled normal operation. “Performance so far has been extremely good,” said Marshall Johnson, Venus-orbiter flight director at ARC. “Of course, we have 300 million miles and 6mo to go,” he added. At 9am PDT June 1 the spacecraft was 4 800 000km (2 890 OOOmi) from earth and had traveled toward Venus at 16 580kph (10 296mph). Controllers would make the first midcourse correction June 8, changing velocity to 12.6kph (7.8mph) to aim the Pioneer at the exact point for Venus orbit insertion. Pioneer Venus 1, a spin-stabilized spacecraft with its spin axis perpendicular to the ecliptic plane, consisted of a cylindrical thrust tube serving to transmit acceleration loads into the spacecraft; a 97.5in-diameter circular equipment shelf for mounting electronic units and scientific instruments; a lOOin-diameter cylindrical substrate 48in long for mounting the solar-cell array; and a despun mast assembly supporting three antennas, including a high-gain antenna. A single-piece fitting that would remain on the Centaur at spacecraft separation would be the mechanical/ structural interface with the launch vehicle. Payload was 12 scientific instruments with a total weight of 1001b, using average power of 58watts and peak power of 85watts. The instruments could handle 75 redundant discrete commands and 6 redundant quantitative commands, as well as 17 serial-digital, 24 bilevel, and 31 analog telemetry channels. Three of the instruments would use pyrotechnic firing pulses for various functions. The magnetometer had been put at the tip of a 15.7ft beam to isolate it from spacecraft magnetic fields. The Pioneer Venus 1 launch vehicle was an Atlas SLV-3D Centaur D-14 131ft tall, weighing about 328 6401b at liftoff. The nosecover protecting the spacecraft, a conical/ cylindrical fiberglass fairing about 29ft high attached to a 56in-high aluminum split barrel, had been designed for jettison early in the Centaur burn. NASA had launched Pioneer Venus 1 into an ascent trajectory varying from 3° to 18° south of due east during the first 15days; the 7mo flight to Venus would take the spacecraft more than halfway around the sun (through about 200°), covering about 480 million km (300 million mi). The orbiter would take 3mo longer for the trip than the multiprobe, and would have a slower speed upon arrival at Venus, requiring less power from the orbit-insertion motor. For the first 82 days after launch, Pioneer Venus 1 would fly outside the earth’s orbit. In Aug. it would return inside earth’s orbit and, during the last 4mo of the journey, would cross 42 million km (26 million mi) on a long curving trajectory between the orbits of the earth and Venus. The orbiter’s flight path would resemble that of the Venus multiprobe, to be launched a few days after the orbiter crossed back inside earth’s orbit. NASA had designed the flights to answer questions such as: Why had two planets with about the same mass, formed of similar materials and situated at comparable distances from the sun, evolved different atmospheres? Why had the surface of Venus baked in searing heat, while earth had climate friendly to life? Answers would aid in understanding the evolution of Venus and earth atmospheres and the forces affecting earth’s weather. The Pioneer Venus flights, first devoted to studying another planet’s atmosphere and weather on a global scale, would use the largest number of vehicles devoted to such studies and would make measurements at the greatest number of locations. The flights would record characteristics of Venus’s upper atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as of the lower atmosphere, and interactions of these regions with the solar wind (the continuous stream of ions and electrons flowing outward from the sun) and with the solar magnetic and electric fields. Circling the planet for at least 80mo, the Pioneer Venus orbiter would make the longest observations of Venus to date and would be the first U.S. spacecraft to orbit the planet. A NASA-contractor team under KSC’s expendable vehicles directorate had been responsible for preparing and launching Pioneer Venus I. Hughes Aircraft Co. had built the spacecraft and radar mapper. (Ames Release 78-21; MOR S-825-78-01 [prelaunch] May 15/78; [prelaunch summary] May 11/78; NASA Release 78-68; NASA press brief May 9/78; Marshall Star, May 17/78, 1; May 24/78, 1; Lewis News, May 26/78, 1; JSC Roundup. May 26/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, May 19/78, 2; C Trib, May 21/78, 1-3; W Post, May 21/78, A6; NYT, May 22/78, A10; W Star, May 21/78, A-2)
MSFC reported the first-time assembly of all elements of a Space Shuttle—two solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRBs), an external tank, and an or-biter—in the dynamic-test stand at MSFC. Next step would be resumption of mated vertical ground-vibration testing, with the upcoming series of tests being in launch configuration, the Marshall Star reported. National and regional press representatives were present to film and report on the historic first assembly of the entire vehicle. The SRBs would undergo launch-configuration tests filled with inert propellant, replaced by empty units for configuration tests representing the vehicle just before SRB separation. (Marshall Star, Oct 11/78, 1)
NASA announced it would launch on or about Aug. 7 from Cape Canaveral the second of two Pioneer spacecraft designed for direct measurement of Venus’s dense searing atmosphere, making the 354 million km (220 million mi) flight to Venus on an Atlas Centaur rocket. Pioneer/Venus 2, 20da out from Venus, would separate into five atmospheric-entry craft. Four would enter Venus’s atmosphere at points over the earth-facing hemisphere, two on the day side and two on the night side, and the fifth (the transporter bus) would enter on the day side. The Pioneer/Venus 2 entry probe would arrive five days after the Pioneer/Venus 1 orbiter. The 30 experiments aboard the two Pioneers, a coordinated observational system, would employ the most spacecraft (6) ever devoted to one planet. NASA has designed the flights to study atmosphere and weather on another planet on a global scale as an aid to understanding the forces driving earth weather, and had issued a fact sheet (NASA Release 78-100) giving details on the surface, atmosphere, and stratosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 78-101)
