The People’s Republic of China launched a long-range missile May 18 capable of delivering a nuclear warhead as far as Moscow or the west coast of the United States, Xinhua press agency announced. Australian navy ships reported the rocket’s splashdown in the ocean about 750 miles northwest of Fiji. Diplomatic sources in Beijing said the rocket may have been fired from a complex about 1,000 miles west of there, or from the Lop Nor nuclear-arms test area in northwest China. If so, the rocket made a flight of 5,000 miles or more. (W Star, May 19/80, A-6; FBIS, Xinhua in English, May 23/80; Hong Kong AFP in English, May 18/80; Moscow World Svc in English; Tass in English, May 16-25/80)
LaRC, manager of the Scout program, announced that NASA had awarded Hampton Technical Center (a division of Kentron International, Inc., of Dallas) a $2.2 million,contract modification calling for ten Algol 111A Scout rocket motors by March 31, 1981. Prime contractor for Scout was formerly Vought Corporation, also of Dallas; the modification was made with the same parent firm, Ling Temco Vought. Name changes and other corporate restructurings would streamline the work done for NASA, with estimated savings of about $1 million to be gained by contracting with a subsidiary already qualified to build and load the motors. To be qualified, a firm must have fired two or three launch vehicles, a process costing about $1 million. Scout, NASA’s smallest vehicle, was a four-stage solid-propellant rocket that had launched payloads for NASA, DOD, and several foreign countries. (LaRC Release 80-15)
WFC reported the successful launch July 31 or a two-stage sounding rocket to test both the vehicle system and a “mother-daughter” two-part payload, an electrodynamics package to be used in a series of three launches from Norway later in 1980. Launched at 8:18 a.m. on an Honest John-Orion rocket, the 216-kilogram (476-pound) instrumented payload was programmed to separate at about 95 kilometers (59 miles) altitude and measure the electric field and profiles of ion density and conductivity in the atmosphere. (The three experiments to be launched in Norway would measure energetic-particle and X-ray fluxes and ultraviolet light from the aurora in addition to the electric field and ion density and conductivity.) Telemetry showed that the payloads separated as planned and both the sections reached peak altitude of 111 kilometers (69 miles). The “daughter” payload, a sphere with six 1-meter booms extending from it, performed well and exhibited good stability until descent. At 73 kilometers (45 miles) on the way down, a 65-foot-diameter mylar parachute deployed from the “mother” section; this was a lower altitude that planned, resulting in a faster fall than planned, but the section’s stability allowed it to acquire usable data. This section also contained a movie camera to film parachute deployment; recovery of the section from the Atlantic was in progress. (WFC Release 80-9)
WFC reported that it had made nighttime electric-field measurements in the “middle atmosphere” from balloon ceiling to the ionosphere (30 to 100 kilometers), to extend measurement capability into this region, and to compare techniques simultaneously on a worldwide basis. During the past decade scientists had become able to obtain reliable data elsewhere in the atmosphere (troposphere, stratosphere, ionosphere, magnetosphere, and even in deep space) but not in the middle region. WFC used rockets and a balloon for its local experiments; radars in Massachusetts, Alaska, Peru, Puerto Rico, France, and Scandinavia made supporting ground measurements. At 8:35 p.m. EDT August 13, WFC launched a hundred-thousand cubic-foot balloon inflated with helium, carrying a 21-kilogram (46-pound) payload to measure AC and DC electric fields from to 10 kHz in the middle atmosphere. The mission ended 10 hours, and a chase plane located the payload near Roanoke, Va. At 10:40 p.m. EDT, WFC launched a two-stage Nike-Orion rocket carrying a 232-kilogram (510-pound) payload that reached peak altitude of 90.2. kilometers (56 miles) and recorded data during both ascent and descent. The payload included a water-recovery system; it was recovered at 11:58 p.m. and returned to WFC. At 11:11 p.m. EDT, WFC launched a single-stage Super Areas to reach 90 kilometer (58-mile) altitude, carrying an experiment called Blunt Probe to measure electric fields as well as positive and negative conductivity in the middle region, for comparison with balloon and Nike-Orion measurement. (WFC Release 80-11)
The Washington Post reported that NORAD in Colorado Springs, Colo., had identified a flaming object that streaked across the sky and plunged into the Gulf of Mexico earlier in the week. The object was apparently the remains of a Soviet rocket, probably Cosmos 549, that had been in orbit for seven years. (W Post, Sept 19/80 A-5)
NASA said that the Shuttle orbiter Columbia would move out of the orbiter-processing facility at KSC no earlier than November 23 for tow to the VAB and mating with the external fuel tank and solid-fuel rocket booster. Actual date would depend on results of final inspections now in process; NASA would issue an update November 22. (NASA Release 80-173)
NASA launched an eighth space-processing applications rocket, SPAR 8, November 18 from the White Sands missile range in New Mexico. Its payload, developed and tested by MSFC, was three experiments processed in about five minutes of zero gravity in the coast phase of the suborbital flight, using a three-axis room-temperature acoustic levitator; a single-axis acoustic-levitator furnace to produce 1,575 °C; and a specialized processing furnace. All experiments had apparently performed as expected: two were on acoustic levitation (use of soundwaves to keep liquids from contamination in touching the walls of a container), one of them to produce a high-temperature glass; the third experiment studied movement of bubbles in molten glass. The payload, damaged at impact on Earth, was recovered for damage assessment and study by the investigators of the results. (MSEC Release 80-148)
The British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight announced that Skylark 12, a rocket launched from Natal, Brazil, by British Aerospace, reached a record altitude of 834 kilometers (SF, Apr 4/80, 177) Spaceflight reported a discovery by USSR scientists that the lunar regolith (the dust covering the Moon’s surface) contained nonoxidized iron. Lunar samples proved to be corrosion resistant when exposed to terrestrial atmosphere. The finding, registered at the USSR Committee for Inventions and Discoveries, was confirmed at other USSR and U.S. laboratories. This unusual form of element resulted from the action of the solar wind on the Moon’s surface, said Dr. Valery Barsukov, director of the Institute of Geochemistry. Particles from the solar wind “seize the oxygen of the lunar matter and carry it away into space,” leaving pure metal on the lunar surface. The iron had not oxidized during the eight years since the Luna 16 expedition. (SF, Apr 4/80, 164)
