MSFC announced the choice of two firms, Hercules Inc. and Votaw Precision Tool Inc., to negotiate a contract for development of a filament-wound case for the solid-fuel rocket motor used in the Shuttle boosters. The contract to produce the filament-wound item [see March 2] would cover design, manufacture, test, and delivery of four flight cases at an estimated cost of $33 million. The new case segments would replace portions made of steel, improving performance by reducing Shuttle-liftoff weight about 66,000 pounds (29,937 kilograms). First use would be in late 1985. (NASA Release 82-80; MSFC Release 82-52)
NASA announced that it would try to salvage the two solid-fuel rocket boosters that sank in the Atlantic June 27. Underwater cameras carried by the Scarab 2, a remotely controlled submersible vehicle operated by technicians from Ocean Search, Inc., Lanham, Md., from the deck of the United Space Boosters recovery ship UTC Freedom, showed the boosters on the ocean floor, broken up by the impact. The debris had no built-in lifting points, but PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED the Scarab could attach recovery lines to the sunken objects for hydraulic lift by the salvage ships. Vessels used for recovery would include, besides the Scarab, the UTC Freedom and UTC Liberty (the designated boos ter-recovery ships). A remote station on a recovery ship would navigate Scarab, using bridge displays to show range and bearing, heading, depth, and pitch-roll of the submersible. Radar had located the boosters at about 3,500 feet, too deep for humans in hardshell diving suits to inspect; Scarab could operate in underwater currents up to 0.5 knots at 6,000 feet using three television cameras and one still camera with six quartz-diode floodlights to illuminate the ocean-floor. The solid-fuel rocket boosters’ parachutes failed to open properly because explosive bolts on half the parachute risers fired prematurely. Premature firing separated half of the risers from each main parachute, allowing the parachutes to stream instead of filling with air. NASA did not know why the explosive bolts fired prematurely. {AvWk, Aug. 9/82, 20; Spaceport News, Aug 19/82, 1 & 2; W Post, Aug 2/82, 3)
