NASA today released a statement on the proposed action to develop a second source for the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket motor (SRM). Since November 1984, NASA had assessed the desirability of a second source, and four firms—Aerojet Strategic Propulsion Co., Atlantic Research Corp., Hercules, Inc., and Chemical Systems Div. of United Technologies Corp.—had expressed interest in becoming the SRM second source. As a result, NASA believed the development of an SRM second source would serve the national interest. The statement read in part: ". . . Because of the continued strong interest of the four contractors and our belief that a second source would be in the national interest, it is our intent to provide the contractors the opportunity to respond through a formal request for proposal (RFP). "Industry must, however, be willing to respond with the full knowledge that NASA will provide no firm guarantee of recovery of their qualification costs. If industry is so willing, and where competition remains available with the incumbent excluded, NASA intends to proceed with establishing a second source. "Should the winner of a second source competition for SRMs become qualified to produce flight-quality motors in time to support our next production buy, NASA would plan to buy contingent on overall cost considerations, 20 flight sets of motors at the rate of not less than four flight sets a year. In addition, NASA would compete the balance of the buy and subsequent buys to determine the split in production between the incumbent and the qualified second source. A decision to dual source any quantity beyond the planned minimum buy of 20 flight sets would be based on the cost of the dual source in comparison to the cost of contracting the balance with the incumbent (Morton Thiokol, Inc.) only. "Based on the above, NASA intends to notify the four interested firms by letter in early January 1986 of our willingness to proceed with an RFP and the specific conditions that would apply. Their comments and views would be requested. A positive response would provide the basis for NASA to issue an RFP. Should industry not support the RFP under these conditions, NASA would cancel any initiative of establishing a dual source for the SRM." (NASA Release 85-178) Student Involvement Program
Sometime in 1986 or shortly thereafter a Conestoga rocket might launch a capsule carrying the cremated remains of 15,000 human beings into an orbit 1,900 miles above the earth, Malcom Brown wrote in the NY Times, and a few critics had deplored the idea that the U.S.'s first private venture into space should haul so seemingly useless a payload. However, Browne pointed out, the day might come when the space undertakers would orbit human relics of genuine value to future historians, archeologists, scientists, and doctors. As the living world became more crowded, he wrote, cremation seemed increasingly attractive as a space-saving alternative. However, if the trend continued, scientists in the distant future might encounter a troublesome shortage of human remains representing today's society. Space burial of at least a few representatives of our society would serve future science admirably, he wrote. Safe from grave robbers, souvenir hunters, land developers, and other terrestrial menaces, an orbiting body would remain in the most pristine frozen storage imaginable. Short of orbiting whole bodies, he added, even the storing of samples of human tissue in space would give future scientists useful time capsules. A system patented by a U.S. inventor, Philip Backman, reduced a human body to 5% of its natural weight by freezing, pulverizing, and vacuum drying it. "A few grams of the resulting powder, taking up no more space in an orbiting mausoleum than cremated remains, would bequeath to future scientists important clues about the deceased person's identity, genetic makeup, pathology, and even style of life," he wrote. "Space may be the arena of our future wars. It seems fitting that space should also serve as a graveyard, from which our distant descendants could mine the treasure of knowledge," Browne concluded. [NYT, Aug 6/85, C3)
Japan's first deep-space probe had escaped earth's gravity on its way to a rendezvous with Halley's Comet early in 1986, the Washington Post reported. A domestically developed rocket had launched Sakigake (Pioneer) January 8 from the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science's launch site at Uchinoura in southwestern Japan. Dr. Tamiya Nomura, director of the institute's office of project coordination, said the probe was 580,000 miles from earth the morning of January 12 and was "entering a sphere where the sun's gravity is dominant." (W Post, Jan 12/ 85, A17)
Finnish army divers had recovered the main section of a stray Soviet rocket that had crashed December 28, 1984, through a frozen lake, and military officials said it was not a cruise missile, the Washington Post reported. A helicopter recovered the missile's main frame and engine after divers had brought up the nose cone and other debris. Finnish authorities said the debris showed it was "an old-type missile dating from 1971 or 72 and without military capacity." U.S. officials, contradicting an earlier statement by Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger that it was an "air cruise missile," agreed with the Finnish that the missile was an older-generation drone and unarmed. The Soviet Embassy in Helsinki, which said the missile had gone off course while in use for target practice over the Barents Sea, had requested return of the remnants. The Finnish later announced they would return the fragments, but asked Moscow to pay for the recovery. (W Post, Feb 3/85, A17, Feb 6/85, A15)
French President Francois Mitterrand opened today the Paris Air Show, stating that the French-led European high-technology program known as Eureka was "off to a good start" after gaining approval from West Germany and other European partners, FBIS Paris AFP in English reported. France and W. Germany had previously disagreed over a U.S. invitation to participate in the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) defense research project. West Germany had endorsed the project, but France had rejected it, fearing it would render France's independent nuclear deterrent impotent and give the U.S. an unassailable lead in advanced technology. In speaking of Eureka, a space research program primarily for civilian uses and the development of ultramodern technology in such fields as lasers and high-speed computers, Mitterrand repeated his contention that the Eureka and SDI projects were not competing for the same goals, but added that Bonn's participation in both would necessitate choices in its budget and assignment of scientists. Fie also said France was determined to develop a European fighter plane by the 1990s and that the European Flermes space plane project was of major importance and could tie in with the European Ariane-5 rocket program. (FBIS Paris AFP in English, May 31/85) Hermes Program
study the solidification of alloys for lead-antimony and an aluminum-copper combination, study the comparative morphology and anatomy of the primary root system of radish seeds, study crystal growth of metallic appearing needle crystals in an aqueous solution of potassium tetracyanoplatinate, and provide information on the "project-explorer-payload-elapsed-time" and the operational status of experiments during flight to all amateur radio stations and short-wave listeners around the world (Alabama Space and Rocket Center);
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Island, VA, facility in cooperation with the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory (AFGL) at Hanscom AFB, Massachusetts, and the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI), Copenhagen, Denmark, would carry out that winter the 1985 Cooperative Observations of Polar Electrodynamics (COPE) project of sounding rocket research in Greenland to gather knowledge about the solar-earth relationship. The project would include studies of polar-cap turbulence and electrodynamics, auroral-zone electrodynamics, auroral-electrojet turbulence, neutral-atmosphere coupling, and polar-ionospheric irregularities. Researchers selected Greenland for the investigations because of its access to the auroral oval, polar cap, and polar cusp; an existing rocket range; support from the Sondre Stromfjord incoherent-scatter radar, the Hi Lat Spacecraft, and the extensive array of scientific ground-observing stations in Greenland, Scandanavia, and North America; and a broad choice of launch azimuths. GSFCAVallops Flight Facility personnel had spent several weeks during the previous summer at the Greenland Sondre Stromfjord facility installing additional launchers and related ground-support equipment, radar, telemetry, and communications systems and erecting vehicle and payload assembly structures. Project experimenters scheduled nine suborbital rocket launches of which two would release chemicals creating artificial vapor clouds 250 km high. NASA scheduled seven flights: two Black Brant Xs, two Terrier-Malemutes, a Taurus-Orion, a Nike-Tomahawk, and a Taurus-Tomahawk; AFGL scheduled two missions: a Black Brant VIII and a Black Brant IX. (GSFC Release 85-5)
