Preliminary investigation into the Titan rocket lost on
A 3,500pound piece of debris that was determined to be a rocket booster, but not identified as from the left or right side, was recovered 28 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 400 feet of water. The massive operation was resumed after a twoday halt from storms and rough seas. Other salvage teams also continued their efforts to recover the rest of the crew's compartment and remains. (W Post, Mar 17/86; P Inq, Mar 17/86; NY Times, Mar 18/86)
NASA released footage of the Challenger just seconds after ignition, showing a puff of black smoke coming from the right solid rocket booster near a joint between two segments. The tape lent more weight to the theory that the accident had resulted from a faulty seal in the motor. (W Post, Feb 14/86; WSJ, Feb 14/86; W Times, Feb 14/86; NY Times, Feb 14/86; B Sun, Feb 14/86; USA Today, Feb 14/86)
NASA and the Nuclear Safety Review Panel differed in their estimates of the reliability of booster rockets before the
manufacturers for solid rocket boosters. The House also voted to authorize spending whatever money would be needed to begin construction of a new orbiter in fiscal year 1987. (P Inq, Sep 26/86; WSJ, Sep 26/86; W Post, Sep 26/86; W Times, Sep 26/86; NY Times, Sep 26/86)
NASA scheduled two scientific experiment rocket launchings for early May, a Black Brant X and a TaurusNikeTomahawk, to create artificial clouds along the East Coast that would be visible from Canada to Florida and as far west as Ohio. The objective of the experiment was to investigate Nobel prize winner Dr. Hannes Alfven's proposed Critical Velocity Effect Theory, which has been used to explain details in the early formation of the solar system. In 1954, Alfven proposed that if an element in a nearly neutral plasma became ionized when it attained a flow velocity that matched its ionization potential, several facets of the structure of the solar system could be explained, including differing chemical compositions of the planets and the regularity of their orbits. Although Alfven's critical velocity effect has been studied in the laboratory, the phenomena required investigation in a space plasma. The experiment was scheduled for dawn, when the Earth's surface would still be dark but when there would be sunlight at the experiment's altitude so ionized cloud chemicals could be visible to the naked eye. The threestage, solidpropellant rockets would release barium and strontium at the apogee altitude of 267 miles. When the releases occurred, ground observers could see, if the experiment was successful, a cloud split into two0*welldelineated jets of gas in the first few minutes. The experiments were part of NASA's sounding rocket program, which included launching approximately 40 to 45 sounding rockets a year from various worldwide locations. (NASA Release 8651)
NASA's chief engineer said that cutbacks in the safety program over the previous three years had put the Agency "in a dangerous situation." Loss of personnel and transfer of safety responsibility to field offices and contractors contributed to NASA's inability to catch the seal problem. He reasoned that "there are only so many problems [one person] can look at, and in my opinion the solid rocket booster was a relatively easy thing to do. But it really wasn't getting the amount of attention from here it should have." (W Times, Mar 5/86)
NASA announced that it would allow private contracts for McDonnell Douglas, builders of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, builders of the Atlas Centaur, to market their products. The two companies were also granted the use of NASA launch facilities, with the agreement to reimburse for any costs incurred. Talks with Transpace, a competitor who had hoped to market the Delta rocket, were ended. (W Post, Oct 15/86; W Times, Oct 15/86; WSJ Oct 15/86)
Western European officials announced that the grounded Ariane rocket would not be ready to fly in February as was earlier hoped, adding to the strains fed by the West's inability to launch. Modifications were recently approved for the rocket's faulty third stage; no new flight date was given. (NY Times, Dec
NASA announced that it had located both the Shuttle's0*crew compartment and the remains of some crew members, in 100 feet of water, about 25 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida. Sonar first detected the object on the night of March 7 and subsequent dives confirmed it to be the module. About 10 percent of the wreckage had been recovered to this date, but the suspected right solid rocket booster still lay on the ocean's floor. Although little insight into the cause of the accident was expected, recovery of the data tapes, officials speculated, could shed some light. (USA Today, Mar 10/86; P Inq, Mar 10/86; B Sun, Mar 10/86; NY Times, Mar 10/86; W Post, Mar 10/86; W Times, Mar
Allan McDonald, in charge of the booster rocket redesign task force, told members of Congress that the new booster joints would fall into the "criticality1R" category, meaning that they'(0*would have a backup. No specific design had yet been chosen, and the engineer stated, "We're looking at some designs with orings and some without. We're looking at various seating concepts." McDonald was taken off Morton Thiokol's solid rocket team after testifying before the Rogers Commission concerning his objection to launching the Challenger in cold weather, but was reassigned to head the task force after complaints from Congress. (USA Today, Jun 19/86; W Times, Jun 19/86; NY Times, Jun 19/86)
Forty miles off the Florida coast and at a depth of 1,200 feet, a fourman submarine recovered debris and took photographs of what engineers hoped was Challenger's right booster rocket. As the investigation moved further ahead, the Presidential Commission looking into the accident asked NASA to remove from its own investigation any officials involved in the H&decision to launch the Shuttle. (B Sun, Feb 18/86; NY Times, Feb 18/86; W Post, Feb 18/86; P Inq, Feb 18/86; W Times Feb 17/86) 0** NASA Requested $45 million for fiscal year 1987 to accelerate research for its next generation spacecraft, a hypersonic transatmospheric vehicle, or "space plane", capable of Mach 25 (about 17,000 mph). Able to fly into orbit, reenter the atmosphere and achieve orbit again while being completely reusable, the craft would have both commercial and military applications. (W Times, Feb 17/86)
Investigation into the Delta rocket crash May 3 indicated that the accident could have been a result of a faulty hardwareassembly program in the engine compartment. A short circuit was most likely the cause, said Lawrence Ross, Chairman of the Delta review board, but sabotage was not ruled out. (B Sun, Jun 6/86)
NASA chose a new design for its solid rocket motors, a major step for returning the Shuttle fleet to flight. Each joint would be sealed by three orings constructed from a more resilient material than that used originally, and would seal at all times, not just from pressure produced by expanding gas inside the rocket. Other changes included a metal clip meant to force the joint to remain sealed, interlocking insulation to prevent hot gases from directly contacting the orings, and a bolt assembly between the rocket nozzle and the engine for providing an additional seal at the nozzle joint. Hundreds of (#tests for the new design were scheduled for the coming fall. (NY Times, Aug 12/86; Aug 13/86; W Times, Aug 12/86; W Post, Aug 13/86; C Trib Aug 13/86)
A decision was reached by NASA to test the new booster rocket design for the Shuttle fleet by firing the rockets horizontally, and not vertically as the Rogers Commission had suggested. A NASA spokesman called this method of testing "the most demanding" and the one that "best satisfies the Commission's intent." (NY Times, Oct 3/86; W Post, Oct 3/86; P Inq, Oct 3/86)
Salvage crews reported that they might have located a key part of the booster rocket, suspected in the January 28 accident, 32 miles offshore at a depth of 650 feet. Embedded firmly into the ocean's floor, the estimated 400500 pound debris located near other wreckage was positively identified as parts from the right booster rocket. As engineers examined their most recent discovery, other teams recovered still more of the crew's cabin as well as additional remains and personal affects. (W Times, Mar 13/86; NY Times, Mar 13/86; B Sun, Mar 13/86)
Several engineers at NASA recently questioned the proposal to add 100 bolts to a critical joint between the exhaust nozzle and the solid fuel segments in the Shuttle booster rockets. The purpose of the fasteners was to prevent further leakage of hot gases. Many engineers, however, saw these holes as another way for the gasses to escape because they were to be placed between inner and outer orings. (B Sun, Nov 3/86; 'A0*Times, Nov 3/86)
