The media covered the destruction after launch of Orbital Sciences Corporation's Aries rocket carrying secret Pentagon experiments for Star Wars. The rocket went out of control soon after liftoff and had to be destroyed. (AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91; NY Times, Aug 21/91; WSJ, Aug 21/91; W Post, Aug 21/91; USA Today, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; W Times, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; C Trin, Aug 21/91; LA Times, Aug 21/91)
The press quoted the official Notimex news agency as reporting that the rocket that was to provide data about the sun during the total eclipse on July 11 failed to send back any data. The project was jointly sponsored by the Florida Institute of Technology and the National Autonomous University of Mexico. (AP, Jul 11/91; B Sun, Jul 12/91)
NASA announced November 13 as the launch date for Consort 4, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments. The experiments was to be launched from the Naval Ordnance Missile Test Station at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, with material from the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. (NASA Release 91-173)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax County, Virginia was issued its first license for commercial space launches. The Department of Transportation licensed three launches to be used for experiments on the impact of weightlessness on payloads for the Center for the Commercial Development of Space at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. Orbital, which launched an experimental winged Pegasus rocket from a NASA B-52 bomber last year, was to use a different technology for the DOT-licensed flights. It would launch Prospector rockets developed by the company from a Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch pad refurbished by Orbit. The first launch was scheduled for March 1991, followed by launches in December 1991 and December 1992. (W Post, Jan 3/91)
Peenemunde, Germany was the place where the first self-propelled rocket left the Earth's atmosphere. This occurred on October 3, 1942 when the Nazis launched a 5 1/2 ton V-2 rocket to a height of more than 50 miles. A museum was scheduled to open on the site. (LA Times, Apr 9/91)
The Washington Post carried a lengthy article describing the need for a new cheaper, dependable space launch system and work being done to develop a new family of rockets. The proposed new National Launch System was to be a hybrid of old and new technology to reduce costs. The booster shell would derive from the Shuttle's external fuel tank, topped by a Titan 4 cargo housing. The core would be a newly developed oxygen-hydrogen engine. The rockets would use from one to several engines and for heavy payloads could strap on advanced solid fuel boosters being developed. (W Post, May 13/91)
NASA announced that the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had selected EER Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, to provide vehicle, launch, and recovery services for the next series of Consort suborbital rocket missions. (NASA Release 91-194)
Gregg Easterbrook, contributing editor for Newsweek and Atlantic Monthly, wrote a lengthy article criticizing NASA's slow response to the need for various reforms. He particularly faulted the formation of commissions as being easier than correcting errors and discussed the U.S. lack of a "throwaway space booster." (W Post, Aug 18/91)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket, would be launched from Cape Canaveral on June 7. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
NASA selected the 49-foot Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, for seven launches worth about $56 million, with an option for three more. This contract was additional to one for about $43.5 million for ocean observation. (W Post, Mar 5/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, rescheduled its launch of the Joust 1 rocket at Cape Canaveral for June 5, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, May 21/91)
The media reported on the failure of Orbital Science Corporation's Prospector rocket to take off from the NASA launch pad at Cape Canaveral. The rocket, produced by the Fairfax, Virginia firm, contained 500 pounds of scientific experiments. The flight was sponsored by NASA's Commercial Space Development Center at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. (W Post, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91)
The Council on Competitiveness in its report found the United States leading the world or holding its own in 61 of 94 technologies considered crucial to future economic progress, including rocket engines, computer software, biotechnology, and advanced welding techniques. However, it deemed the United States trailing in 33 other fields including laser technology and semiconductor chips. International competition and joint efforts to develop a supersonic plane with a new "hypersonic engine" are discussed. Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget Project, commented that although most such research would be global, many US firms still did not see themselves as part of a global industry. (W Post, Mar 21/97; P Inq, Mar 21/97)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying 10 materials and biotechnology experiments, would be launched on March 29 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The mission was sponsored by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for Commercial Development of Space. Space Data Division of Orbital Sciences Corporation would provide rocket and launch services to lift the payload approximately 400 miles into space. In addition to UAH CMDS, four other NASA commercial development centers and two industrial firms were involved. (NASA Release 91-33)
The media reported the launch from Cape Canaveral by Orbital Sciences Corporation of a small Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments for the Defense Department. The experiments were intended to help in designing sensors to measure heat-emitting "signatures" of ballistic missiles in flight. (AP, Oct 14/91; W Times, Oct 15/91)
AP reported that after a delay caused by a battery failure in one of the experiments, a three-ton Starfire 1 rocket blasted off from the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico. After its 15-minute flight peaking at 185 miles above Earth, researchers recovered the rocket's payload in the missile range 50 miles from the launch pad. The rocket spent seven minutes in microgravity, an area of little gravity on the edge of space, where nine experiments were conducted. (AP, Nov 16/91)
The Washington Times also dealt with space law and the risks involved in such matters as rocket launches. In the latter connection, it cited Orbital Sciences Corporation and its difficulties. Because most commercial space companies had NASA or the U.S. government as a customer, changes in government had an impact on the legal aspects. (W Times, Sep 29/91)
A University of Alabama, Huntsville-managed sounding rocket launch was canceled on November 12 when an electrical problem occurred with one experiment. The launch of the Consort 4 from the White Sands New Mexico Missile Range was reset for November 16. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; AP, Nov 13/91)
