Rocket scientist Albert E. Schuler died of natural causes at the age of 83, the third original member of Wernher von Braun’s rocket team to die in the same week. Schuler had retired from NASA in 1969, after a career overseeing measurement of instrumentation on test stands and rockets during static firings and overseeing flight instrumentation, guidance, and control on rocket flights.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die.”)
One thousand Puerto Ricans protested against NASA’s plans to launch, from a nature preserve in Puerto Rico, suborbital rockets filled with chemicals. The Coqui Dos program planned the launch to measure high-level winds and turbulence in the upper atmosphere. Coqui Dos continued the El Coqui program of 1992, part of NASA’s Suborbital Sounding Rocket program, which launched 25 sounding rockets annually from locations worldwide. Because the rockets would disperse aluminum trimethol before crashing into the sea, the protesters demanded that NASA produce studies proving that the launch would not damage the environment. The mayor of Vega Baja led the protest outside the entrance to the Tortuguero Recreation Area, the section of the nature preserve where the rocket launches would take place, threatening to sue NASA to force it to release environmental impact studies from the 1992 launch.(NASA, “NASA Studying Space Weather from Puerto Rico,” news release 98-23, 6 February 1998; Mario Maldonado for Associated Press, “Puerto Rico-NASA,” 1 February 1998; Lance Oliver, “11 Launches Will Attract Protesters: Many in Puerto Rico Fear Damage by Research Rockets,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 February 1998.)
The Huntsville Alabama L5 Society (HAL5), a chapter of the National Space Society, failed in its second attempt to become the first group of amateurs to launch a rocket into space. The society attempted to use a hot-air balloon from a NASA barge in the Gulf of Mexico to launch its rocket, a launch concept known as a rockoon. According to the rockoon concept, a small rocket may “obtain very high altitude because there is little air to slow it down during launch.” James A. Van Allen had been the first to fly rockoons in the 1950s, as part of a joint U.S. Navy- University of Iowa project. The U.S. Navy had abandoned the technique after large, ground- based, sounding rockets became available. NASA’s MSFC signed a cooperative agreement with HAL5 in 1996, continuing the relationship for the High Altitude Lift-Off mission. MSFC had supplied HAL5 with the barge, helium for the balloon, nitrous oxide for the rocket, and some funds for materials. HAL5 sought to “make space more affordable for students, amateurs, experimenters, and researchers.” NASA was examining alternate launch sites and methods in an effort to find ways of reducing the cost of rocket launches.(HAL5 Project, “Space Group Hopes To Launch First Amateur Rocket into Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 June 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Space Buffs in Alabama Can’t Get Rocket Launched,” 21 June 1998; William R. Corliss, “Chapter 4: Development of the First Sounding Rockets,” in NASA Sounding Rockets, 1958– 1968: A Historical Summary (Washington, DC: NASA Scientific and Technical Information Office, 1971), http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4401/contents.htm (accessed 30 January 2008).)
KSC officials broke ground on a complex for testing a NASA experimental rocket, the X-34. Engineers had designed the vehicle⎯a small, winged rocket⎯to launch into orbit from an airplane and to return to Earth, landing like an airplane. Planning flight tests to begin in 2000, KSC hoped the new facility would attract commercial space enterprises, such as Lockheed’s VentureStarTM, still under development. Facilities anywhere in the country would be able to launch the VentureStarTM, once completed, because it would not use boosters or fuel tanks and, therefore, would not require a coastal launch site.(Robyn Suriano, “NASA Breaks Ground for $8 Million Complex To Serve New Rocket, Attract VentureStar,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 1998.)
Heinrich K. Paetz, an original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, died of natural causes at the age of 88, the second team member to die within the week. Before retiring from NASA in 1970, Paetz had participated in the Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn I, and Saturn V programs as a member of the test branch.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die.”)
