The National Research Council Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades released a report cautioning NASA “not to wait too long to choose between keeping the Shuttle until 2020 or scrapping it after 2012 in favor of a new vehicle like Lockheed Martin’s proposed VentureStar.” The committee, led by former astronaut and former head of the Space Shuttle Program Bryan D. O’Connor, advised NASA to make a timely decision to either phase out the Shuttle upgrade program or make the major investments necessary for the Shuttle to carry out reliably its long- term mission. The panel specifically addressed the Liquid Fly Back Booster (LFBB), the most expensive Shuttle upgrade under consideration, with development costs estimated at between US$2 billion and US$7 billion. The panel’s report revealed that NASA had not investigated enough alternatives to the LFBB to ensure that it was “the most appropriate way to meet the needs of the Shuttle and other programs.”(Aerospace Daily, “NRC Panel Worried NASA Hasn’t Studied Alternatives to LFBB,” 13 January 1999.)
NASA’s GRC announced that, for the first time, researchers had suspended particles of frozen hydrogen in liquid helium, the first step toward creating new rocket fuels that could revolutionize rocket-propulsion technology. Researchers had poured small amounts of liquid hydrogen at a temperature of 14 K (-435°F or -259°C), just above freezing point, onto the surface of liquid helium of a temperature just above absolute zero, at 4 K (-452°F or -269°C). The liquid hydrogen had formed small, solid hydrogen particles, which floated on the surface of the helium. Scientists planned to use the suspension to create “futuristic atomic fuels,” making it possible to develop rockets with “liftoff weights one-fifth that of today’s [rockets] or with payloads three to four times more massive.” In addition, the suspension could “reduce or eliminate on-orbit assembly of large space vehicles,” thereby contributing to the exploration of the entire solar system.(NASA Glenn Research Center, “Rocket Fuels Researchers Suspend Frozen Hydrogen Particles in Helium,” news release 99-65, 12 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/news/pressrel/1999/99_65.html (accessed 25 February 2008).)
