Alain Bensoussan, president of the French space agency, announced that he was resigning from his post because he no longer had the support he needed to continue his job. Bensoussan had been the “target of increasingly bitter attacks” lodged by frustrated employees who no longer perceived a clear direction in the agency’s mission. Bensoussan had also faced the failure of a new Ariane 5 rocket and an agency budget that had decreased steadily since 1997, despite the addition of new programs. Moreover, the French government had commissioned a report evaluating the space agency’s current status and future direction, and the report had been “lukewarm in its assessment” of Bensoussan. Following the publication of the report, France’s space minister Claudie Haignere had stated that the agency had not yet made a decision about its future management. The commission’s findings and the space minister’s statement had not provided a strong message of support for Bensoussan’s leadership.(Peter B. de Selding, “French Space Agency Chief To Resign,” Space News, 29 January 2003.)
Starchaser Industries Ltd., a British entry for the X Prize competition, successfully tested its Nova 2 rocket capsule, dropping it from a Fairfield C123K aircraft near Kingman, Arizona. Parachute expert Ted Strong piloted the capsule, which the aircraft had released at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,048 meters). Traveling at 100 miles per hour (161 kilometers per hour), the craft deployed a 10-foot (3-meter) drogue parachute to stabilize its descent, and 5 seconds later, the pilot “oriented the capsule into a horizontal position” before deploying the main steerable canopy. The pilot flew the capsule like a glider to a precision landing.(Space.com, “X Prize Entry Starchaser Successfully Test Drops Piloted Capsule,” 24 July 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/starchaser_test_030424.html (accessed 12 January 2009). 486 NASA, “Atlas V Chosen To Launch New Horizons Mission,” contract release C03-y, Space.com (accessed 23 December 2008).)
NASA released its Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) report, which identified four possible causes for the failure of the comet-rendezvous mission. The CONTOUR Missionintended to encounter at least two comets and to perform investigations and analyses of comet materialhad launched on 3 July 2002. NASA had lost contact with the craft on 15 August 2002, following a propulsive maneuver involving the solid rocket motor (SRM), and had been unable to reestablish contact as of 20 December 2002. On that date, NASA and Johns Hopkins University’s Applied Physics Laboratory had concluded that the spacecraft was lost. NASA had established the MIB on 22 August 2002. The CONTOUR MIB’s task was to examine the processes, data, and actions surrounding the events of 15 August; to search for proximate and root causes of the loss of the craft; and to develop recommendations for future missions. In its report, the CONTOUR MIB concluded that the probable cause of the mission’s failure was the structural failure of the spacecraft resulting from plume heating during the embedded SRM burn on 15 August. However, the lack of telemetry and observational data, immediately before and during the burn, as well as the lack of recoverable debris, left open the possibility that one of several other problems might have contributed to the loss of the spacecraft. The MIB report identified as other possible causes the catastrophic failure of the SRM; collision with space debris or meteoroids; and the loss of dynamic control of the spacecraft.(NASA, “Contour Mishap Board Completes Investigation,” news release 03-324, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03324_contour.html (accessed 27 January 2009); NASA, “Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Mishap Investigation Board Report,” 31 May 2003; Associated Press, “Heat from Rocket Likely Broke Up Unmanned Spacecraft―NASA,” 16 October 2003.)
