NASA’s KSC announced that it had awarded a contract for the construction of the Ares-I mobile launcher to Hensel Phelps of Orlando, Florida. The Ares-I rocket, as part of the Constellation Program, would transport the Orion CEV (crew exploration vehicle), with its crew and cargo, into low Earth orbit. The contractor had agreed to construct a mobile launcher that would transport the Ares I to the launchpad and to provide ground support for the launches. The mobile launcher would comprise a main support structure, which would include a base, a tower, and ground-support systems for the facility. Handel Phelps would supply all of the equipment, labor, and materials for the project; separate contracts would provide for ground-support equipment. The firm fixed-price contract, which included an option for an additional Ares-I mobile launcher, could be worth up to US$263,735,000, if NASA exercised all the options.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Ares I Mobile Launcher,” news release C08-025, 8 May 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_C08025_Ares_MLP_contract.html (accessed 16 March 2011).)
NASA announced that LRO had successfully completed its first round of environmental testing. Engineers had performed the tests, which included a spin test and a vibration test, at NASA’s GSFC. The spin test ascertained the craft’s center of gravity and measured its rotation. The vibration test determined the structural integrity of LRO by simulating the shaking the craft would experience during launch. Before the launch, NASA planned for LRO to undergo acoustics testing, thermal-vacuum testing, and a simulation of separation from the rocket during launch. LRO’s launch window would open on 27 February 2009.
NASA’s Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) launched from the Kwajalein Atoll at 17:47 (UT) aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket. The probe was embarking on a two-year mission to create an image of the interstellar boundary region. IBEX carried two large-aperture, single-pixel “cameras” to create an image of the outer solar system. Instead of capturing light, the cameras detected energetic neutral atoms. Energetic neutral atoms are created in the outer solar system when the hot solar wind, moving at 1 million miles per hour (1,609,344 kilometers per hour), collides with the cold gases of interstellar space. The interstellar boundary region shelters Earth from dangerous cosmic rays that otherwise would enter Earth’s orbit and affect human health and spaceflight. NASA’s GSFC was managing IBEX, which was part of the Small Explorers program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, “NASA Launches IBEX Mission to Outer Solar System,” news release 08-262, 19 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08262_IBEX_Launch.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Agence France-Presse, “NASA Launches Probe To Study Edge of Solar System,” 20 October 2008.)
Iran’s state-run media announced that the country had successfully launched a rocket called Kavoshgar 2 into space. A follow-up to the 4 February 2008 launch of the first Kavoshgar rocket, Kavoshgar 2 had reportedly performed its functions, landing 40 minutes later. Iranian media stated that the rocket had consisted of three parts, including a space laboratory. Kavoshgar 2’s mission had been to conduct space experiments on the atmosphere, to test its payload’s retrieval system, and to facilitate academic coordination among scientists.(Agence France-Presse, “Iran Says It Has Sent Another Rocket into Space,” 26 November 2008.)
