Commander Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow docked Discovery with the ISS, relying solely on the Shuttle’s powerful primary jet thrusters, marking the first occurrence of this type of docking. All six of the Shuttle’s small nose-and-tail steering thrusters were incapacited when a single forward jet failed, prompting NASA to shut down both of Discovery’s small forward jets, as well as the four small thrusters in the orbiter’s tail. NASA had taken these measures because of concern that toxic rocket propellant could spray onto the ISS solar wings, reducing the wings’ ability to produce power. LeRoy E. Cain, Chair of NASA’s Mission Management Team, explained that, although flying the Shuttle with only the primary jets presented a challenge, NASA had fully certified the alternative docking mode and had trained all crews headed for the ISS for that possibility. NASA commentator Rob Navias described Sturckow’s approach and docking as “textbook,” saying that the “entire rendezvous and docking was smooth as silk.”(Todd Halvorson, “Skipper Nails Tricky Move,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 August 2009. 48)
NASA announced the successful test of a critical piece of the Ares-I rocket, marking a key milestone in the next-generation crew launch vehicle’s (CLV’s) development. ATK had conducted the flight test at its facility in Promontory, Utah. Simulating the separation event that should occur following the first-stage flight of Ares I-X, the test had demonstrated that the linear-shaped charge intended to separate the forward skirt extension would sever cleanly. The test had also measured the shock that the charge created. Built as a single, solid aluminum cylinder, 6 feet long (1.8 meters long) by 12 feet in diameter (3.7 meters in diameter), the forward skirt extension’s design enabled it to withstand the loads of the first stage and to support the weight of the upper stage. Michael A. Kahn, Executive Vice President of ATK Space Systems, remarked that the successful test represented an important milestone for the program, validating key parameters to support the upcoming Ares-I-X flight test.(NASA, “Test in Development of NASA’s New Crew Rocket Is Successful,” news release 09-022, 30 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-022_Ares_1-X_Sep_test.html (accessed 14 January 2010); ATK, “ATK Successfully Conducts NASA Ares 1-X Separation Test,” press release, 30 January 2009, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=892 (accessed 7 March 2011); Todd Halvorson, “NASA Stages Key Test in Advance of Ares 1X,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2009.)
South Korea’s rocket Naro 1, which had launched 25 August, failed to deliver its payload to orbit. South Korean Vice Minister of Education, Science, and Technology Kim Jung Hyun explained to the media that the fairing had failed to separate properly when the satellite reached its target altitude, causing the satellite to overshoot its mark and, probably, to burn up in the atmosphere after falling back toward Earth.(Heejin Koo, “South Korean Satellite Burned Up After Orbit Failure,” Bloomberg News, 26 August 2009.)
Amateur rocket enthusiast Steve Eves broke two world records when he successfully launched his 0.1-scale model of a Saturn-V rocket from the Maryland-Delaware Rocketry Association’s home field on Maryland’s Eastern Shore. At 36 feet (10.97 meters) and 1,648 pounds (748 kilograms), the model rocket was the largest and heaviest amateur rocket launched and recovered to date. Eves had powered his Saturn-V model with nine motors—eight of them were 13,000- Newton-second-N-Class motors and one was a 77,000-Newton-second-P-class motor—that lifted the rocket 4,440 feet (1,353.31 meters) straight up into the air. Eves, an auto-body repair specialist by trade, had begun working on his Saturn-V model two years before the launch, after tracking down schematics on the Internet and locating old NASA drawings. Eves had built the skeleton using seven-ply aircraft-grade plywood and the tubular skin using nearly 300 square feet (91.44 square meters) of Luan plywood, which he had coated with fiberglass made out of 14 gallons (53 liters) of resin. The project cost Eves US$25,000, including US$13,000 for the fuel alone. NASA contacted Eves about displaying the model at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama, beneath an original Saturn V. Although Eves had considered launching the rocket a second time, he remarked that he would rather not risk a second launch, preferring instead to retire the model rocket and place it on display for people to enjoy.(Davin Coburn, “Rocket Record: The Largest, Heaviest Amateur Rocket Ever Launched,” Popular Mechanics, 28 April 2009.)
NASA announced the successful demonstration of an inflatable heat shield slowing and protecting itself as it entered the atmosphere at hypersonic speeds—the first time that anyone had successfully flown an inflatable reentry capsule. NASA launched the Inflatable Re-entry Vehicle Experiment (IRVE) on a 50-foot (15.2-meter) Black Brant–9 sounding rocket, from NASA’s WFF on Wallops Island, Virginia, at 8:52 a.m. (EDT). Made of several layers of silicone-coated Kevlar, the heat shield inflated with nitrogen several minutes after launch, from a 15-inch- diameter (38-centimeter-diameter) payload to a 10-foot-diameter (3-meter-diameter) mushroom- shaped aeroshell. The inflation process, which occurred on schedule at an altitude of 124 miles (200 kilometers), required fewer than 90 seconds. Six-and-a-half minutes into flight, at an altitude of 50 miles (80.5 kilometers), the aeroshell entered the key phase of the demonstration, experiencing its peak heating and pressure measurements for approximately 30 seconds. An onboard telemetry system collected data from its instruments, broadcasting that information to engineers in real time. The entire mission lasted approximately 20 minutes, ending with splashdown in the Atlantic Ocean approximately 90 miles (145 kilometers) east of Wallops. NASA did not retrieve either the shield or the rocket. IRVE Project Manager Mary Beth Wusk, based at LaRC, remarked that, with the success of the small-scale demonstrator, NASA’s next step would be to build a more advanced aeroshell, capable of handling higher heat rates—a promising development for future planetary missions.(NASA, “NASA Launches New Technology: An Inflatable Heat Shield,” news release 09-188, 17 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-188_IRVE_launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011); Cory Nealon, “The Newest from NASA: Inflatable Brakes,” Newport News Daily Press (VA), 18 August 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Inflatable Spacecraft Shield Works, Space Test Shows,” Space.com, 17 August 2009, http://www. space.com/7144-inflatable-spacecraft-shield-works-space-test-shows.html (accessed 12 September 2011).)
