Pravda article stated that the day was “not far distant when a Soviet human being will rocket into space.”
Israel fired a multistage solid-propellent Shavit (Meteor) II rocket to an altitude of 80 kilometers, releasing a sodium-cloud meteorological payload.
Atlas booster 111-D, to be used for Ranger I, was erected on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral.
First Italian launching of scientific sounding rocket in cooperative program with United States, a Nike-Cajun launched from a range in Sardinia to a height of over 100 miles, and released a cloud of sodium vapor visible for many miles.
USAF fired a Blue Scout rocket from Point Arguello, Calif., aimed at a point some 27,600 miles out in space and over the South Pole, to measure low-energy protons originating from the Sun.
Power run completed the test series on the Kiwi B-1A reactor system being conducted at the Nevada Test Site by AEC’s Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Fourth in a series of test reactors in the joint AEC-NASA nuclear rocket propulsion program, Kiwi B-lA was disassembled for examination at the conclusion of the test runs.
NASA Aerobee research rocket with University of Michigan payload shot to 252-mile altitude from Wallops Station.
Enormous reception for Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov in Red Square, Moscow. That evening at a Kremlin reception, Premier Nikita Khrushchev made an impromptu speech in which he asserted that the Soviet Union could construct a rocket with an explosive warhead equivalent to 100 million tons of TNT.
Static test of 111 seconds’ duration of Saturn booster was successful, the final SA-1 flight qualification test of the S-I stage.
NASA selected Vitro Engineering Co. for negotiation of a design contract for an engine maintenance and disassembly building, one of the facilities to be a part of the National Nuclear Rocket Development Center.
Swedish scientists fired a U.S. Areas rocket to 55.8-mile altitude from Arctic Circle test range at Vidsel.
NASA announced that a complete F-l engine had begun a series of static test firings at Edwards Rocket Test Center, Calif.
NASA fired Nike-Asp rocket carrying aluminum thermite and sodium pellets to an altitude of 34 miles, one of a series of sodium cloud firings in connection with similar launchings in Italy.
NASA Bios (biological investigation of space) payload launched by Argo D-8 booster rocket from Pacific Missile Range, but veered sharply off course 57 seconds after launch.
F-l rocket engine tested in first of firing series of the complete flight system.
Mercury-Redstone booster for MR-4 flight was erected on pad 5 at Atlantic Missile Range.
First of four scheduled Skylark rocket firings was launched from Woomera in the joint United States-Australian ultraviolet survey of the southern skies.
Development time schedule for Dyna-Soar was reduced when DOD authorized the USAF to move directly from B-52 drop tests to unmanned and then manned orbital flights. This eliminated the previous interim stage of suborbital flights to be powered by the Titan II booster. USAF announced it was canceling the Titan II development contract held by the Martin Co. and negotiating a new contract for a larger booster.
NASA Nike-Cajun rocket launched from Wallops Station, carrying 60-pound payload ejecting explosive charges, which fired at intervals from 20- to 80-mile altitude to provide data on density of the atmosphere.
announced that it had fired new, powerful carrier rocket more than 7,400 miles to within less than five-eighths of a mile from its Central Pacific target.
Successful test of a new way to steer large-size rockets was announced by United Technology Corp., an experimental method called liquid thrust vector control (TVC), in which a gas or liquid is sprayed into the exhaust path of a rocket engine, deflecting the exhaust and thereby turning the vehicle. The test was made with a 450,000-pound-thrust solid-fuel engine.
NASA bidders conference on a contract to produce the booster (S-I) stage of the Saturn vehicle was held at the Municipal Auditorium, New Orleans.
USAF Atlas E missile made successful 5,000-mile flight at Atlantic Missile Range. The payload included the guidance equipment for the Centaur rocket, radiation sensors, and a nose cone intended for the Minuteman. Data capsule was recovered.
Solid-propellent rocket motor generating nearly 500,000 pounds of thrust was fired in a static test of 80-second duration by United Technology Corp. at Sunnyvale, Calif., under USAF contract.
NASA fired a four-stage solid-fuel Trailblazer rocket from Wallops Station, Virginia, in the first of a series of reentry tests. Two stages boosted the rocket to 167 miles; then the other two drove the nose cone down through the atmosphere at 14,000 miles per hour.
Small liquid-fuel rocket was fueled and fired while floating in ocean off Point Mugu in Aerojet-General demonstration of this launching technique.
Small rocket lift device demonstrated publicly for the first time at Fort Eustis, Va., a rocket belt developed by Bell Aero-systems, which lifted Harold M. Graham in a controlled free flight to an altitude of 15 feet and "a standup landing 150 feet from his starting point.
Aerojet-General test-fired large solid-propellent rocket motor which generated a half million pounds’ thrust, at Sacramento, Calif.
Army successfully fired a Nike-Zeus antimissile missile from White Sands Missile Range in the first flight test of all three rocket motors. During November: Studies by General Electric’s Space Sciences Laboratory, under NASA contract, disclosed that the heat barrier encountered by vehicles returning from deep space will be at least 2% times more severe than previously estimated. During November: Textron’s Bell Aerospace Corp. completed 81 flight tests with cold gas one-man propulsion system in USAF C-131 aircraft flying “Keplerian trajectories.”
Iris rocket, new solid-propellent single-stage sounding rocket, failed to attain programed flight from Wallops Island, reaching only 86 miles’ altitude instead of 160 miles.
U.S.S.R. announced that third flight of current series of Pacific tests of new multistage carrier rocket was successful.
Two experiments to measure atmospheric winds, temperature, and density in relatively high altitudes conducted from Wallops Island in two four-stage Argo D-4 rocket launches. Sodium clouds were released at near 120 statute miles and again at 228 miles in first launch, and at 118 and 230 miles in the second launch. French scientists participated by using special optical instruments to observe the brilliant orange and yellow clouds which stirred a rash of public inquiries to newspapers from hundreds of miles around.
Republic of China announced plans to initiate a rocket research
The Soviet Union announced it had fired fifth multistage rocket 7,500 miles into the Central Pacific, with all stages functioning perfectly and with the nose cone landing in the target area with a high degree of accuracy.
Army Nike-Zeus antimissile rocket with active second stage successfully fired at Point Mugu, Calif.
Plans to launch a Japanese Kappa 6 sounding rocket within a year announced by Yugoslavia.
NASA announced that Government-owned Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans would be the site for fabrication and assembly of the first stage of Saturn as well as for making stages for larger booster.
launched fourth multistage rocket 7,500 miles into the Pacific.
Navy barge Compromise, carrying first Saturn booster, stuck in the mud in the Indian River just south of Cape Canaveral. Released several hours later, the Saturn was delayed only 24 hours in its 2,200-mile journey from Huntsville.
Reported that Navy had been launching telephone poles with rocket boost in test of floating launching requirements.
NASA selected United Aircraft to make feasibility study of ion rocket application for long space flights.
AEC-NASA jointly announced plans to negotiate with an industrial team for a first-phase contract for the development of the Nerva nuclear rocket engine. Team selected for the Nerva part of Project Rover consisted of Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Electric Corp.
announced completion of its series of Pacific rocket tests with a successful shot of 7,500 miles. Since series began on September 13, Tass had announced a total of eight shots, emphasizing the accuracy of what was described as a “fundamentally new type of guidance system.”
NASA announced that instrumented Venus probe to be launched next year would be launched by an Atlas-Agena B rather than a Centaur rocket as originally planned.
Army Nike-Zeus fired from White Sands Proving Ground met all test objectives, including controlled high-velocity in the atmosphere and evaluation of solid-fuel rocket motors and guidance system.
Navy YFNB barge was obtained by NASA to serve as a replacement for the Palaemon in transporting of the Saturn booster to Cape Canaveral.
NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office invited industry to submit proposals for participation in development of Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application), a part of Project Rover initiated in 1955 by USAF-AEC.
First Saturn (SA-1) booster began water trip to Cape Canaveral on Navy barge Compromise after overland detour around Wheeler Dam.
NASA announced that Ira H. Abbott, Director of Advanced Research and Technology, would retire in January after 32 years service with NACA and NASA. Beginning with the Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929, Abbott became internationally known for his aerodynamic research, in more recent years as supervisor of X-15, supersonic transport, nuclear rocket, and advanced reentry development programs.
NASA selected GE’s Space Sciences Laboratory and Avco Corp. for negotiation of contracts to study feasibility of magneto gas dynamic electric rocket or thermal arc jet rocket engines.
Plans for the development of a two-man Mercury capsule were announced by Robert Gilruth, Director of NASA's Manned Spacecraft Center. The two-man capsule, to be built by McDon-nel Aircraft Corp., would be similar in shape to the Mercury capsule but slightly larger and two to three times heavier. Its booster rocket was announced to be the USAF Titan II, scheduled for flight test early in 1962. One of the major objectives in the two-man capsule program would be a test of orbital rendezvous, in which the two-man capsule would be put into orbit by the Titan II and would attempt to rendezvous with an Agena stage put into orbit by an Atlas rocket. Total cost for a dozen two-man capsules plus boosters and other equipment was estimated at $500,000,000. Program name later announced as Gemini.
Segmented solid-propellent rocket engine fired by United Technology Corp. at Sunnyvale, generating over 200,000 pounds of thrust in 80-second firing. Developed under NASA contract, center section of engine contained over 55,000 pounds of propellant, the largest single piece yet manufactured in the United States.
Army launched Speedball rocket successfully from the island of Roi-Namur on Kwajalein atoll in the Southwest Pacific, the first target rocket to be used in Nike-Zeus development.
Aerojet-General Corp. announced first successful underwater launching of a liquid-fueled rocket, an Aerobee fired from a water test basin at Azuza, Calif.
Titan II, an advanced ICBM and the booster designated for NASA’s two-man orbital flights, was successfully captive-fired for the first time at the Martin Co.’s Denver facilities. The test not only tested the flight vehicle but the checkout and launch equipment intended for operational use.
Soviet Marshal Kiril S. Moskalenko, chief of rocket forces, declared that 95 percent of all Soviet rockets fired reached their targets. (Article in Red Star timed to coincide with first firing of new rocket series in the Pacific.)
NASA fired first seven-stage Trailblazer rocket from Wallops Station, first three stages firing meteorite to 175-mile altitude and next four stages back through the atmosphere in a high-speed reentry experiment.
NASA Argo D-4 rocket was launched from Wallops, reaching an altitude of 585 miles and landing 817 miles out in the Atlantic, to gather data on the density of electrically charged helium atoms in the upper atmosphere.
nasa witnesses testified before a subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee that Centaur rocket development administration had in recent months been streamlined. Problems in the program were attributed to too austere a budget at the start, “growing pains” of a new organization, and unexpected technics difficulties in utilizing high-energy liquid hydrogen as a rocket fuel.
In an interview with fourteen American newspaper editors, the text of which was released, Premier Nikita Khrushchev asserted that showing of documentary film on the Soviet antimissile missile to the Communist-sponsored Peace Conference last week had been overruled by those who felt its showing “might have been misunderstood” as a warlike gesture. “Had the people been shown this film,” Khrushchev said, “they would have seen what kind of a machine it is. You can say our rocket can hit a fly in outer space.”
Second joint U.S.-Sweden sounding rocket launched from Kronog&rd site in project to gather data on noctilucent clouds, the Nike-Cajun rocket sending instrument-packed nose cone 43.4 miles (70 km.) high before it parachuted back to earth.
usaf would undertake “development program to advance the technology of large solid propellant rocket motors” under recent nasa-dod agreement, dod announced. Program was designed to “keep open the possibility of expedited development” in case large solid-propellant motors should be required for future space boosters. Principal effort would be devoted to providing techniques for and proving feasibility of manufacturing, handling, transporting, and firing motors measuring 260-in. diameter and capable of about six million lbs. thrust.
NASA-supplied Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by Swedish Committee of Space Research at Kronog&rd, Sweden, in experiment to study auroral event in progress, the rocket performing as predicted but payload failing to separate.
nasa launched Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, its 256-lb. payload lofted to 92-mi. altitude and 60-mi. distance. Efforts to recover the payload were not successflli, but scientists were able to analyze data telemetered during flight about performance of an attitude control system as well as four scientific experiments: to measure solar flux in two llitra-violet spectral regions; to measure radiation emerging from the top of the earth’s atmosphere; to obtain llitraviolet photographs of Venus from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and to study distribution of atmospheric atomic hydrogen and Lyman Alpha radiation. Also flight-tested was an experimental, transistorized telemetry system.	_	_
President Kennedy gave the order to resume nuclear testing in the atmosphere, to be conducted by Joint Task Force 8 under the command of Maj. Gen. A. D. Starbird. April #5:’'Saturn (SA-2) booster rocket was successfully launched from ame in its second flight test. Like the first Saturn vehicle launched on October 27, 1961, the Saturn fired only the first-stage engines, generating 1.3 million lbs. of thrust. Dummy second ana third stages filled with water were detonated at 65 miles altitude (Project High Water) and the water ballast formed an artificial cloud. Maximum velocity was slightly more than 3,700 mph. Modifications to decrease the slight fuel sloshing encountered near the end of the previous flight test were apparently
nasa launched Aerobee research rocket with 213-lb. payload containing four scientific experiments from Wallops Station. Reaching an altitude of almost 125 statute miles, the nose cone was recovered by an S-62 helicopter some 52 miles down range.
An astronautics ship together with a floating drydock has been proposed as a launching platform for icbm’s and large space boosters, including Saturn. LCdr. Burton Edelson (usn), writing for the Bureau of Ships Journal, contended that a 10,000-ton ship, such as the seaplane tender Curtiss, could be specially" outfitted as an integrated astronautics ship and could handle all solid-fuel launchings, including Minuteman. An accompanying floating drydock could handle large liquid-fuel rocket launchings up to and including Saturn.
A four-stage nasa Scout rocket carried P-21A probe payload 3,910 miles into space and 4,370 miles downrange from Wallops Station, Va. In 97-minute flight measurements were taken of the ionospheric electron density profiles, ion density, and types of ions, data needed to improve communication between earth and space.
Saturn SA-3 reached 104-mi. altitude in ballistic flight from Cape Canaveral, the fully-fueled S-I stage performing as planned. Upper stages were filled with water simulating weight of live stages. At peak altitude, rocket was detonated by radio command and the ballast water was released into the ionosphere, forming massive cloud of ice particles several mi. in diameter. From the cloud experiment (Project Highwater II) scientists hoped to gain data on atmospheric physics. This was third straight test-flight success of nasa’s Saturn and first flight with maximum fuel onboard. Vehicle generated 1.3 million-lb. thrust on flight of 4 min., 55 sec.
Aerojet-General Corp. proposed a booster two to three times larger than Nova, to be launched from the sea. Two-stage Sea Dragon with takeoff weight of 20 to 100 million pounds would be assembled in existing drydocks, towed to point of launch, and launched from the water without gantry cranes or launch pads. Both stages would be recovered in the water by hydrodynamic deceleration.
nasa indicated it would begin series of flights with an inflatable paraglider in mid-1963. Flights would provide information on frequency and size of micrometeoroid particles in space and allow post-flight laboratory study of impacts caused by such particles. Paraglider would be launched by Aerobee research rocket from White Sands Missile Range (wsmb) to height of 700,000 ft., and would descend to earth at speed of mach 5. Its re-entry path would be almost straight down—at an angle of 82°. Inflated paraglider would be 14-ft. long with span of 18 ft.; it would weigh 170 lbs. during launch and 85 lbs. during re-entry.
Maj. Robert M. White (usaf) was awarded the Flying Tiger Pilot’s Trophy in recognition of his record 314,000-ft.-altitude flight in the X-15 rocket research aircraft.
Indonesian scientist Dr. Hadinoto said Indonesia hoped to launch her first space rocket in 1964 for scientific purposes, with aid provided by U.S.S.R.
nasa launched rigidized Echo-type balloon on Thor booster to 922 mi. in inflation test. Nicknamed “Big Shot,” the 13-story balloon was inflated successfully and was visible for 10 minutes from Cape Canaveral. Movie film capsule parachuted into sea northeast of San Salvador was recovered by three pararescue men of the Air Rescue Service. This was the largest manmade object sent into space, the previous record being held by the 100-ft ECHO i.
Nike-Zeus antimissile was shot outside earth’s atmosphere and successfully maneuvered with controlled blasts of rocket exhaust, in test over the pmr.
Sixth and final powered test of Kiwi BAA ground-test reactor for Project Rover was successful at Jackass Flats, Nev. Newsmen were permitted to watch this test from a mile away, the first test to which outside observers had been allowed. Kiwi B-4A, looking more like a flyable engine than some of its predecessors, was mounted on a remote-controlled railroad flatcar, consumed tons of liquid hydrogen in the half-power, five-min. test. Part of the joint aec-nasa program for development of a nuclear-powered rocket, the series of ground reactors tested different reactor designs, fuels, metals, and accessories.
Second successful test of usaf Titan II rocket, 5,000-mi. flight from amr. Second generation ballistic missile with storable liquid fuels will be used as a booster in nasa’s Project Gemini.
Reginald Lascelles, personal assistant and spokesman for Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Lovell was afraid the new radiation belt would “seriously affect space exploration by radio astronomy.” September mariner ii, 1.2 million mi. from earth on its voyage to vicinity of Venus, successfully swung a yard-wide antenna around and focused it on earth, sending radio beam back to scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The antenna maneuver was performed on command of on-board timer and was first of two in-flight maneuvers crucial to correcting the probe’s path to within 10,000 mi. of Venus; after scientists evaluated results of antenna orientation, nasa Goldstone Tracking Station would send radio command to fire rocket aboard the 447-lb. craft.
Atlantic Research Corporation introduced new Archer solidpropellant sounding rocket for use during International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), 1964-65. Archer successfully completed its initial flight to 75-mi. altitude carrying 35-lb. payload, at Pt. Mugu, California. Flight testing would be completed early in
Two gsfc scientific sounding rockets launched from Wallops Station. An Iris research rocket launched with test instrumentation did not achieve programed altitude and landed 175 statute miles downrange. A four-stage Argo D-4 launch vehicle carried 78-lb payload to an altitude of almost 530 statute miles to record the intensity and distribution of radio noise above the ionosphere at extremely low frequencies.
nasa announced that sea damage to Wallops Station, Va., occurring earlier in the month was not extensive, and that rocket firings would be resumed in a few days. Although launch pads and some tracking gear on the island itself had been damaged by water, the more important tracking and data acquisition facilities on the mainland were undamaged.
nasa fired a Scout rocket from Wallops Station, Va. The rocket flew 135 miles high and about 800 miles downrange in a re-entry test reaching speeds of 19,000 mph.
30th sounding rocket launched by three-man team at McMurdo Station, Antarctica, the program calling for 60 Areas rocket launchings at rate of one a week. Purpose of launchings was to obtain information on sudden warming of upper atmosphere that occurs during Antarctic spring.
nasa launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which detonated 12 grenades from 25 to 57 mi. altitude. Fifteen minutes later a Nike-Asp sounding rocket was launched. It released a cloud of sodium vapor from 26 to 144 mi. altitude in a study of wind velocities and upper-atmosphere densities.
Naval Ordnance Laboratory announced use of Loki launch tube attached to the barrel of a 5-inch/54 naval rifle to launch the Hasp (high altitude sounding rocket) for weather soundings from ships anywhere at sea.
United Technology Corp. fired 35-ton segmented solid booster for a duration of 130 seconds, developing thrust of slightly more than 100,000	lbs for the entire burning time.
Soviet Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, executed in 1937 on Stalin’s orders and exonerated in 1956, was honored in the official military newspaper, Red Star. It was pointed out that in 1932 Tukhachevsky insisted on the development of rocket engines and that he persisted in this effort until purged.
Japanese Foreign Ministry announced it had filed protest with U.S.S.R. against Soviets’ establishing of restricted areas in the Pacific for its rocket tests. Japan said barring ships and aircraft from the areas violated rights of other nations to the open seas.
Third successful static-test firing of “Old Salty”—an H-l engine that had been submerged in salt water for four hours before each of its test runs. Purpose of tests was to determine feasibility and costs of recovering, rebuilding, and reusing booster engines as opposed to cost of new engines. Early results indicated that engines could be recovered and rebuilt at a cost of about 10% of new engines.
nasa-aec designated the Jackass Flats area of the aec Test Site as the Nuclear Rocket Development Station. Placed under management of the joint nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), the new station has been used since 1959 for ground tests of Kiwi reactors.
Franco-American scientific sounding rocket launchings coordinated when two U.S. launchings were made from Wallops Island while France launched one from Algeria and failed to launch one from France. First U.S. rocket (Nike-Cajun) fired at 5:57 AM carried a Langmuir probe to determine electron density and the temperature of the “E” layer of the ionosphere (50-100 miles altitude); the second (Nike-Apache) launched at 6:15 AM, released a sodium vapor cloud to 106-mi. altitude which spread over 100 miles of the eastern seaboard. “Sporadic E” regions of the ionosphere have electron density that reflects much higher radio frequencies, and may result from wind shears. On November 7, gsfc scientists undertook the first sounding rocket _ firings to examine correlation between “E” region and wind shears.
Sweden launched U.S. Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, first of series of U.S.-Swedish cooperative program for peaceflli exploration of the upper atmosphere, the rocket reaching 68-mi. altitude after launch from KronogSrd range in northern Sweden. Fifteen minutes after launch, canister containing sample cloud particles was recovered; particles would be analyzed to provide information on composition and origin of noctilucent clouds.
usaf Titan II rocket flew 5,000 miles in its third success of five test launchings. All test objectives were met on the 30-min. flight from Cape Canaveral to target area near Ascension Island in the South Atlantic Ocean.
High-altitude nuclear test over Johnston Island in the Pacific failed when Thor rocket and the thermonuclear device were destroyed by the safety officer “because the tracking system was malfunctioning.” Debris fell into the ocean well within the 520-mile-radius safety area around Johnston Island.
' Joint U.S.-Japanese sounding rocket launching at Wallops Station, Va., was postponed because of high winds.
16th of Project Firefly series of high-altitude rocket launchings was conducted at Eglin afb, Fla., the two-stage Nike-Cajun rocket releasing chemicals at about 50-mi. altitude. Chemicals caused formation of artificial cloud which ground stations tracked to determine upper atmosphere movements.
Four German scientists, including Eugen Saenger, former director of Stuttgart Institute of Physics, West Germany, were reportedly employed by Egyptian government to direct Egypt’s new rocket design and development program.
Prof. G. V. Petrovich, Soviet rocket specialist, wrote in Komsolakaya Pravda that within a few decades the solar system wlli seem no more forbidding than once-formidable Antarctica does today. When the solar system is conquered, man wlli be able to undertake interstellar flignts. Noting that the rockets boosting vostok iii and vostok iv into orbit were 20,000,000 horsepower, he predicted that during the Twentieth Century rocket liners would be built with engine capacity greater than 1,000,000,000 horsepower.
U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, meeting in Geneva, set up a ten-nation working group under the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee to examine international exchanges of scientific information on outer space. Takeo Hatanaka of Japan was named chairman; other nations represented were the U.S., U.K., U.S.S.R., Belgium, Chad, France, Hungary, Romania, and the United Arab Republic. Another group, chaired by W. A. Sarabhai of India, was set up to examine the U.S. proposal of an international research rocket range to be established near the Equator.	...	.
Titan II underwent a successful 20-second full-power captive firing at Cape Canaveral and was considered ready for its first flight test in about a week. usAF-developed Titan II produced 430.000	lbs. thrust in its 1st stage; the 2nd stage would add another 100.000	lbs. thrust; compared with 400,000 lbs. for the Atlas E and 380,000 for Titan I. Titan II, already selected as booster for nasa’s 2-man Gemini capsule, burns storable fuels that emit a stream of hot, clear gases rather than flame.
Dr. Marvin H. Gold, manager of Propellant Chemicals Div. of Aerojet-General’s Solid Rocket Plant, was awarded Navy Meritorious Public Service Citation by onr for his contributions to high energy rocket propulsion for advanced Polaris.
First of a series of 80 rocket probes to determine wind patterns over Cape Canaveral initiated by nasa with launch of a single-stage Nike to 80,000 ft. where it laid down a white smoke screen for subsequent photographic study.
nasa announced the advanced version of liquid -hydrogen/liquid-oxygen rocket engine had completed its preliminary flight rating tests. In the test program, the 15,000-lb.-thrust engine underwent 20 static-firings for a total of 2,820 sec. of firing; it also passed humidity and vibration tests.
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, told conference of Manufacturing Chemists’ Association that nuclear rocket fuel “. . . may eventually make it an attractive matter to bring lunar ore to the earth for processing. . . .” Nuclear fuel would reduce the cost of each pound of payload.
Testimony before the Joint (Congressional) Committee on Atomic Energy revealed management difficulties on Project Pluto nuclear-powered vehicle, to fly at 2,000 mph within the atmosphere. Dr. Leland Haworth, member of aec, testified that aec was “awaiting a firm decision” from dod on whether the project would be continued. Reactor for nuclear ramjet rocket, under development since 1956, had been successfully ground-tested in Nevada. Dr. Harold Brown, director of dod research and engineering, said dod hoped that a decision could be reached “within a month.” An estimated $500 million would be required to continue the project through flight-test phase.
An Australian rocket with five cameras was launched from Woomera as tiros iv passed overhead. The rocket’s camera took photographs of clouds from 80-mile altitude while tiros iv made simultaneous photography of cloud cover from 400-mile altitude.
Nevada (Extension of the aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo) became operational, with Robert P. Helgeson as Chief. Located at Las Vegas, the Nevada Extension assumed financial and contract responsibilities for construction and operation of facllities at Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), which will conduct static ground testing of nuclear rockets.
aec—dod high-altitude nuclear test failed, the safety officer of Joint Task Force 8 destroying the Thor booster and nuclear payload within minutes after liftoff because of booster’s malfunctioning. This was third failure of four attempted high-altitude tests in the current Pacific series.
Metal fragments resembling top of gasoline drum, thought to have fallen from the MA-7 Atlas booster, were discovered near Barkly East, South Africa.
dod announced successful static firing of the Thiokol-developed acceleration rocket for usaf’s X-20 manned space glider. X-20 previously known as Dyna Soar.
nasa signed three letter contracts with naa’s Rocketdyne Division for further development and production of the F-l and J-2 rocket engines. The contracts provided: (1) $1 million for long lead-time items in F-l engine r&d; (2) $3.4 million for early production effort on 55 F-l engines; and (3) $1.7 million for early production work on 59 J-2 engines. Ultimate value of the final contracts, extending through 1965, would be about $289 million.
Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey ruled unanimously that Thiokol Chemical Corporation, producer of the rocket engines for the X-15, was liable for property damage caused in testing the engine. The Court ordered $25,605 damages to be paid to 15 home owners near the Picatinny Arsenal, Rockaway Township, for cracked foundations, floors, walls, chimneys, and fireplaces. Thiokol stated that it would have to pass these costs on to the Federal Government, since it had a cost-plus contract.
aec and nasa announced that the Catalytic Construction Co. had been selected as construction contractor for nuclear rocket development facilities for Project Rover at the aec Nevada Test Site near Las Vegas, Nev.
Navy launched solid-propellant Terrier-Asp IV sounding rocket from Point Arguello in successflli first flight test.
Aerobee 150A launched from nasa Wallops Station, the rocket reaching 117-mi. altitude in experiment to measure absolute intensity of the spectrum of stars with 50 angstrom resolution and to measure ultraviolet fluxes. No usable data were received because rocket failed to despin as planned.
Announced that Georgia Nuclear Laboratories’ nuclear reactor had been licensed by aec to operate at one megawatt. Laboratories would participate with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. in development of nasa’s Rift rocket stage.
X-15 No. 3 flown by Major Robert White (usaf) in stability test at speed exceeding mach 5, with lower tail-fin absent and with nose raised to 25° angle above the horizon. Successful flight was the 75th by the rocket research airplane.
X-15 No. 1 piloted by Cdr. Forrest Petersen (usn) made its first forced landing in 47 flights when its rocket engine failed to ignite in mid-air after two attempts. X—15 was brought down without incident at Mud Lake, Nevada.
United Technology Corp. experimented with hypergolic ignition system, spraying highly reactive fluid into nozzle end of solid-propellant rocket motor. Fluid immediately ignited the motor, which developed more than 100,000-lbs. thrust in the test.
Because of unnamed technical difficulties, flight test of X-15 rocket research aircraft was postponed minutes before X-15 was to be dropped from its mother ship.
U.S. transferred to Dominican Republic its rocket tracking station at Sabana, D.R. Formerly used to track missiles launched from Cape Canaveral toward Ascension Island, the facllity would be used as a training center.	_	_
Filth attempt to launch nasa’s Centaur space booster was canceled at the last second at amr. Engines on the Atlas first stage had been ignited when an automatic detection device spotted a malfunction and shut off the engines.
In a speech to the American Ordnance Association, Dr. Glenn Seaborg, aec Chairman, said that nuclear energy provided the most feasible means of accomplishing long voyages in space: “To perform long-range, manned missions, it is essential that we increase the specific impulse (amount of thrust per pound of propellant) of the propulsion system well beyond the values that can be achieved with chemical combustion. . . .” He stated that a hydrogen-fluorine rocket system, now in research phase, can provide up to approximately 475-lbs. thrust per pound of propellant (kerosene-oxygen—300 lbs.). A nuclear rocket, which utllizes hydrogen (through its heat exchanger system) could provide highest specific impulse of 800 and above. He reviewed progress of Project Rover and Nerva.
usaf announced that it had begun negotiation with United Technology Corp. for development of solid-fuel motors for use in Titan III space booster.
Pakistan made its first space experiment, the launching of a Rehbar I sounding rocket from a site near Karachi. Part of a cooperative program between nasa and the Pakistan Upper Atmosphere and Space Research Committee, the Rehbar I was a Nike-Cajun rocket supplied by the U.S., carrying a sodium vapor payload to an altitude of about 80 miles to measure upper-altitude winds. Several more such launches are programed for the next few months. Prior to the launches, Pakistani scientists and technicians were given training in nasa research and launch centers.
usaf selected proposals submitted by United Technology Corp. for the 120-inch solid motor and stl-arma for the guidance efforts to be placed in Titan III which wlli serve as a large space booster. Contracts were contingent upon final program approval.
General Dynamics/Convair reported developing a new laser with increased pulse rate. When perfected, new laser would be able to machine and trim any material with greater speed and accuracy than available by any other means. Ocober 12: usaf Titan II rocket achieved all test objectives in flight from Cape Canaveral. This was fourth success in six test launchings of the rocket, a modified version of which will be used in nasa’s Project Gemini beginning in 1964.
nasa fired a Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which released a sodium vapor cloud between 25 and 74 miles altitude. Rays of the setting sun colored the sodium cloud red, instead of sodium vapor’s normal yellow.
100-inch diameter, 53-foot long, solid-fuel rocket static-fired for 98 seconds and developed 600,000 pounds of thrust by Aerojet-General, the largest solid rocket fired to date.
X-15 No. 2 flown at 3,511 mph and to about 73,000 feet by Major Robert Rushworth (usaf) with 103 seconds of rocket power in heat resistance test. Temperature of tail surface was reported to have reached near 1,250° F.
Four-stage Journeyman rocket carried 145-lb. payload to 1,058-mi. altitude, from nasa Wallops Station. Primary experiment was measurement of the intensity of RF energy at medium frequencies; secondary experiment was measurement of electron densities in the upper ionosphere and investigation of possibility of using ionosphere as a focusing medium in future radio astronomy mapping experiments. Payload landed about 1,323 mi. from launch site in the Atlantic Ocean.
Second successful high altitude U.S. nuclear test in Operation Dominic was conducted near Johnston Island in the Pacific, a low-yield explosion at altitude of between 20 and 30 mi. Specially-built rocket with Sergeant motor was used to loft the nuclear warhead.
Rocketdyne Division of naa announced plans to expand its Canoga Park, Calif., facilities to manufacture F-l and J-2 rocket engines for nasa’s Advanced Saturn launch vehicle.
nasa launched three-stage, solid-fuel Ram-B (Radio Attenuation Measurement) rocket from Wallops Station, Va., all contact with the vehicle lost 11 sec. after second-stage ignition. Project Ram was designed to provide information on communications blackout during space vehicle re-entry.
U.S.S.R. delegate to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space expressed approval of a subcommittee’s recommendation to establish an international sounding rocket launching base on the geomagnetic equator. U.S. delegate Plimpton welcomed the Soviet position.
nasa launched Aerobee sounding rocket from Wallops Station, the 259-lb. instrumented payload reaching 106-mi. altitude in test to map sources of photons in specific wavelengths in the nighttime sky. Payload landed about 61 mi. downrange, with recovery not attempted.
nasa selected Sverdrup and Parcel of St. Louis as contractor for the design criteria and initial master planning for the Mississippi Test Facility, the 13,500-acre site that would eventually contain 6 or more static test stands for testing booster stages of Saturn and Nova vehicles.
U.S. and Japan launched a joint sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va. nasa furnished the Nike-Cajun rocket, launch facilities, data acquisition, and a langmuir probe to measure electron temperature. Japan furnished instrumentation, a device designed to measure electron temperature and density simultaneously, functions which up to now have required two separate instruments. Height of the flight was 75.6 mi.
aec-dod jointly announced that repair work on launch facilities at Johnston Island would delay further high-altitude nuclear tests for some weeks. Damage occurred July 25 when Thor rocket and its nuclear warhead were deliberately destroyed on the pad.
Sparobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station with 90-lb. payload to measure electron and neutral particle temperatures at 75 to 225-mi. altitudes. Vehicle reached peak altitude of 214 mi. and payload impacted in Atlantic Ocean about 217 mi. away. Secondary objectives were measurement of ion and neutral particle density and flight testing of newly designed Thermosphere Probe system. Experiment was joint project of University of Michigan and nasa Goddard Space Might Center.
dod and nasa signed an agreement that neither agency would begin the development of a launch vehicle or a space booster without the written acknowledgment of the other.
Titan I liquid-fueled engine strapped to the side of a 175-ton solid-fuel rocket engine and the configuration test-fired by Aerojet-General Corp. to evaluate the compatibility of liquid and solid engines for the usaf’s Titan III space booster. The configuration generated 700,000 lbs. of thrust.
Rehbar II sounding rocket launched from site near Karachi, a continuation of U.S.-Pakistan joint program. First launching of Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying sodium vapor payloads was June 7.
afcrl scientists launched a second artificial meteor by means of a multistage rocket fired from Wallops Island. The meteor traveled at a re-entry speed of 12 kilometers per second, exceeding that attained in the previous experiment of April 21, 1961.
Atlas rocket for manned orbital flight MA-8 was static-fired successfully for 11 seconds at Cape Canaveral.
First successful reactor tests using liquid hydrogen as coolant were performed by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory at the Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), Jackass Flats, Nev. “Cold flow” series of reactor tests involved operation of Kiwi-B reactor, previously conducted only with gaseous hydrogen. Liquid hydrogen as a propellant is planned to power the Nerva nuclear engine being developed for Projects Rover and Rift.
Joint U.S.-Norwegian-Danish Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Andoeya, Norway, with instrumented experiment to probe the ionosphere and the Northern Lights. Third in a series, the sounding rocket reached an altitude of near 68 mi.
India offered to provide launching base for U.N. international rocket probes in session of U.N. Committee for Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. India’s proposal was related to a proposal that 1964 be designated International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), and include equatorial sounding rockets to gather data above the earth’s Equator. Southern part of India lies within 10° of the Equator and would provide suitable launching site for the project.
nasa announced that Lockheed Missiles and Space Company had been selected for negotiation of a contract for the design, development, fabrication, and testing of the Rift (reactor-in-flight-test) stage. The Rift vehicle is intended to flight test the Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application) being developed jointly by nasa and aec.
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station to measure high-altitude winds and temperatures, the payload consisting of 12 special explosive charges which were ejected and detonated at intervals from 24- to 57-mi. altitude.
High-altitude nuclear test in U.S. Operation Dominic was made in Pacific test area, the sub-megaton device carried by Thor rocket to estimated altitude of 30 to 40 miles, aec reported two Soviet nuclear explosions also occurred, one a high-altitude test over central Asia and the other an atmospheric test over Soviet Arctic.
Thor booster carrying nuclear warhead for atmospheric test (Operation Dominic) was destroyed on pad at Johnston Island; reportedly there were “no injuries to personnel” and “no hazard from radioactivity.”
National Rocket Club announced the establishment of the Dr. Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award, an annual competition in the history of rocketry and astronautics, the first such competition in the field of history.
nasa announced that the first Centaur launch was due no earlier than April 20. Postponement on April 11 was caused by too low calibration of a transducer, which gave a false indication of the pressurization of the fuel systems in the Atlas booster.
Fuel tank of the Atlas booster of Ranger III was repaired from inside in 48 hours, first such repair while booster was upright on the pad. Effort of General Dynamics/Astronautics crew was necessitated by fuel leak.
nasa launched 2-stage Aerobee sounding rocket from Wallops Station to an altitude of 130 miles to obtain planning data for future solar physics projects.
House of Representatives passed a bill (H.R. 9485) to amend the Space Act of 1958 to designate March 16 as National Goddard Day, commemorating the date in 1926 when Dr. Robert H. 114 Goddard launched the first successful liquid-fuel rocket. The bill was then referred to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences.
nasa announced appointment of Bob P. Helgeson as Chief of the Nevada Extension of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo-n), effective August 1. As Chief of the Nevada Extension, Helgeson will direct construction and operation of Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), national site for testing nuclear rockets.
Two-stage Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island with 95-lb. payload to 89-mile altitude with gsfc experiment to measure electron density and electron collision frequency in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions.
usn announced tests conducted at U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, Calif., had included successful free-flight of a new type of rocket propulsion system called “Hybrid” because of its use of combination liquid and solid propellant in single motor.
Ranger III lunar shot postponed because of technical difficulties with Atlas booster rocket.
NASA’s F-l rocket engine first fired at full power (more than 1.5 million pounds of thrust) for full duration at Edwards, Calif.
International Association of Machinists (iam) workers struck at Lockheed Aircraft Corp. in California, Florida, and Hawaii. President Kennedy, invoking Taft-Hartley Act, created three-man board of inquiry to investigate the dispute; board’s recommendations, due Dec. 3, would contribute to President’s decision whether to request Federal court order barring strike for 80-day period. Included in Lockheed production items are Agena second-stage rocket, used by usaf and in nasa Ranger and Mariner programs.
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., in nasa experiment to gather data on solar radiation intensity in ultraviolet region. Rocket carried spectrophotometer package to 124-mi. altitude. Preliminary experimental results: “High voltage arcing in the instrumentation prohibited collection of scientific data ... .”
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru told Indian Parliament that India had agreed to have a rocket launching station on her territory under TT.N. auspices for international use.
nasa announced that Mercury Mark II spacecraft would be named “Gemini,” after the third constellation of the zodiac featuring the twin stars Castor and Pollux. Gemini would be a two-man spacecraft used in development of the rendezvous technique, would be 50% larger than the Mercury capsule, and launched into orbit by a Titan II booster.
nasa launched a Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which released an 80-mile-long sodium-vapor cloud to measure air density and wind direction in the upper atmosphere.
Reported that nasa had drafted for review by other Government agencies a policy statement on measures being studied for the prevention of rocket booster parts surviving re-entry, possibly injuring life and property on earth. Fragments of MA-6 booster had surprisingly survived re-entry. Measures, as reported, included programed booster destruction, perhaps at the cost of payload weight.
tiros v launched into orbit by Thor-Delta booster from Cape Canaveral, faulty guidance system placing it into elliptical orbit (apogee: 604 mi.; perigee: 367 mi.; period: 100.5 min.) instead of 400-mi. circular orbit. Cloud-cover pictures transmitted to tracking station at Wallops Station on early orbits were of excellent quality, tiros v was expected to chart the origin, formation, and movement of hurricanes, typhoons, and other storms during the August-September peak tropical storm period.
nasa launched first two of six tests of the performance of the Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket. The first carried a payload to an altitude of 58 miles above Wallops Station, the second reached 62 miles altitude.
aec announced that U.S. would begin “rocket borne” nuclear tests at an altitude of “tens of kilometers” shortly after nightfall on June 1 at the Johnston Island test area.
Unnamed nasa official said that a four-stage rocket probe would be launched in October or November to check the strength of the radiation belt created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion over the Pacific on July 9, 1962.
Reported in Tass that a Soviet expert on rocket propulsion, not mentioned by name, had said: “The creation of powerful rockets has been full of pitfalls. Our investigations and experiments have not always been successful—far from it. There have been difficulties ...”
dod announced “clearest data yet obtained of the ionosphere and the dynamics of its formation and dissipation” had been obtained by afcrl scientists, who matched experimental data from positive ion detector aboard a Thor rocket with theoretical data based on laboratory studies, within error of only two per cent, (dod Release 388-63)
First birthday of alouette i (“topside sounder”) satellite, built by Canada and launched by nasa into orbit Sept. 28, 1962. alouette was still functioning well and transmitting ionospheric data to 13 telemetry stations around the world. nasa launched four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket with instrumented payload to 645-mi. altitude from Wallops Station, in experiment to compare rocket-borne measurements of ion and electron temperatures and densities with similar data obtained by alouette. Measurements were taken by the rocket payload in the ionosphere 10 min. before alouette passed through the region and made its measurements. Data were telemetered to ground receiving stations and no recovery operation was involved. Flight was follow-on to similar experiment conducted July 2, results of which indicated close agreement in measurements. During the first year of operation, alouette i orbited the earth 4,981 times, executed 12,900 commands, and provided 2,060 hours of telemetry transmissions, (gsfc Historian; nasa Release 63211; Wallops Release 63-87; Goddard News, 9/23/63,1)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station with 230-lb. instrumented payload to measure intensity of light from stars. Equipped with four scanning photoelectric spectrophotometers, payload reached 115-mi. altitude, impacted in Atlantic Ocean 68 mi. downrange. (Wallops Release 63-68)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to an estimated peak altitude of 185 mi. from White Sands, New Mexico. Objective of the experiment was to measure the absolute alpha radiation resonantly scattered by atmospheric atomic hydrogen at night. Instrumentation included eight ion-chamber nodules and two aspect photometers, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 4/4/63)
Joint U.S.-U.K.-Australian Project Dazzle to study behavior of objects re-entering atmosphere would be conducted at Woomera Rocket Range in Australia, dod announced. ILK. would provide Black Knight rockets and re-entry payloads; U.S. would provide instrumentation for test, (dod Release 1088-63)
A gimbaled integral nozzle (gin) was sucessfully tested on the Lockheed “Char” motor by experts at the AF Rocket Propulsion Lab, designers of the exhaust system. Partially submerged in the aft section of the rocket case, the flanges and actuating components were shielded from the exhaust gases by the case itself. The concept would lead to a gimbaling system requiring less operating power than present operational swivel-type nozzles. A heavy, high-temperature-resistant silicone grease was used to lubricate the ball-and-socket gimbaling system. {M&R, 2/17/64, 21)
West German Cabinet approved West German participation in two European rocket and space projects—development of three-stage rocket by 7-nation eldo and development of space probe by 11-nation esro. (NTT [West. Ed.], 7/11/63)
usaf announced launch of space probe using Blue Scout, Jr., booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 3/18/63,11)
AF Cambridge Research Laboratories terminated flight of 54-ft. mylar balloon after 28-day journey across Pacific Ocean. Launched May 19 from Chico, Calif., superpressure balloon had reached point 500 mi. south of Kamchatka (Siberia) peninsula when afcrl destroyed it by radio command from Chico. This was third successful balloon flight in afcrl series to evaluate superpressure design. (OAR Research Review, 9/9/63, 2) Jwne 17: Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched to peak altitude of 113 mi. from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Purpose was to obtain positive information on gyro drift and general control characteristics. The aspect instrumentation on the rocket included two cameras, two Adcole digital sun sensors, a fine tracking Ball Brothers System and a Whittaker three-axis gyro package. All of the instruments worked exceptionally well. Good control, stabilization, and maneuver accuracy was demonstrated, but the target accuracy was less than expected, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 7/2/63 & 7/19/63)
Upper stage (S-IV) for Saturn SA-5 rocket arrived at Cape Canaveral aboard modified Stratocruiser aircraft. To be test-flown late this year, SA-5 would be first Saturn testing live upper stage.	(Marshall Star, 9/25/63,1)
A second Aerobee-Hi research rocket in the NASA-French joint program investigating propagation of very low frequency waves in the ionosphere was launched from Wallops Station. The 193-lb. payload went to an altitude of 115 mi. and yielded seven minutes of telemetry data before impact. The first experiment in this series was conducted on Oct. 17, 1963. (Wallops Release 63-98) 741-623 0—64--27
usaf announced award of formal contract to Martin-Marietta Corp. for design, development, fabrication, and delivery of Titan III Standardized Space Booster. Martin-Marietta was serving as systems integration contractor, with Aerojet General producing liquid propulsion systems and United Technology Corp. the segmented, solid-propellant engines, (dod Release 256-63)
Estimated 200 German scientists and technicians were working in Military Factory 333, Egyptian rocket center outside Cairo, according to Washington Post's magazine Parade. {Parade, 5/5/63)
usaf announced that Cape Kennedy would be open to the general public for three hours every Sunday beginning on December 15th, to allow for “public drive-through.” Only on Armed Forces Day in 1961 had the general public previously been allowed within the rocket and space launching complex, (upi, NYT, 12/8/63,A4)
West German rocket firm, Weapons and Aviation Armament Corp. of Hamburg, test-fired four solid-fuel rockets to 90,000-ft. altitude and announced signing contract to deliver missiles to an unnamed foreign country. {Wasli. Post, 12/6/63)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., but sustainer engine failed to ignite, destroying vehicle and payload containing a gfsc nebular spectra experiment, (gsfc Historian)
Preparations continued for nasa-cnes launching of U.S. instrumented payload with French Centaure rocket from Colomb-Bechar, Algeria, next February. {M&R, 12/2/63, 8-9)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Assistant to dod Director of Defense and Engineering, said in address to National Rocket Club in Washington that dod viewed X-20 (Dyna Soar) and Gemini projects as “insurance” against uncertainties of future military manned clarify man’s possible role in military space missions. {M&R, 8/26/63, 12, 14)
Atlas booster, first stage of Centaur space launch vehicle, arrived at Plum Brook Station to begin series of structural tests in E-Stand, (lrc Release 63-64, Lewis Chronology, 7)
X-15 No. 3 was flown to 89,800 ft. and 3,310 mph (mach 4.94), by nasa pilot Milton O. Thompson. This was Thompson’s second flight m the X-15 and was intended to familiarize him with the extreme altitude control of the rocket research aircraft. (M&R, 12/9/63,10; X-15 Project Office)
Activities of Amateur Rocketeers of America (aha) at National Amateur Missile Analysis Center (namac) near Indianapolis were described in National Observer, namac was built by ara, national organization of high school-age rocket enthusiasts, and put into use in autumn 1962. Completion was planned for summer 1963. {National Observer, 4/22/63)
Attempt to launch two-stage Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station failed with first stage of the vehicle failing to perform properly. This was nasa’s first attempt to launch the Astrobee, and purpose of test was to evaluate the rocket’s performance as a nasa test vehicle. (Wallops Release 63-36)
A. O. Tischler, nasa Launch Vehicles and Propulsion Assistant Director (for Propulsion), quoted as saying combustion instability 262 problem of F-l rocket engine was now “under control,” in Missiles and Rockets. Installation of mechanical isolator separated oscillations in engine pump from oscillations in fuel system. “Since that time the engine has been tested under the most severe conditions and there has been no evidence of combustion instability.” (M&R, 7/1/63) ...	.	.
usn disclosed new Subroc antisubmarine missile, a submarinelaunched, rocket-propelled, inertially-guided nuclear depth bomb, would be operational in 1965. Launched from standard torpedo tube, Subroc is powered by solid-fuel rocket motor which ignites underwater and propels missile up and out of the water. Rocket booster is automatically separated from depth bomb payload, which continues on ballistic trajectory until impacting water, where it sinks and detonates, (dod Releases 1536-63 and 1537-63)
Reported that dot cost study of Titan III launch vehicle concluded total development cost of Titan III “exclusive of mission payload adaptations” would be $808.3 million. Study concluded the military space booster would repay its development costs over three or four years of operation—conclusion based on predictable and expectable payload launchings within booster’s capability. (Space Bug. Dally, 7/1/63)
Atlas booster for Project Mercury manned flight MA-9, scheduled for mid-May, arrived at Cape Canaveral from General Dynamics/ Astronautics, San Diego. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/20/63)
nasa launched Scout rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with rfd-i (re-entry flight demonstration-1) payload for aec. 480-lb. mockup nuclear reactor traveled 800-mi. suborbital trajectory and reentered southwest of Bermuda, but initial recovery attempts were not successful. Purpose of flight was to obtain data for designing space nuclear reactors that, disintegrate upon atmospheric re-entry. This was first of series of aec flight tests to evaluate safety of aerospace nuclear power systems in operation. (Wallops Release 63-49; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/23/63)
France successfully launched a cat into space onboard a Veronique rocket and brought it to a safe landing. (Reuters, Wash. Post. 10/19/63, 4)
General Dynamics was proposing combination of fluorineandiiquid-oxygen Atlas and Centaur upper stage as a cheaper substitute for Titan III booster for usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), Missiles and Rochets reported. (M&R, 12/23/63, 9)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., sending a 156-lb. payload to an altitude of 137 mi. Payload was a photospeciroineler to measure ultraviolet light emissions from atomic oxygen at various altitudes in the upper atmosphere to learn more about the amounts and properties of the oxygen atoms. (Wallops Release 63-101; NYT, 11/13/63, 29)	■
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that, within past 18 months, four F-l rocket engines had been damaged or destroyed in static firings and that another 12 firings had ended with premature shutdowns. F-l was under development by Rocketdyne for use in Saturn V launch vehicle. (Av. Wk., 2/4/63, 26)
Flight of X-15, with Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) as pilot, canceled minutes before scheduled drop from mother ship because of mechanical troubles in the rocket aircraft, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/19/63)
Soviet Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, writing in Izvestia, claimed that Soviet icbm’s “in many respects exceed both quantitatively and qualitatively” the strategic rocket potential of any other nation. The new-model tests in the Pacific in the spring of 1963 had produced “fabulous super-sniper accuracy” over a range of 8,000 mi., he said. Among characteristics of Soviet icbm’s, the Marshal listed “unlimited range,” relative ease of operation, combat readiness “within minutes,” and capability of launching from mobile field installations having no preliminary engineering work. (NYT, 11/17/63, 39)
France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales announced France would send a cat into space from rocket launching site in Sahara. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/24/63)
238-lb. instrumented payload to measure intensity of light from stars was launched with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station to altitude of 110 mi. Telemetry data obtained during flight would be compared with data from similar experiment conducted July 19. (Wallops Release 63—71)
207-lb. instrumented payload carried 125 mi. high by Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched at Wallops Island, Va., by nasa and Australian scientists. Designed and built by Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, experiment was designed to measure vlf radio noise above E region of ionosphere and was similar to experiment conducted under nighttime conditions April 12. (Wallops Release 63-48; nasa Release 63-99)
Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Co. announced successful demonstration of new method of cooling high-pressure hydrogen rocket-engine chamber, p&w spokesman said that “successful demonstration of cooling during this company-sponsored firing was a research breakthrough on high-pressure hydrogen rocket engines .... The high pressure concept is the next step in increasing the performance of hydrogren fueled rocket engines.” p&w is producer of RL-10 liquid hydrogen rocket engines for Saturn S-IV stage and Centaur upper stage booster. (Space Bus. Daily, 9/9/63, 356; Hartford Courant, 9/9/63)
Unidentified space probe employing Blue Scout, Jr., booster was launched by usaf from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 2/11/63,13)
28-nation U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space approved Indian progress report on plans to sponsor an international rocket base at Quilon for launchings in space above the equatorial regions. Italian delegate reported that the San Marco floating launching facility would be completed in time for use in the iqsy. {L.A. Times, 2/26/63)
Atlantic Research Corn, announced development of solid rocket propellants containing beryllium to provide increased thrust Studies leading to this development were sponsored by dod. (NYT, 5/20/63, 46)
nasa launched Scout rocket with flight experiment to test re-entry heat shield material for spacecraft, but Scout veered off course and had to be destroyed before it left vicinity of Wallops Station launch area. Cause of malfunction was being investigated. (Wallops Release 63-69)
nasa announced it would negotiate contract with Pratt and Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for continuation of RL-10 rocket engine development. Contract would complete the RL-10 qualification program; it would specify improvements to be incorporated in the liquid-hydrogen engine as well as certain support services to be provided to Centaur and Saturn vehicle systems. RL-10 engines were being used to propel the Centaur upper-stage launch vehicle and the S-IV stage of Saturn I launch vehicle. (nasa Release 63-189)
mit announced that a laser had been used to observe meteoritic dust at heights of 35 to 85 mi., with the dust seeming to concentrate at 50 to 75 mi. It was suggested that the lower layer might be related to the noctilucent clouds, since last year’s rocket launchings from Sweden suggested that noctilucent clouds found at that altitude could be ice-covered particles of meteoritic dust. The higher layer might be at the level where meteors break into dust on entry into the earth’s atmosphere. (NYT, 10/16/63, 2)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with experiments to measure winds and temperatures and to derive densities and pressures up to 90 km. was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada. Twelve grenades ejected and exploded successfully at altitudes from 39 to 91.3 km. A simultaneous launching with Wallops Island was achieved. ( nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 3/11/63)
usaf solicited proposals from industry for development of solidpropellant space booster capable of up to six-million-lb. thrust. usaf action stemmed from dod-nasa agreement of December 1962 to advance the technology of large solia-propellant rocket motors. (dod Release 53-63; AP, Wash. Post, 1/16/63)
Two usaf U-2 aircraft have been used at amh for more than three years in a program gathering data on infrared characteristics of the exhaust plumes of ballistic missiles, according to Aviation Week. The program had been sponsored by Aeronautical Systems Div. of afsc. Known as Smokey Joe, it was coordinated with arpa’s Project Tabstone, which includes aircraft-user programs Lookout (using rcaf CF-lOO’s) and ramp (Radiation Air Borne Measurement Program). One of the U-2’s was equipped with 400-lb. radiometer, the other with spectrometer. One or both covered 80% of am:r launchings, flying at 60,000 ft. to observe the plume of the rocket as it passed on its upward flight. Data was forwarded to agencies concerned with ballistic missile defense. (Av• Wk., 11/18/63,53)
French government report recognized the direct and indirect economic benefits to the French economy from space and nuclear work. Of 13,000 persons employed in rocket development, 5,000 were in electronics, 5,000 in chemical-metallurgy. Of 14,000 working at the Pierrelatte nuclear center, 92% are employees of private industry. {MdcR, 11/18/63,9)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched to 126 mi. altitude from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Payload contained experiments to study the solar corona and extreme ultraviolet radiation—studies which would later apply to the Oso-B (S-17) ex
usaf launched Thor-Agena D space vehicle with unidentified payload from pmr; launch occurred several hours after another booster exploded. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64; NTT, 6/12/63)
Soviet Chief Marshal of Aviation Konstantin Vershinin was quoted as saying that air-launched missiles had become basic form of weapon for Soviet aircraft, replacing bombs. (Av. Wk., 1/7/63, 25) Cape Canaveral, and usaf was conducting study to determine cause of the advanced Minuteman’s malfunction. This was second flight of new, more powerful Minuteman model, (dod Release 25-63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/63) Early January: United Technology Center made first U.S. test-firing of cluster of large segmented solid rocket motors. Four rocket motors consisting of six segments each were fired for 14 sec., producing 140,000 lbs. of thrust. Test was to demonstrate techniques for ignition of clusters “which appear applicable to the simultaneous ignition of clusters of solid booster rockets producing millions of pounds of thrust.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63; Av. Wk., 1/14/63,33)
On 10th anniversary of first successful Redstone missile launching, Army fired Redstone rocket at White Sands Missile Range in successful test by Redstone Field Artillery unit. {M&R, 8/26/63, 14)	.	.	,
usaf launched Thor rocket with delta-wing re-entry payload from amr, first flight test in Project Asset (Aerothermodynamic-Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests). Payload reached 35-mi. altitude before re-entering atmosphere at 10,900 mph speed and landing about 1,000 mi. southeast of Cape Canaveral. Recovery efforts were not successful. Good data on temperatures and pressures of the payload were obtained during the 20-min. flight; the various materials of the payload were subjected to re-entry heat up to 4,000°F. (AP, NYT, 9/19/63, 8)
nasa successfully launched explorer xvm, the Interplanetary Monitoring Probe (Imp), from amr on a Thor-Delta booster. Intended to have an apogee of 173,000 mi. and a perigee of 125 mi., explorer xvm was tracked as having an apogee of 122,800 mi. and a perigee of 120 mi., with an orbital period of about four days, and an inclination of 33.3°. Essentially a continuation of the series of energetic particle spacecraft and similar in design and in some experiments to the earlier explorers xn, xiv, and xv, its 35 lbs. of instruments would measure the major magnetic field phenomena in space, including the interplanetary magnetic field, interactions of the streaming solar plasma and the geomagnetic field, galactic and solar radiation, (nasa Releases 63-249,261; Wash. Post, 11/27/63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa WTallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to altitude of 100 mi., in experiment to measure electron density profile, electron temperatures, and solar radiation in the ionosphere. Secondary objective of the flight was to check out hardware to be flown from Ft. Churchill, Can., during solar eclipse in July. (Wallops Release
usaf was reported by Aviation Week and Space Technology to be planning an expansion of its ballistic missile early warning system (bmews) to cover the southern approaches to the U.S. and possibly also to detect launches from submarines. Named Project Red Mill, the proposed system being developed by Raytheon Co. under usaf contract would use high-frequency ionospheric radar bounce techniques to detect changes in the ionospheric critical frequency made by rocket exhaust. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63, 23)
Nike-Apacbe sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carrying experiments (1) to determine upper atmospheric winds and diffusion coefficients by means of triangulation photography of sodium vapor trail, and (2) to determine atmospheric temperature from photoelectric measurement of emission line width. The flight was part of an international effort to measure winds at widely separated geographical locations, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 6/14/63)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara visited Boeing Co. in Seattle, Wash., and nasa Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, Tex., for briefings on X-20 (Dyna Soar) and Gemini projects. In Houston, McNamara said to press: “In the last six months the Department of Defense has completed with nasa an agreement on joint planning for the nasa Gemini program. We want to see how Gemini and the X-20 can be fitted together to make the best program for both military and civilian purposes. “The Gemini program provides for two men to be placed in orbit in 1964. The X-20 program proposes to place one man in orbit at a later date. While the X-20 would be in orbit less time than proposed in the Gemini program it would provide more recoverable payload because it would use a larger booster. The two programs are therefore not entirely comparable. “But because they do have similarities and are both very costly, I believe this trip to Seattle and to Houston, Texas, to visit the Manned Spacecraft Center where the Gemini program of nasa is underway is extremely important. “We will have spent about $350 million on the X-20 by the end of this fiscal year. We are requesting Congress to authorize an additional $125 million in the next fiscal year (1964) . . . .” (dod Release 334—63; msc Space News Roundup, 3/20/63, 1, 7; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/15/63)
Soviet news agency Tass announced test program of “improved types of rocket carriers for spacecraft” would be conducted May 15-July 15 in specified regions of the Pacific. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 5/12/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
Sodium-vapor experiment to measure high-altitude winds and diffusion rates was launched on Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va. Sodium vapor trail, ejected from 27 to 127mi. altitudes, was visible for several hundred miles from launch site. (Wallops Release 63—51; AP, wash. Post, 5/24/63)
Titan II was launched 5,700 mi. down amr in test of vibration levels Sri or to its employment as a booster for Gemini manned space ights. Also along on the flight was a pickaback capsule of instruments to study the exhaust plume of the missile, (upi, NYT, 11/2/63, 9)
Dummy S-IV stage for Saturn I rocket arrived at Cape Canaveral from Douglas Aircraft Co. via converted Boeing 377 Stratocruiser, marking first use of aircraft for transporting major nasa rocket components from West Coast, (upi. NYT. 7/14/63, 64)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, nasa-Director of Electronics and Control, said in address before Fourth International Electronic Circuit Packaging Symposium: “Electronics and its associated disciplines constitute the brain, nerves and senses of flight vehicles. It is estimated that about 40 per cent of our booster costs, 70 per cent of our major spacecraft dollars, and 90 per cent of our tracking and data acquisition funds go into electronics. Unfortunately, in the same context approximately 90 per cent of our flight failures, not to mention flight delays, arise from electronic failures. Success in this area is obviously a major factor in over-all mission accomplishment since a dead or unintelligent vehicle is useless if it cannot measure data and send it back to earth .... “nasa electronic research must satisfy the following requirements : “Undertake, under contract and in-house, advances in the electronic art to meet the requirements of future space flight. “Guide industry and university sponsored research, in space electronics, into channels useful to both nasa and the sponsoring industry. “Provide facilities to verify the performance of advanced electronic equipment developed for space use, irrespective of source of funding. “Conceive, develop, ground test, flight test and interpret data for nasa flight experiments designed to prove advanced electronic equipment fin-use.’ ” Dr. Kelley then described the functions of the proposed Electronics Research Center, which would be “the focal point of our electronics research efforts.” (Text)
usaf fired Titan II icbm in 5,800-mi. flight down the Atlantic Missile Range, the missile carrying malfunction-detection system similar to the one to be incorporated in Titan II Gemini booster. The Titan II also carred scientific pod containing instruments to study radiation in the missile’s exhaust plume. (NYT, 8/22/63, 22; M&R, 8/26/63, 14)	_
nasa and aec announced revision in Project Rover, canceling development of Rift (Reactor-In-Flight-Test) stage and deferring flight objectives of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application). Rover’s Kiwi ground reactor program was unchanged. Work towards development of flight systems was deferred until technology learned from Kiwi and Nerva is “satisfactorily established.” Revision was expected to save as much as $180 million of planned and programed funds in FY 1964 and FY 1965. nasa and aec now will concentrate on ground reactor and experimental engine research, development, and testing “with particular emphasis on analyzing and understanding power levels, temperatures, operating life, and problems of frequent and reliable restarts.” (nasa Release 63-285)
Italy launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket to 126-mi. altitude for atmospheric studies. Launching was first from island of Sardinia, (upi, NY T, 5/22/63,34)
Franco-Italian project to develop “Iris'’ rocket capable of delivering mail to any European city was reported by Associated Press. Powered with mixed solid-liquid fuel, the rocket is being designed to deliver 65 lbs. of mail more than 400 mi. away. Rocket would be launched vertically to predetermined altitude—around 72,000 ft.—then guided by radio to delivery point. 30 mi. from target, engine would be shut off, allowing rocket to glide; retrorockets M ould be fired to point its nose up, then Iris would descend backwards to earth. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star. 12/4/63)
J-2 rocket engine first successfully test-fired, at simulated space altitude of 80,000 ft. The one-sec. test was conducted in specially designed vacuum chamber at naa’s Rocketdyne Propulsion Field Laboratory, (msfc Historian, 5/22/63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station with 95-lb. instrumented payload to measure “ion and electron density and conductivity in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions,” and to measure solar ultraviolet and x-ray fluxes. Rocket reached 96.7 mi. altitude and for the first time “both ionization in ‘D’ region and solar rays causing it” were observed. This was the very process that formed the ionosphere, (nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching; Astro, and Aero. Eng., July 1963,9)
14-16 months’ additional slippage of Rover nuclear rocket program due to engineering and materials problems in Kiwi nuclear reactor reported by Missiles and Rockets. Dr. Harold B. Finger, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), was quoted as saying procurement difficulties were encountered because Rover lacked DX priority. No decision would be made to request a DX priority, he said, until results were obtained from the component test and evaluation program. (M&R, 3/11/63, 14-15; R-2, Stein and Morgan)
Two-stage sounding rocket instrumented to observe ionosphere was successfully launched to 215-mi. altitude by Japanese scientists near Kagoshima, Japan. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/21/63)
First technical description of U.A.R.’s Pioneer rocket appeared in Cairo newspaper Akher Saa. Article said Pioneer multistage rocket has range of 625 mi., is powered with liquid oxygen and another unnamed liquid, and is intended as space research vehicle. (AP, Houston Post, 8/2/63)
nasa announced signing $980,488 contract with Pratt and Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. to conduct research in use of fluorine/hydrogen and fluorine-oxygen/hydrogen as rocket propellants. Objective of 13-month research project was to demonstrate feasibility of a complete engine system using the two mixtures, (nasa Release 63-158)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director, said in speech before National Rocket Club in Washington that suggestions of U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint lunar landing program were impractical. Such exchange of manpower, knowledge, and funds could be of some benefit, he said, “but I tremble at the thought of the integration problems we could expect .... I really have mixed emotions, but I’m speaking only as an engineer, not as an international politician . . . .” (NYT, 9/18/63, 11; nbc Release)
usn announced Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory facilities destroyed by fire in April would be rebuilt “to provide support for current rocket motor development programs and those already planned for the next year.” (AY,Wash. Post, 5/7/63)
Rocketdyne had completed test firings of the X-8 experimental engine, one of a series of experimental rocket engines being designed and tested by Rocketdyne for usaf’s Ballistic Systems Div. in a search for advanced propulsion techniques. The X-8 engine had tested the feasibility of using liquid hydrogen as coolant for the thrust chamber. The tests showed liquid hydrogen to be a remarkably good coolant. An X-12 engine would now be built to test the possibility of achieving an increase of four to five times the pressure in the thrust chamber using coolant. This would not alter thrust at sea level but would give considerably increased thrust at altitude. {Av. Wk.. 11/11/63,99)
Solid-propellant rocket motor for Titan III test-fired for first time at United Technology Center, burning for about two min. and producing more than a million lbs. of thrust. Two such motors would be used in first stage of Titan III. (M&R, 7/29/63, 15)
usaf and Martin Co. engineers reportedly adopted a tight engineering review system in the number and types of changes in the Titan II missile to the man-rated Titan II booster for Gemini flights. System is intended to improve reliability by holding changes down to fewest possible and seeing that each of these contributes to overall reliability. Modifications that have been made include the necessary structural changes to accept the Gemini capsule, redundancy in certain key systems, and a malfunction detection system that would alert the flight crew to possible trouble. {Space Bus. Daily, 10/3/63, 20)
In first altitude test of aec’s Project Sand (Sampling Aerospace Nuclear Debris), Honest John-Nike rocket carried nuclear sampler payload to 36-mi. altitude where it was jettisoned and parachuted back to earth. Launch was conducted from Tonopah Test Range, Nev., by Sandia Corp. for aec. Project Sand was designed to determine amount of nuclear debris in atmosphere 23 to 43 mi. above earth and to develop techniques for predicting its dispersal in this region. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/27/63, 300)
Details of Soviet antimissile missile were disclosed for the first time, by Hungarian Communist Party newspaper Nepsza-badsag. The two-stage rocket has range of between 2,500 and 3,750 miles, can operate effectively against target missiles at altitudes from 20 to 200 miles. Weapon is part of long-range radar system that automatically feeds data of approaching missiles into computers; data are passed automatically to antimissile missile stations, which take over tracking; then, when approaching missile is within 600 miles, antimissile missile is fired automatically. (upi, Wash. Post, 12/8/63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched at twilight from nasa Wallops Station in the second of a series of comet experiments. At 95-mi. altitude the 100-lb. payload produced flames visible from earth and combustion products that lingered after burnout as a faint luminous cloud somewhat similar to a comet. The cloud effect was visible for a surprising five minutes, compared with less than one half minute the night before. The simulated comet was photographed from three ground positions. (Wallops Release 63-92)
usAF-sponsored solar hydrogen rocket engine (sour) was successful in series of ground tests, producing up to one pound thrust in runs of several hours. Scale-up to 10-lbs. thrust now appeared feasible. Built by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., sohr uses large, lightweight solar concentrators to focus solar energy into a cavity absorber containing a heat exchanger using hydrogen. The heated hydrogen provides thrust as it is accelerated through a nozzle. One sohr generating one to two lbs. thrust could move a 6,000-lb. payload from a 300-mi. orbit to a 22,400-mi. synchronous orbit in 20 days, compared with half a day for a chemical powerplant and 45 days for an electrical one. Specific impulse of sohr is 800 sec., compared with 400 sec. for chemicals, 1,200 for arc jets, and 5,000 sec. up for ion rockets. {M&R, 11/18/63,35)
West German Government announced that it disapproved of its citizens assisting the United Arab Republic on military rocket projects, and said that there was no proof that any West Germans were so engaged. The Israeli Parliament had appealed to Chancellor Adenauer on March 20 to take action against German scientists assisting the U.A.R. in developing military potential. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/22/63, A2)
nasa Plum Brook Research Reactor, Sandusky, Ohio, reached full power for the first time. 60,000 kilowatts of thermal energy were produced at end of two-month-long approach to power. The reactor is scheduled for basic research experiments associated with nasa’s plans to develop a nuclear rocket for interplanetary exploration. (Lewis Chronology, 2; lrc Release 63-20)
Titan II icbm flown 6,500 mi. down amr with heaviest payload ever to travel that far on a U.S. rocket vehicle. This was first Titan II launch conducted by an all-usAF crew, (dod Release 166-63; upi, Wash. Post, 2/7/63, A2; M&R, 2/11/63,13)
nasa launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Station. Payload was a 77-lb. package sent to 84-mi. altitude to measure mechanical and thermal stresses on a scientific payload during launch. (Wallops Release 63-99)
A nasa Hq press conference confirmed that the combustion instability that had plagued the 1.5 million-lb.-thrust F-l rocket engine had been corrected, nasa had assembled a team of the best propulsion experts in the country to work on the problem. The nature of the corrective action was redesign of a part of the engine behind the injector, so that fuel and oxydizer were no longer subject to surging as they entered the thrust chamber. Further redesign was underway to simplify the rather complicated series of baffles in the new part. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/19/63)
nasa Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station failed to boost scientific experiment to desired altitude because of launch vehicle malfunction. Experiment was to have studied spectral emission lines in upper atmosphere to help in determining “distribution of certain molecular and atomic species in the upper atmosphere.” (Wallops Release 63-8)
Deputy Commander of Soviet Strategic Rocket Troops, Col. Gen. Vladimir Fedorovich Tolobko, said in Krasnaya Zvezda that U.S.S.R. had perfected 100-megaton nuclear warheads for its missiles and had succeeded in creating antimissile defenses. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/21/63, A21)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket carried instrumented payload to 101-mi. altitude in experiment from nasa Wallops Station to measure density and conductivity of electrically charged particles in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions. Except for failure of solar aspect sensor, experiment was considered a success. The 80-lb. payload impacted in Atlantic Ocean 77 mi. from launch site. (Wallops Release 63-38; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
nasa simplified its launch vehicle terminology for the Saturn space booster series: Saturn C-l became “Saturn I”; Saturn C-lB became “Saturn I-B”; and Saturn C-5 became “Saturn V.” (MA, Holmes)
X-15 No. 1 flew to an altitude of 77,800 ft. and a speed of 2,834 mph (mach 4.21), as Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf) made his first flight in the research rocket aircraft, (nasa Release 63-224; Chic. Trib., 10/8/63)
Monorail rocket sled attained mach 5 speed along missile test track at Holloman afb in recent test, afsc announced, highest known speed ever reached by a monorail sled. Fired in two stages with Cajun and Cherokee rockets, the test vehicle reached 3,753 mph before being stopped near end of seven-mile track. Attachment of “flow separation spike,” similar to needle on nose of jet fighter aircraft, reduced air resistance and thus increased speed. To brake the sled, spike was flipped away from front of sled when peak speed was attained, thus increasing air drag by a factor of four. Sled was then caught by several lengths of tied-down nylon restraining straps. Major test objectives were accomplished, (afsc Release 37-74—72)
Second birthday of Michoud Operations, nasa facility in Louisiana used for fabrication of Saturn I, Saturn IBj and Saturn V rocket stages. To date, nasa had awarded $739 million in contracts which will be carried out primarily at Michoud, and some $41 million had been spent on rehabilitation and modification of plant and construction of new facilities. More than 7,800 persons are now working at Michoud, most of them employees of nasa contractors. (Marshall Star, 9/11/63,1,2)
U.S. launched an unidentified probe using Blue Scout booster. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Chief of the U.S. 14th Coast Guard District in Honolulu, Capt. George D. Synon, was quoted as confirming that a U.S. cutter had entered the Soviet rocket-test zone “by accident” earlier in the month. This was in reply to accusation by the Soviets that the U.S. had observed rocket tests on May 18 and 25. Capt. Synon stated that the cutter “did not do any observing.” (AP, Wash. Post, 5/31/63')
U.K. completed first static-firings of Blue Streak rocket planned as first stage of three-stage booster for eldo. Tests were conducted at Woomera, Australia. {M&R, 12/23/63, 9) During December: nasa’s trend toward more incentive-type contracts was outlined in Commerce Clearing House report, pointing out that in early 1962 nasa had no incentive-type contracts, by end of June 1963 nasa had awarded 10 large incentive contracts with others in negotiation, and by June 1964 the number of incentive contracts was expected to be increased by a large margin. Incentive-type contracts were expected to lower costs and improve work performance, in place of cost-plus-fixed-fee type. (Goodman, Wash,. Post, 12/18/63)
Dr. G. A. Tokaty, former chief of the aerodynamics laboratory of the Zhukovsky Academy and later chief rocket scientist of the Soviet Government in Germany (1946-47), published an article on “Soviet Space Technology” in Spaceflight, magazine of the British Interplanetary Society. Article submitted that the “Soviet Government have manifested their keen interest in the [spacej field throughout the entire history of their existence [since 1917J” and reviewed this history in interesting detail to 1961. (Spaceflight, 3/63,59-64)	.
Three-stage Nike rocket launched from Eglin afb, Fla., fourth in series of ten high-altitude probes to test methods of slowing reentry vehicles. Parachute was deployed when 500-lb. Cree payload reached peak altitude, and cameras in payload photographed action of parachute as it deployed and descended with payload. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/9/63)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was fired by nasa from White Sands Missile Range, N. M„ the 235-lb. payload to take observations of ultraviolet light and the sun’s corona, (gsfc Hist.; AP, Wash. Post, 10/2/63)
usaf launched unidentified payload with Blue Scout booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {Wash. Post, 2/20/63, Al; M&R, 2/25/63,11)
Skylark rocket launched at Woomera, Australia, reached 123-mi. altitude with experiment to measure electron densities in upper atmosphere. Secondary experiments were measurement of distribution of positive ions, x-ray spectrum of the sun and distribution of atomic hydrogen in upper atmosphere. (MdcR, 3/11/63,
Dr. Franklin A. Gifford, Jr., was awarded Dept, of Commerce’s Gold Medal for Exceptional Service for his “major contributions to science and administration, for extremely significant research and outstanding leadership in the study of turbulent diffusion in the atmosphere, and for highly distinguished authorship in the field of meteorology.” Dr. Gifford is Meteorologist in Charge of che Weather Bureau Station at Oak Ridge, Tenn. (Dept, of Commerce Release WB 63-1) Mid-February: AF Cambridge Research Laboratories conducted atmospheric-density experiment by dropping instrumented mylar sphere to earth from 160-mi. altitude. Aerobee rocket carried inflatable sphere to desired altitude from Eglin afb, Fla., the sphere’s telemetering equipment transmitting linear accelerometer data measuring atmospheric drag on the sphere, (dod Release 35-63)
usn launched Hydac sounding rocket, built by Douglas Aircraft and Lockheed, from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 12/23/63, 10)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev, opening session of World Woman’s Congress in Moscow, warned that third world war would “be a rocket nuclear war of extermination, . . . [destroying] much of what we generally call civilization.” Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova was stellar attraction at Communist-dominated congress. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/24/63 A-20)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 70-lb. instrumented payload to 106-mi. altitude, payload impacting in Atlantic Ocean 87 mi. downrange after 6 min., 40 sec. flight. Payload contained instrumentation to determine altitude and intensity of electric current systems in the ionosphere. New method of altitude determination during rocket flight was also tested. Flight was in preparation for electrojet program to be conducted from India later this year. (Wallops Release 63-81; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
nasa announced signing of formal contract with Boeing Co. for development and production of Saturn V first stage, largest rocket unit under development in U.S. Contract worth $418,820,967, largest ever signed by nasa, called for design, devel-' opment, and manufacture of 10 flight boosters and one ground test booster, as well as assistance to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center in portions of ground test program. Preliminary development of the vehicle stage, powered by five F-l rocket engines, had been in progress under interim contract since December 1961. (nasa Release 63-37)
Soviet news agency Tass announced improved types of rocket carriers for spacecraft were launched successfully from Soviet Union to central Pacific during June and July, and area was no longer off-limits for navigation of ships and aircraft. (Tass, Komso-molskaya Pravda, 7/11/63,3, afss-t Trans.)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. Wasatch Div.’s 156-in. solid-propellant rocket motor was fired for 130 sec. and terminated within 0.5 sec. of predicted action time, although the last 30 sec, of the firing was completed without the plastic nozzle extension, which parted at the metal attachment flange. Severe erosion of the 5-ft. nozzle extension skirt, which was constructed entirely of ablative materials, weakened the structural integrity of the skirt and it blew off after about 100 sec. of motor burning. The firing continued normally after loss of the skirt with only about an 8% degradation in' thrust, which had peaked at just over 1.4 million lb. This was the first demonstration of thrust-vector-control using a movable nozzle. The rocket motor case used in this feasibility demonstration was undamaged, would be used in the follow-on 156-in. program which was awaiting dod approval. (Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 26)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Ft. Churchill, Canada, reached 144.5-mi. altitude in experiment to study very low energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Rocket performance was good and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Two of three trays containing experimental emulsions did not completely retract and were damaged by heat and upon impact by water. Preliminary estimate was that 100% good data were obtained by the emulsion that functioned properly and 60% by the two which did not retract. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
NASA and the Swedish Space Committee agreed to extend for another year their cooperative sounding rocket studies of the upper atmosphere and noctilucent clouds. Under the new agreement, the U.S. would provide the eight payloads and part of the ground equipment on a loan basis. Sweden would provide four of the eight sounding rockets and most of the ground instrumentation. Launching, payload recovery, and other support operations would be carried out by Swedish personnel. The joint studies began in 1961. (nasa Release 64-131)
38th anniversary of first liquid-fuel rocket flight—that of Dr. Robert H. Goddard whose rocket flew 184 ft. in 2y2 sec. at Auburn, Mass., in 1926.	(A&A/1915-60, 21)
NASA announced that usns Croatan had completed its successful shakedown cruise off the Virginia-North Carolina coast during which a number of sounding rockets were launched for NASA. Electronic equipment and operational procedures were checked out in preparation for using the usns Croatan as a mobile launch platform early in 1965. During this three-month NASA expedition, forty or more scientific experiments would be launched from the usns Croatan as part of NASA’s sounding rocket program in connection with the International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY), 19641965. (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Release 64-294)
A scheduled flight of the X—15 rocket ship to test star-tracking cameras was canceled when rain soaked lakebeds used as landing fields for the plane. No new date was scheduled. (Wash. Post, 11/10/64)
Army Corps of Engineers announced award of $8,079,003 (NASA funds) fixed-price contract to Malan Construction Co. of Koppers Co., Inc., for construction of a rocket engine test stand at the NASA Mississippi Test Operations, (dod Release 856-64)
nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office announced successful completion of cold-flow experiments on a Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application) experimental reactor, designated the nrx-ai, by the Aerojet-General and Westinghouse Electric Corporations. The experiments were designed to check the structural stability and flow dynamics of the nrx-a reactor under nonpower conditions. All test objectives were met. (SNPO)
NASA awarded $5,944,000 supplemental contract to the Boeing Co. for additional r&d and planning in the manufacture of Saturn V first-stage rocket at Michoud Operations, La. (New Orleans Times-Picayune, 4/4/64; Marshall Star, 4/8/64,10)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched within 10 min. of each other to provide data on evening atmospheric temperatures, winds, densities, and pressures from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, Va., using explosive-grenade technique. Ft. Churchill rocket reached 77.5-mi. altitude, ejecting and detonating all 12 grenades. Wallops Island rocket reached 74.9-mi. altitude, ejecting and detonating all but the ninth grenade. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Rice Univ. payload was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 94-mi. altitude. Two photometers, two scintillators, three Geiger counters, and two magnetometers made coordinated measurements of light intensity and particle fluxes. (NASA Rpt. srjl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumba Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (NASA Rpt. srl)
More than 20 Martlet rockets were launched from Barbados site during first year of the high-altitude research project conducted by Canada’s McGill Univ., New York Times reported. Fired from 16-in. naval cannon, Martlet has motor that ignites once the rocket is in flight, sending rocket to altitudes between 60 and 100 mi. It lands about 100 mi. southeast of Barbados in the Atlantic. 200 shots, financed by U.S., were planned for 1964. (AP, NYT, 1/11/64)
The third and final set in a series of dual ship-to-shore sounding rocket launchings was conducted at 5:53 a.m. EST from the USNS Croatan and at 5:56 a.m. from Wallops Island, about 300 mi. apart. Sodium vapor was ejected by the Nike-Apache launched from the ship up to an altitude of approximately 141 mi.; sodium vapor failed to eject from the payload launched from Wallops Island. (Wallops Release 64-85; nasa Rpt. srl)
Kenneth W. Gatland, Vice-President of British Interplanetary Society, described space progress in Great Britain in Astronautics & Aeronautics. He pointed out that Britain not only played a leading role in establishing eldo but also was contributing to eldo “the 300,000-lb.-thrust Blue Streak ... as the booster for a three-stage satellite launcher [Europa 1].” Other activities—not counting the eldo contribution—had made Britain, in cooperation with Australia, “easily the biggest participant in space research outside the United States and the Soviet Union. “Upper-air research with Skylark rockets began at Woomera in February 1957 and has continued to the present time. Black Knight rockets have reached heights of 500 mi., and with it a number of interesting investigations have been made on both re-entry and stabilization and control of rocket vehicles at high altitudes. The growth of the Weapons Research Establishment at Woomera as a launching, tracking, and communications center under joint investment by the British and Australian Governments, and latterly by ELDO and NASA, has made this facility the finest and best-equipped overland rocket range in the Western World. . . . “With the advent of Sputnik 1 in October 1957, Jodrell Bank [radioastronomy facilities] quickly established itself on both sides of the Iron Curtain as an important center for space tracking and communications. . . . “In addition, the General Post Office in 1961-62 built an experimental ground station at Goonhilly Downs, Cornwall, for relaying telecommunications signals between the United States and the United Kingdom via Telstar and Relay. There are plans to develop this station into a ground terminal for a global telecommunications network. . . . “In July 1963, it was announced in Washington that Black Knight would be used by the United States, Great Britain, and Australia in a joint program of re-entry research [Project Dazzle] to he conducted over the Woomera rocket range.. . . “[British] universities and industry . . . [supplied] scientific instruments for the satellites S—51 and S-52 built and launched by the United States. A third scientific satellite, S-53, wholly engineered in the United Kingdom, will be launched by Scout in 1966.. . . “In the small rocket field, excellent results are currently being obtained with the Skua meteorological rocket .... a cheap and simple tool for the meteorologist to conduct routine research measurements in the upper atmosphere. . . . “Finally,. . . [studies] are currently being made in the United Kingdom into the concept of the Aerospace Plane, or space Transporter. . . .”	(A&A, 7/64, 18-26)
Paper surveying space nuclear propulsion by Harold B. Finger, James Lazar, and James J. Lynch of NASA and aec was presented to AIAA. “. . . a major forward step has been taken in the milestone established by the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in its design, development, operation, and analysis of the KIWI-B4D nuclear rocket reactor experiment. This test provides good reason for confidence in the successful execution of the tests to be conducted this year and next and provides a good basis for confidence in the availability of nuclear rockets when they will be required for the performance of advanced space missions. The availability of these nuclear rocket propulsion systems will give this country a propulsion capability far advanced over any other rocket propulsion system available. . . . “Progress has been made in electric propulsion, particularly in the thrustor area, but important research data and technology are also beginning to be provided in the difficult area of nuclear reactor electric generating systems required for prime electric propulsion in space. “Beyond these systems, other advanced nuclear propulsion concepts are not yet well enough understood to justify undertaking significant development efforts. Careful and systematic accumulation of research information to evaluate the feasibility of these concepts and to arrive at a real understanding of them appear appropriate.” (Text)
At aiaa banquet, G. Edward Pendray Award was presented to Andrew G.	Haley for his “pioneering contribution to the analysis of governmental and international legal questions arising from the rapid development of space travel and space exploration, as exemplified by his book, Space Law and Government, published in 1963.” aiaa Lawrence B. Sperry Award was presented to Daniel M. Tellep, Manager of Launch and Entry Thermodynamics Research and Engineering at the Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., for Tellep’s “contributions to re-entry technology through participation in the United States’ first re-entry flight test program and for advancements in the field of heat transfer as related to aerospace programs.” Also presented were the 1964 Graduate and Undergraduate Student Awards to Richard C. Lessman and Lawrence S. Iwan. (aiaa Annual Mtg. Program; aiaa Booster, 7/2/64)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska payload to obtain data on the visible aurora and on the vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was to' be supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Payload also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors. The rocket attained peak altitude of 103 mi., and the flight appeared satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Kiwi B—4E reactor, operated at nearly full power for eight minutes Aug. 28, was restarted and run for a second time at power level nearly identical to that achieved during the first experiment. Test lasted about 2.5 min. and reactor performance was excellent. This demonstration of capability to rerun reactors came much earlier in the NASA—AEC nuclear rocket program than had heen anticipated; officials considered it a significant step toward economical development of nuclear propulsion technology. Harold B. Finger, Manager of NASA—aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, said: “We have proved that nuclear rockets can give the kind of performance that is needed for advanced space missions. We could use essentially this type of reactor for experimental flights in the early 1970s and have an operational system by 1975.” Test marked final one planned for Kiwi, (snpo; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64)
nasa Aerobee 300 sounding rocket with Univ. of Michigan payload to measure electron and neutral particle temperatures in the atmosphere was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 200-mi. altitude. Instrumentation included electrostatic probe, omegatron gage, Bayard-Alpert ion gage, as well as a solar aspect sensor to provide proper attitude. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory, although the omegatron made no measurements, (nasa Rpt. srl)
West German government issued denial that any West German firm was producing missiles suitable for military application. Denial was in response to Soviet diplomatic complaint that missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads were being produced in West Germany, recalling rocket test-firings last December by Weapons and Air Equipment Co. of Hamburg. German government said investigation of the Hamburg company established that it possessed no manufacturing facilities. Two days later, according to Missiles and Rockets, the company halted production of rockets that it “apparently planned to export to Middle Eastern Arab nations.” Company officials told M&R the decision was made voluntarily to prevent further embarrassment to West German government. (NYT, 2/6/64, 5; M&R, 2/17/64, 9)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands, N. Mex., with JPL payload to measure ultraviolet light and fluctuations in earth’s magnetic field. Rocket started large yaw maneuvers soon after 30 sec. and reached only 18.2-mi. altitude; no new scientific data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
U.S.S.R.’s unsuccessful attempts to send payloads to Venus Feb. 26 and Mar. 4 were reported in the U.S. press. Failures were attributed by U.S. military officials to difficulties with upper-stage rocket supposed to send the spacecraft out of parking orbit and onto its interplanetary course., (Av. Wk., 3/30/64,15; Finney, NYT, 4/1/64,1, 10)
Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Electric Corp. successfully conducted first power test of a Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application ) experimental reactor designated the nrx—A2. The reactor was operated for six minutes, at powers ranging from 56% of full power to near full power. All test objectives were met. Nerva was a project of NASA—AEC Space Nuclear Reactor Office, (snpo; Lewis News, 10/30/64, 1; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/25/64)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket at White Sands, N. Mex., the rocket serving as a test round for a series of rockets to be flown in Sweden in July, and containing micrometeoroid-particle collector as follow-up to Aerobee 150 experiment three years before. Despite extremely low peak altitude (about 30 mi.—the second stage broke up after about 4.5 sec. of burning), instrumentation functioned until impact except for aspect sensor and Dovap. No useful scientific data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ascension Island carried Univ. of Michigan instrumented payload to 98-mi. altitude to measure atmospheric pressure, temperature, density, and winds using the pitot-static probe. All objectives appeared to have been met. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumbs Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Nomadic Lapps in northern Sweden had registered complaints about ESRO’s rocket launching plans from new base being built about 100 mi. northeast of Kiruna. Beginning in 1966, esro would fire 50 rockets per year 120 mi. into the ionosphere every year for eight years. But the Lapps, living in the target area for the rockets, were fearful for the safety of themselves and their reindeer. (Reuters, NYT, 10/21/64, 26)
First flight tests of new 16-in. rocket motor in Project Harp (High-Altitude Research Project) were expected in May at Barbados Is., B.W.I., Missiles and Rockets reported. Static tests on the motor were now underway. The rocket motor would be used to boost gun-launched payloads in the McGill University-U.S. Army project. The May series would include some 30 firings of the rocket vehicle and new versions of the Martlet-series missile. Project sources indicated use of multiple staging with new rocket motor could make possible the orbiting of 50-70 lb. payloads into 60-100 mi. earth orbit. (M&R, 1/27/64, 22)
Second U.S. manned rocket flight was made 20 years ago today, when Northrop MX-324 flying wing was towed aloft and propelled by 200-lb.-thrust Aerojet rocket engine and flown for four minutes by test pilot Harry Crosby over Harper’s Dry Lake, Calif. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/64, 44; A&A, 1915-60, 47)
Britain successfully launched a Blue Streak rocket from the Woomera Range in Australia. The rocket reached an altitude of 110 mi. and a top speed of 6,400 mph. Because the engines cut off seven seconds earlier than had been planned, the rocket fell 382 mi. short of impact area. The rocket traveled 620 mi. northwest of Woomera and disintegrated over Western Australia. (NYT, 6/6/64)
Mating assembly of Saturn V rocket sections would be accomplished with aid of air cushions, Marshall Star reported. General Motors’ Defense Research Laboratories was developing for MSFC a special tool—basically 20 “air pads”—for lifting rocket section and its wheeled carrier. Air pads would lift the huge sections about 1% in. from the floor. Tool designers were also working on mechanical mover for the air-cushion device so that one man would be able to move the stages forward and laterally. (Marshall Star, 1/8/64, 1-2)
Continuing the current series of sounding rocket experiments to obtain comparative characteristics of the upper atmosphere at widely separated locations, NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets at Wallops Island, Fort Churchill, and Ascension Island. The rocket payloads ejected 12 grenades which detonated at intervals up to 55-mi. altitude. (Wallops Release 64-16)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra of nebulosities of certain star fields. Abnormal coning motion of the rocket and subsequent pitch-roll coupling caused the rocket to reach only 46-mi. altitude; and the attitude control system had no chance to point at the programed targets, so no experimental data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
An experiment designed by youthful rocket scientists ended in tragedy when “Gus,” a two-ounce mouse, was killed in a mishap. Several youths from Schenectady had designed the rocket, which was to carry Gus to an altitude of 6,000 ft. The rocket went off at an angle upon launch and smashed into the ground killing its passenger. The launch, which had been protested by local humane societies, was viewed by a crowd of 400. (AP, L.A. Herald Examiner, 7/19/64)
Largest monolithic solid grain ever poured was well into its 20-day curing cycle at Aerojet-Dade Div. of Aerojet-General Corp. The 120-in., 37-ft.-long “Subscale 1” would be test-fired in the same cast-cure pit in midAugust. Both batch and continuous mix processes were used with the continuous mix working for 55 straight hours in the 2^-day pouring job. The 100-ton grain was to produce about 600,000 lbs. thrust in checking out the nozzle, materials, and processes developed for the upcoming 260-in. large solid rocket test at Aerojet. (M&R, 7/13/64, 11)
Test firing of Bell Aerosystems Co. 40,000-lb .-thrust fluorine-hydrogen rocket engine showed combustion efficiency exceeded 95 per cent of theoretically obtainable maximum. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64, 69)
Geraldo de Carvalho Silos told the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that Brazil would establish a rocket center near Natal and would seek U.N. sponsorship for the facility. The U.N. had been asked to sponsor a similar international facility at Thumba, India. (NYT, 11/4/64,39)
NASA Wallops Station launched a sounding rocket with instrumented payload to determine the effects of the ionosphere on delicate low-frequency radio radiation receiving sensors. A Nike-Apache rocket boosted the payload, designed to test instrumentation for possible use in the space astronomy program, to an altitude of 85 mi. Preliminary data indicated the experiment was successful. (Wallops Release 64^-57)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with instrumental payload to obtain evidence of hypervelocity micrometeoroid impacts, samples of low-velocity cosmic dust, and measurements of electron densities. Flight failed when'rocket’s propulsion system malfunctioned and the rocket attained only 6.25-mi. altitude. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Intelligence information reaching Washington revealed that Red China had begun to manufacture its own MiG jet fighters. Significance of the new development was that Red China might have the principal ingredients of a nuclear force—A-bombs and jet fighter bombers. (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/31/64) During December: Boeing Co. was named systems integration contractor for NASA’s three-stage Saturn V booster. Work would be performed at the firm’s launch systems branch at New Orleans under an 085 million supplement to its contract as prime contractor for the booster’s first stage. Systems and engineering integration would be conducted in three major areas: the vehicle, systems documentation, and systems development breadboard facility. On the vehicle itself, Boeing would be responsible for mechanical interface engineering, instrumentation and telemetry systems, aerodynamics and flight mechanics, flight evaluation and operation, atmospheric environmental design criteria, malfunction detection system, structural heating and environmental control system, structural dynamics, and vehicle assembly documentation. (M&R, 1/4/65,10)
Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) flew X—15 No. 2 to 83,000-ft. altitude and 2,966-mph speed (mach 4.49). Engine of the rocket research aircraft burned 76 sec. This was the first flight of the rebuilt No. 2 aircraft, and performance was successful, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
usaf Secretary Eugene M. Zukert said that the Titan III rocket would make its maiden flight during the coming summer. Eventually, Titan III would launch the usaf’s Manned Orbital Laboratory, probably sometime in 1967 or 1968. In addition, Zuckert announced that three firms, Douglas Aircraft Co,, General Electric Co., and Martin Co., had been authorized to go ahead with work on orbital space-station studies. (UPl, Louisville Courier-Journal, 6/6/64)
President Lyndon B. Johnson said in article for The Journal of the National Education Association: “The nation that has the schools has the future. No less than our rocket thrusts into outer space, there is urgently needed a national education thrust of massive proportions that will help us master the problems of our age. “. . . figuratively and physically we are building not only a pathway to the stars but also—hopefully—bridges of understanding here on earth. “It is here on earth that our task begins. And for that task, the education attainments of our fellow Americans are, in some categories, far less than they should be. . , .” (AP, NYT, 1/3/64,21)
French Dragon rocket was successfully fired to an altitude of 275 mi. from a base in Iceland, National Center of Space Research announced in Paris. Fired in cooperation with Icelandic scientists, the sounding rocket carried instruments to measure energy and direction of particles from Van Allen radiation belts. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/2/64; M&R, 8/10/64,11)
President Johnson stated in press conference: “This past week the United States has demonstrated in at least eight different situations this Nation’s determination to insure both peace and freedom in the widest possible areas. “Progress toward these ends is frequently slow and rarely dramatic, but it should be viewed in the perspective of history and not headlines. . . The President listed the first seven situations, then “And finally, we have witnessed and the whole world has witnessed with pleasure the remarkable success of our Saturn rocket, the most powerful rocket thrust known to man. This rocket, I am happy to say, was first recommended by our committee [Senate Preparedness Subcommittee, chaired by Johnson] in 1958.” (Transcript, Wash. Post, 2/2/64, A7)_	_	_	_
Astrobee 1500, most powerful of U.S. sounding rockets, was flight-tested from NASA’s Wallops Island, Va., launch site, its second stage carrying 156-lb. instrument package to 1,212-mi. altitude before impact in the Atlantic Ocean 1,326 mi. from launch site. This was second flight test of the solid-propellant rocket; adequate performance data were not achieved in first NASA flight test (April 1963) because nosefairing failure ended the flight only 16 sec. after launch. In today’s flight, 27 min. of telemetered data were received on acceleration, vibration, temperatures, and pressures, and from preliminary examination the test appeared successful. (Wallops Release 64-76)
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory successfully completed eightminute power experiment with the Kiwi—B4E reactor, the eighth and final reactor built for power testing under the Kiwi phase of the NASA—aec nuclear rocket program. All planned test objectives were met and reactor performance was smooth. Duration of the test was limited by the liquid hydrogen capacity of the Jackass Flats, Nev., facility. (snpo; Wash. Post, 8/29/64)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with instrumented payload to obtain comparison of electron density profile with wind profile and to measure electron temperature. Sodium vapor ejected as scheduled and Langmuir probe functioned well. Launch was to have been one of four spaced through a single night, but high winds and subsequent cloud cover forced cancellation of the other three, (nasa Rpt. she)
European Space Research Organization launched second British Skylark sounding rocket with scientific payload to altitude of 125 mi. from Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia. This launch and identical one the previous day were initial attempts of the 10-nation organization. (NYT, 7/11/64, 5)	_	_
usaf Project Asset space glider was launched from Cape Kennedy with single-stage Thor booster to 31-mi. altitude before returning downward at 8,800-mph speed and impacting 900 mi. southeast of the launch site in the Atlantic Ocean, usaf said die spacecraft temperatures had reached about 2,000° in the 25-min. flight, which was termed “very successful.” (AP, Wash. Post, 10/28/64; M&R, 11/2/64, 8)
X-15 No. 1 flown by usaf pilot Maj. Robert Rushworth to maximum speed of 3,920 mph (mach 5.76) and altitude of 101,000 ft., in flight near Edwards AFB, Calif. For the flight a special camera was installed in the plane’s fuselage to test optical degradation caused by temperatures of up to 1,200° F. This was the 103rd flight of the rocket research aircraft, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Chic. Trib., 3/28/64)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with upper atmosphere grenade experiment was launched from Wallops Island to 73-mi. altitude, and series of 12 grenades was ejected and detonated at intervals from 23-to 58-mi. altitude. Experiment was coordinated with similar grenade shot from Sweden’s Kronogard Range (81-mi. peak altitude) and with another experiment launched there on a Nike-Apache rocket to measure noctilucent clouds (77-mi. peak altitude). These launchings marked beginning of third series of grenade experiments conducted by NASA gsfc from Wallops Island, Fort Churchill Research Range, and Ascension Island, with Sweden joining the group for this series. The Fort Churchill and Ascension Island launchings were canceled because of weather conditions. (Wallops Release 64-59; NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska instrumented payload attained 96-mi. altitude. Experiment objective was to obtain data on visible aurora in three wavelengths and data on vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was to be supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Payload also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors. Good telemetry signal was received for 383 sec., but door covering instrumentation apparently came off at about 20,000-ft. altitude and most of the sensors were damaged by the severe environment. (NASA Rpt. srl)
usaf launched four-stage Athena re-entry test rocket from Green River, Utah, for a partially successful flight. Flight was aborted automatically before third-stage ignition because of an inverter malfunction. (M&R, 10/5/64,11)
Scout rocket launched by usaf from Pt. Arguello, Calif., exploded in flight. {M&R, 7/6/64, 8)
NRX-A2 Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) experimental reactor, run at full power Sept. 24, was restarted in test of reactor system in the low-power, low-flow region of operation. Analysis of data from this run confirmed design predictions and indicated no unusual start-up or control problems. Test was conducted by Aerojet-General and Westinghouse Electric Corporations for nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, (snpo; NASA Press Conf. Transcript, 11/12/64)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 111-mi. altitude, but telemetry transmitter failed. Five charged-particle detectors, an aspect magnetometer, and an accelerometer were included in the instrumentation, which was to have obtained data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and those responsible for auroral absorption. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
The Soviet Union marked Rocket Day, a new observance, by warning the West of the “stupendous power,” great range, and pinpoint accuracy of its missiles. Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, chief of the rocket forces repeated the Kremlin’s claim that it had antimissile missiles. (upi, NYT, 11/20/64, 27)
nasa successfully launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to an altitude of 522 mi., with instrumented payload to measure the earth’s geomagnetic field from the ground to Javelin peak altitude. Data from this experiment would be combined with that obtained from a Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched 90 sec. earlier. This was the first Javelin launched from the Churchill Research Range, (nasa Rpt. srl) ,
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra of nehulosites of certain star fields. Rocket attained 118-mi. altitude and instrumentation performed properly, but failure of the attitude control system prevented the rocket from pointing at the targets and there were no experimental results, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA successfully launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket to an altitude of 110.8 mi. from Wallops Island, Va. Experimental objectives were: (1) to measure daytime ion and electron densities and solar ultraviolet flux in the region from 31—124 mi.; (2) to test efficiency of loop antenna section for extending CW propagation measurements to “D” region altitudes. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket with ionosphere experiment payload from Wallops Island, Va., to peak altitude of 105 mi. The payload carried instrumentation to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in the D and E regions of the ionosphere; it impacted 114 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Provided by Univ. of Illinois and the Geophysics Corp. of America, the experiment was an investigation of the International Year of the Quiet Sun (1964-65) (iqsy). (Wallops Release 64-37)
U.K. successfully launched its second Blue Streak rocket booster from Woomera, Australia, in development test. Blue Streak was slated to serve as first stage of eldo’s multistage launch vehicle. (M&R, 10/26/64,11)
India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy and NASA announced signing memorandum of understanding for Indian-U.S. cooperation in meteorological sounding rocket program. Data gathered in the program would contribute to International Indian Ocean Expedition, a continuation of research begun during igy, concentrating on weather and atmospheric conditions related to the Indian Ocean area. Under the agreement, India Dept, of Atomic Energy would provide, transport, assemble, and launch Loki-Dart sounding rockets and payloads; operate the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Range; and coordinate launchings with those of other countries in International Indian Ocean Expedition. NASA would lend radar equipment, train Indian personnel, and provide technical advice. (NASA Release 64-39)
msfc Director Dr. Wemher von Braun discussed Saturn IB/Centaur launch vehicle at Michoud tour and said that “there will be money to develop the booster in the FY ’66 space agency budget.” Dr. von Braun said he believed Saturn IB/Centaur would compete on cost-effectiveness basis with Titan III; with the contemplated missions, cost of $20 million per launch was possible. Dr. von Braun also disclosed NASA studies indicating manned circumlunar flight with Gemini spacecraft was feasible. Such a mission was not being seriously considered at this time, however. (M&R, 5/18/64,17)
Archeological relics dating as far back as 3,500 B.C. were being uncovered at future site of man’s rocket launchings to the moon—Merritt Island, Fla. (nasa Space Sheet, 10/16/64)
usn commissioned the guided missile ship Norton Sound at Baltimore, Md. For 12 years previously Norton Sound had served as a seagoing test platform for various missile systems, particularly for numerous sounding rocket and “Rockoon” launches, (dod Release 468-64)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from NASA Wallops Station to 71-mi. altitude with payload of 12 explosive charges to provide data on atmospheric winds and temperatures and effects of the “warming trend” in the upper atmosphere. Previous measurements had been made during February “warming trend,” which moved in westerly direction across the northern hemisphere. This second and unexpected warming trend appeared to be moving in easterly direction. (Wallops Release 64-25; nasa Rpt. srl)
Hurricane Cleo battered Cape Kennedy rocket launching site with gale winds up to 65 mph. Technicians dismantled second stage of Titan II for GT—2 Gemini flight and stored it in hangar, lashed first stage of the Titan II to the pad. No damage was done to the Titan II or other lashed-down rockets. (Wash. Post, 8/28/64; AP, Balt Sun, 8/29/64) 766-598 0—66-----20
Japan launched its first meteorological sounding rocket from the National Space Development Center’s testing range on Nii Jima Island. The two-stage rocket reached 68.2-mi. altitude. (AP, NYT, 7/23/64, 46; AP, Wash. Post, 7/23/64)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to 86.6-mi. altitude, but nose cone failed to release. Using CW propagation transmitter, Gerdien condenser probe, and ion trap, experiments were to have measured ambient electron and ion density, monitored integrated ultraviolet flux from the sun, and tested two 12.267-mc shroud antennas. The propagation experiment obtained good data from 83 sec. to peak, but no other experimental results were obtained. (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with instrumented payload to study very low energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. The rocket reached 133.7-mi. altitude, ejected recovery package. After land recovery of the payload, examination revealed the emulsion trays all had fully extended and fully retracted properly, so that very good data would be obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
NASA successfully launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to an altitude of 444 mi., with instrumented payload to measure the earth’s geomagnetic field from the ground to Javelin peak altitude. Data from this experiment would be combined with that obtained from a Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched 90 sec. earlier. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill with grenade payload to obtain atmospheric temperature, wind, density, and pressure data. The rocket attained 86.5-mi. altitude and all but the first of the 12 grenades detonated. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was fired from Wallops Island with 82-lb. payload containing grenades, detectors, and associated equipment. the grenades electing and exploding at altitudes ranging from 24-to 59-mi. altitudes. This flight was followed 20 min. later by Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Fort Churchill, Canada, with identical payload, a less successful flight because second-stage motor failed to ignite. Grenades were ejected and detonated but at altitudes too low to obtain useful data. The close-order firings were first two in current NASA, series to gather comparative data on winds and atmospheric temperatures up to 55-mi. altitude at widely separated locations on nearsimultaneous basis. (Wallops Release 64-7)
USAF began awarding small study contracts to industry to explore various aspects of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Directed toward the orbiting of a 4-ton laboratory in 1968 to help DOD determine the military role of manned space flights, mol would be launched by a Titan III—C rocket and would orbit for approximately one month. Contracts were let last month to the Martin Co. to study the role of Titan III—C in relation to launching the laboratory. Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and the AiResearch Div. of the Garrett Corp. got contracts for study of environmental control systems. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/5/64)
The second set in a series of three dual ship-to-shore sounding rocket launchings was conducted at 5:24 p.m. EST from the usns Croatan and at 5:27 p.m. from Wallops Island, Va., about 200 mi. apart. Sodium vapor was ejected by the Nike-Apaches from about 25 mi. up to an altitude of approximately 125 mi. The reddish-pink clouds were visible for several hundred miles along the East Coast. (Wallops Release 6484; NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA used an Aerobee rocket to launch two experiments from White Sands Missile Range. The experiments were to measure cosmic dust and electron densities in the upper atmosphere. (M&R, 12/21/64, 8) NASA also successfully launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., to peak altitude of 121 mi. Objective was to obtain data on the electron density distribution in the ionospheric D region by means of a radio propagation experiment, and to measure photoemission currents. (NASARpt. SRL)
Static-test firing of Titan II rocket for first Project Gemini flight was postponed at Cape Kennedy until Jan. 14 because of possible malfunction of first-stage propellant valve during countdown, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/11/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/64)
Five-segment 120-in. rocket motor for Titan III exploded after 55 sec. during static firing at Edwards afb, Calif. Explosion caused extensive damage to new $ 10-million solid-motor test facility, dedicated just three hours earlied by SSD commanding officer Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, who had called the new stand “the most sophisticated and highly instrumented facility in the world.” Stand was operated for usaf by United Technology Center (utc), and further tests were shifted to utc’s test facility at Coyote, Calif. Cause of explosion was thought to be failure of casing weld when a “boot” in the bottom of the motor was removed. {M&R, 5/11/64,16)
Fourth stage of four-stage Blue Scout rocket failed to ignite after USAF launch from Cape Kennedy. The booster was to have sent a USAF scientific probe 23,000 mi. into space to study earth’s magnetic field. Preliminary estimates indicated the 33-lb. payload reached altitude of several hundred miles before it fell back into the Atlantic Ocean. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/13/64)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with Johns Hopkins Univ. instrumented payload was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 100mi. altitude. Rocket carried spectrophotometric instrumentation which measured absolute intensity of certain spectral features in the far ultraviolet region of the airglow during an aurora. Although rocket did not reach predicted 157-mi. altitude, the experiment provided general confirmation of the only previous experiment in that region, and with much higher resolution, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
A report from GAO to Congress charged that usn had spent $13.3 million to put rocket launchers on fighter planes and then had taken them off again because they created too many problems. The rockets had caused the fighters to pitch upward, and in many cases a plane would overtake and collide with a rocket it had launched. The GAO report said that the Navy could have saved about $4 million if it had gotten information available before the launchers were ordered, (upi, Houston Chron., 7/18/64).
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ascension Island to peak altitude of 75.8-mi., in flight to measure wind and temperature and derive density and pressure from 12 grenade explosions during rocket ascent. All grenades ejected and detonated as programed, and ground microphones recorded the sounds, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Flight-rating test for F-l rocket engine was delayed from mid-year to end of the year, and tests leading up to the qualification would begin in September. {M&R, 5/25/64,9)
Engineers proposed development of intercontinental ballistic troop transport capable of carrying 1,200 troops to any trouble spot on earth in 45 minutes. Such an Ithacus rocket transport would be ideal for helping stamp out “brush fire” conflicts, according to engineers Philip Bono and George C. Goldbaum of Douglas Aircraft who spoke at aiaa annual meeting. If funds were committed to project, they considered the ICBM transport system might be operational by 1975.	(Houston Chron.,
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., in test of hinged-fin assembly with modified wedge designed to produce about 5 rps at Apache burnout and to obtain temperatures in flight at various points on the fin panel. Rocket reached 90-mi. altitude; performance of rocket and instrumentation was considered good, with exception of temperature probes, which were lost shortly after lift-off. (NASARpt. srl)
X—15 No. 3 flown 'by NASA pilot Milton O. Thompson to 63,000-ft. altitude and 2,045-mph speed (mach 3.10). The X-15 rocket engine burned 41 sec. before Thompson cut back power to planned 40 per cent. Then engine unexpectedly cut off. Thompson could not restart it, and he had to make emergency landing on Cuddeback Dry Lake. Cause of premature shutdown was malfunction in engine control system. This was fourth forced landing in 107 X-15 flights. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Balt. Sun, 5/22/64)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., with Univ. of N.H. instrumented payload reached 90-mi. altitude, but experiment results were not obtained because of telemetry failure at 4.05 sec. Primary purpose of flight was to check out instrumentation for Nike-Apache sounding rocket experiments to be conducted on the IQST Mobile Launch Expedition in early 1965. A second checkout launch was scheduled for mid-January, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
usaf successfully flew Athena re-entry test rocket from Green River, Utah, to target area at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. USAF said that “some test objectives were achieved.” Launch was said to be second time in five launches that the four-stage missile completed the 357-mi. course. (AP, Phil. Inq., 10/4/64)
Two NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and returned good data. The first attained 95-mi. altitude, its instrumented payload measuring light intensity and particle fluxes. Rice Univ. payload included two photometers, one scintillator, three Geiger counters, One Geiger tube, and two magnetometers. The second rocket reached 117-mi. altitude with instrumented payload to obtain data on charged particles responsible for the visual aurora and on those responsible for auroral absorption. (NASA Rpts. srl)
Four Soviet parachutists at world parachute jumping championships, Leutkirch, West Germany, set new world record for men’s team jumping from 1,000 meters, landing an average of 66.5 centimeters from center of target. Previous world record of 89.5 centimeters was set two days earlier by U.S. team. (Reuters, NYT, 8/12/64,35) Nike-Cajun launched from Ft. Churchill reached 77.5-mi. altitude with 12 grenades ejecting and detonating during rocket ascent. Ground-based microphone array recorded time and direction of detonation sounds’ arrivals to obtain atmospheric temperature, wind, density, and pressure data. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops Island ejected 12 grenades during its ascent to 72-mi. altitude, with similar ground-based microphone array to obtain data. Nike-Apache launched from Kronogard reached 75.5-mi. altitude with micrometeoroid-particle-sampling payload. Although sampling cans did not seal completely, preliminary evaluation indicated that data would be recovered. Experiment was cooperative effort of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories and Meteorological Institute of Stockholm Univ. Nike-Cajun launched from Kronogard, with grenade payload functioned properly, but no usable data were obtained because of loss of Dovap near Cajun ignition. For same reason, peak altitude was unknown. (nasa Rpts. srl)
European Space Research Organization (ESRO) made first launching, a British Skylark sounding rocket, to altitude of 125 mi. from Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia. {NYT, 7/11/64, 5)
NASA announced Purdue Univ. had been awarded grant of $840,000 to finance expansion of Purdue’s Jet Propulsion Center. The construction would enable Purdue to conduct studies of ultra high pressure combustion in rocket thrust chambers, (nasa Release 64-145)
Placing a 100-in. telescope in orbit by 1975-1980 for studying the stars was “not an unreasonable goal,” Dr. Leo Goldberg told iau in Hamburg. The Harvard Univ. astronomer summed up arguments for telescope in space by saying that he could not agree with those “who prefer to look at the universe through a hazy, dirty, semi-opaque atmosphere.” Cost of such a project could be justified, he said, only if expected lifetime of such an instrument was long. However, he cited Soviet and U.S. progress toward space rendezvous techniques and expected increases in rocket booster power, and said: “The future looks terribly exciting.” (Sullivan, NYT, 9/1/64)
Two NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rockets were launched from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The first rocket reached 126.5-mi. altitude carrying instrumented payload which was recovered after impact. Electron measurement experiment did not work, but the other experiments apparently were successful: hypervelocity micrometeoroid collectors, cosmic dust collectors, and momentum and energy measurements as correlative data for the collectors. The second rocket reached 145.5-mi. altitude in successful nighttime test to study distribution of Lyman-alpha radiation. Scanning ultraviolet spectrometer and a photometer were used. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
120-in. solid-propellant rocket motor being developed by United Technology Center for usaf was static-fired for nearly two minutes, a “completely successful” test. (SBD, 1/30/64,163)
NASA and India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy announced they were jointly conducting series of four sounding rocket launchings from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station to investigate equatorial electro jet, electric current flowing along earth’s magnetic equator at about 60-mi. altitude. Thumba range is located near southwestern tip of India, on the magnetic equator. In the four electrojet experiments, India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy provides launching site and supporting facilities; personnel for sounding rocket launch operations, acquisition of data and data analysis; and supporting ground magnetometer and meteorological observations. NASA provides Nike-Apache rockets, loans the launcher, telemetry equipment, and supplementary magnetometers. Indian launch and telemetry personnel were trained by NASA. Rocket magnetometer was built by Univ. of New Hampshire through NASA contract. (nasa Release 64-19)
NASA and Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research announced agreement for joint scientific sounding rocket project. Under the agreement, four Nike-Apache sounding rockets carrying sodium vapor payloads would be launched from Coronie, Surinam, near the equator next autumn. Netherlands would provide scientific payloads and launch site, as well as other support facilities in Surinam. NASA would provide the rockets and launching device and train Dutch launching personnel, (nasa Release 64-197)
NASA-modified Areas sounding rocket, launched at Wallops Island, Va., carried white rat in specially designed, instrumented payload compartment in nose cone of the rocket to 114,000-ft. altitude, where the payload separated from the booster, a parachute deployed, and the container floated down to the surface of the ocean. Package was recovered by helicopter a few minutes later about 20 mi. offshore, and the rat was returned to NASA Wallops Station for observation and analysis. During the flight, biomedical data such as heartbeat and body temperature of the rat were telemetered to ground stations. Launch was part of Bio-Space Technology Training Program. (Wallops Release 64—65)
usaf announced an ion rocket would be tested in 90-day orbital flight next spring, using Agena vehicle. Electrical power to operate the engine would be provided by Snap 10A reactor, the first test combining an electrical propulsion engine and a nuclear reactor in space. Spokesmen said similar rocket had been successfully tested in August in suborbital flight from Pt. Arguello, Calif. The new engine, developed by Electro-Optical Systems, was said to have “developed the unheard-of specific impulse level of 7,800 seconds—roughly 20 times greater than the best chemical rockets of today.” {Wash. Post, 10/6/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/64)
usaf OAR announced determination by Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists R. A. Skrivanek, R. K. Soberman, and Tom Ryan that nocti-lucent clouds were composed of meteoric particles or of residue of burned out meteors. The determination was made after extensive examinations of noctilucent cloud particles gathered by specially designed rocket nose cones sent aloft on Nike-Cajun rockets in joint afcrl-nasa—Univ. of Stockholm program. The researchers expected that another series of noctilucent cloud experiments to be conducted in Sweden this summer would confirm these results. ( oar Release 4-64-3)	"
dod announced additional $30,414,000 had been obligated to Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, on cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for design, development, and fabrication of Titan III space booster, (dod Release 3-64)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket reached 124-mi. altitude in U.S.-Pakistan experiment from Sonmiani. Sodium vapor trail from the rocket was photographed by ground cameras to measure direction and speeds of upper atmospheric winds. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched an Aerobee rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., to a height of 95 mi. The payload, an inflatable paraglider equipped with mylar-sandwich-type meteoroid penetration sensors, was flown in a meteoroid shower to investigate meteoroid hazards in space. Experiment performed as planned, vehicle worked successfully, and payload was recovered. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10; NASA Release 64-141, 64-135)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., reached 96.5-mi. altitude in successful flight to measure brightness of stars in the ultraviolet. Experiment instrumentation for the NASA rocket was provided by Space Astronomy Laboratory of the Univ. of Wisconsin (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumba Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Gemini spacecraft launched into orbit in unmanned test April 8 (GT-1) re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated midway between South America and Africa. Attached to the ll-ft.-long spacecraft was 20-ft.-long cylindrical rocket stage. They had been orbiting the earth at altitudes from between 100 and 190 mi. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/14/64; AP, Houston Post, 4/14/64)
Launching of Saturn I SA-5 rocket from AMR was postponed at T—100 min. because blind flange in liquid oxygen line to S-I stage had not been removed after recent pressurization check. Launch was rescheduled for Jan. 29. (Wash. Post, 1/28/64; Marshall Star, 1/29/64, 1)
The Athena rocket was successfully fired by usaf from Green River, Utah, to a target area in the White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. (M&R, 12/14/64, 10)
NASA conducted two sounding rocket launches from USNS Croatan, near Wallops Island, Va., to determine whether or not ship’s radar could track metalized-mylar spheres with sufficient accuracy to obtain significant geophysical data. Both payloads, each consisting of two metalized-mylar spheres, were provided by Univ. of Michigan. The first rocket, a Nike-Apache, reached 136-mi. altitude and two spheres ejected and inflated, but ship’s radar did not acquire track. Land-based radars did obtain sphere trajectory data. The second rocket, a Nike-Cajun, reached 92.6-mi. altitude, its spheres ejecting and inflating as planned but deflating earlier than expected. Ship’s radar provided questionable position data which would have to be analyzed further. (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Rpts. srl)
NASA launched its first Project Luster payload from White Sands, N. Mex., on an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket. Primary objectives of flight were to evaluate engineering performance of Luster micrometeoroid-sampling instrument and to collect meteoritic debris during the peak of the Leonids meteor shower. The Aerobee 150 reached 97mi. altitude, and performance of both the rocket and the instrumentation was considered “very good.” Nose cone did not fully retract, so the data collected during the flight were lost in re-entry heating and atmospheric contamination. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Final Gemini unmanned flight test (GT-2) from etr was postponed after a last-second engine misfire on the Titan II rocket. The trouble occurred 1.7 seconds after the Titan II booster engines ignited: loss of hydraulic pressure caused one of the two engine nozzles to swivel out of place; and automatic system sensed this and immediately extinguished both engines in the rocket’s first stage one second before lift-off. A NASA spokesman said that one of the nozzle tubes received a slight crack as a result of the malfunction and that extensive checking of all systems must be completed before a decision would be made as to whether the entire first stage would be replaced. The Titan II was to have lifted the 6,900-lb. Gemini capsule to 106 mi. in the suborbital flight and then accelerated it to faster and hotter reentry than normal. A parachute landing in the Atlantic was projected for the capsule and recovery planned. Chief goals of the flight, second in the Gemini series, would have been to test the heat shield as well as control, life support, and other systems. NASA said the delay meant the first manned Gemini flight would not take place until the second quarter of 1965. GT—2 would be attempted again in January. (Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib. 12/10/64; Balt. Sun. ■	12/10/64; Witkin, NYT, 12/10/64)
Of the formerly operational Thor missiles that were being converted to space missions, nsaf spokesman said: “This program has proved that it is possible to take a complex vehicle that was designed as a weapon and convert it to peaceful uses at a substantial saving and without sacrificing reliability. We can expect that there will be more than this.” afssd estimated converted booster cost up to $150,000 less than new Thor booster. (M&R, 4/6/64, 31)
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice-president of Aerojet-General and director of Solid Rocket Operations, announced the firing of a small solid propellant motor which successfully started and stopped more than six times. In the test, Aerojet used a 4-in. motor with 6 lbs. of propellant. (M&R, 11/23/64,9)
Gemini-Titan II (GT-2) rocket which was to launch unmanned Gemini spacecraft arrived at Cape Kennedy. It arrived by C-133B cargo plane from Martin Co. plant in Baltimore where it had undergone testing. (AP,Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel,7/12/64)
United Technology Center successfully test-fired its 120-inch-dia., 1million-lb.-thrust solid propellant rocket motor for nearly two minutes at Edwards AFB, Calif. The firing was the fourth static test within two months. The 250-ton rockets were being developed for the first stage of the Air Force’s Titan III—C standard space launch vehicle, under contract to the AF’s Space Systems Div. The Titan III—C was scheduled to orbit a variety of manned and unmanned payloads, including the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). (M&R, 1/4/65, 26)
United Technology Center’s 120-in.-dia., solid-propellant motor for Air Force’s Titan III—C booster was static-fired successfully for more than 110 sec. with a new ablative nozzle-throat which probably would be substituted for the carbon throat previously used in test firings. (Av. Wk., 11/23/64, 34; utc)
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda published erroneous map of the target area in the Pacific for its rocket tests which it had previously announced would begin August 4. The map placed the impact areas within 10Q mi. of populated islands, but the targets as previously defined were several hundred miles from nearest inhabited areas and in another part of the Pacific. (Shabad, NYT, 8/3/64)
According to breakdown of FY 1965 budget of NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology, NASA would initiate preliminary design study of advanced fluorine-hydrogen (flox) rocket engine in FY 1965. The new engine would be based on results of experimental fluorine program with RL-10 engine. (M&R, 2/17/64,18)
NASA Group Achievement Award presented to Centaur “E” Stand Project personnel at NASA Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station for their “significant contributions resulting in the successful completion of research testing of the Atlas 116 D booster under simulated loading and environmental conditions and [for] providing data vital to the first flight of the Centaur vehicle.” (lrc Release 64-56)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with experiment to obtain optical spectra of night ultraviolet airglow. Rocket attained 1'13.5-mi. altitude, and the attitude control system kept the two fast spectrographs pointed accurately at the horizon, permitting four-minute exposure of the faint molecular oxygen Herz-berg bands. Also included in payload was a Nikon camera to obtain star-field backgrounds for aspect determination, (nasa Rpt. srl)
USAF launched Titan II rocket from AMR on successful 5,000-mi. flight to test its ability to function both as an icbm and as booster for Project Gemini manned spacecraft. The Titan II carried Gemini malfunction detection system and damping device to counteract vibrations. (M&R, 1/20/64, 11)
NASA launched Saturn I SA-5 from AMR in first successful Right test of both stages of the rocket. The 1.5-million-lb.-thrust S—I stage performed as planned, and the 90,000-lb.-thrust upper stage (S-IV) powered by six liquid-hydrogen RL-10 engines separated and burned properly for eight minutes, attaining orbital speed. The orbited body (spent S-IV stage, instrument unit, payload adapter, Jupiter nose cone, and 11,500 lbs. of sand ballast) weighed 37,700 lbs., nearly 20,000 lbs. of which was payload. As the first of the Block II Saturn I’s, SA-5 was first Right test of both Saturn stages and only the second flight test of a liquid-hydrogen powered rocket stage (see Centaur AC-2, Nov. 27, 1963). The five Block II Saturn I’s differ from Block I predecessors in that they have live upper stages, S—I propellant tanks are extended to provide 100,000 lbs. usable propeflant, and tail fins are added for stability. During the flight eight onboard motion picture cameras photographed various operations of the rocket and a TV camera provided real-time photographs of separation and ignition of S-IV stage. Shortly after S-I burnout, the motion picture cameras were ejected, impacting downrange where pararescue men recovered seven of them. This test of the world’s largest known rocket proved flight capability of Saturn I’s liquid-hydrogen, clustered-engine upper stage and demonstrated the vehicle’s capability to orbit 20,000-lb. payload. {Marshall Star, 2/5/64, 1; NYT, 1/30/64, 1; M&R, 2/3/64, 17-18)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., with Rice Univ. experiment “Sammy I” to measure and study causes of auroras and airglow. Vehicle carried 68-lb. payload, designed and built by professors and students in Rice Space Science Dept., to peak altitude of 56 mi. before impacting 74 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. No recovery operation was conducted; telemetry data during flight would be analyzed by the Space Science Dept. This was first of four similar experiments to be conducted under NASA grant; remaining three flights would take place at Ft. Churchill, Canada. (Wallops Release 64-3)
Atlas-Centaur 4 (AC-4) hurled its Centaur second stage into orbit around the earth with a mass model of the Surveyor lunar spacecraft in its nose. The first-burn performance of the Centaur rocket sent the stage into a nearly circular parking orbit of 100 mi. perigee and 106 mi. apogee. The second bum should have put the rocket into an oval path taking it out as much as 5,000 mi. from earth; however, the attempt to restart the RL-10 engines failed and the stage began to tumble and roll. After about 15 hr. in orbit, the Centaur stage and its Surveyor dummy payload re-entered the atmosphere over the South Pacific east of Australia and disintegrated. NASA said all prime mission objectives had been met, including the demonstration of the structural integrity of the Atlas-Centaur during powered flight, testing of the guidance system which was flying closed loop for the first time, verification of the structural and thermal integrity of the Centaur nose fairing and insulation panels, and verification of the performance of the jettison systems for the nose fairing and insulation panels. Project officials were investigating what caused the stage to tumble, preventing propellants from reaching the pumps. (NASA Release 64289; Lewis News, 12/24/64, 1; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 24; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/11/64)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., reached 107-mi. altitude with four spectrographs to obtain spectra of planets, but no data were obtained because attitude control system’s despin valve failed and the rocket spun out of control. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to an altitude of 117 mi. The payload contained three experiments, the most important of which involved the measurement of the composition of the neutral atmosphere in the altitude region of 62-155 mi. All three experiments operated satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA successfully launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to 89-mi. altitude from White Sands, N. Mex. Purpose was to map photon-emitting night-sky sources. Gas-filled proportional counters were used to detect and measure energy of the x-rays. The rocket performed well and experimental results were good, but 10-20% of desired data were lost because yo-yo despin mechanism failed to deploy. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Univ. of New Hampshire instrumented payload was launched from Thumba Range, Trivandrum, India, to 102-mi. altitude. Payload instrumentation included densitometer and baroswitch, to determine altitude and intensity of electric current systems in the ionosphere near the magnetic equator. Performance of both rocket and instrumentation was considered good; telemetry signal was received for 395 sec., and good data were expected, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
usaf successfully launched the fifth Asset re-entry test vehicle in its series of six from Cape Kennedy. The glider rode pickaback aboard a singlestage Thor booster. (Wash. Post, 12/9/64; M&R, 12/14/64, 10)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched in U.S.-Pakistan project from Sonmiani reached 124-mi. altitude. Sodium vapor trail ejected during ascent was photographed by ground cameras to measure atmospheric wind directions and speeds. Launch was part of cooperative program between NASA and Pakistan’s Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Space-General Corp. was building new five-ton rocket vehicle for usaf to use in testing recovery and re-entry parachutes at El Centro, Calif., Missiles and Rockets reported. Vehicle, called “Hi-Dive,” would be dropped from aircraft at 45,000 ft., slowed down by stabilization parachutes for firing of rockets to speed it up to mach 5. Test parachute would deploy at 30,000 ft. Delivery was expected next spring. (M&R, 9/14/64, 11)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with instrumentation to obtain data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and on charged particles responsible for auroral absorptions was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 127-mi. altitude. Instrumented payload included five charged-particle detectors, aspect magnetometer, and accelerometer. All flight objectives were met. (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Trustees and President of Clark Univ. announced Clark’s proposed new library would be named the “Robert Hutchings Goddard Library” in honor of the distinguished rocket pioneer, who was an alumnus and professor of physics at Clark. (Clark Announcement)
Black Knight rocket was fired at Woomera Rocket Range in U.K.-U.S.-Australia Project Dazzle. Minister of Supply Allen Fairhall said the rocket reached 370-mi. altitude, where second stage rocket ignited to drive instrumented re-entry package back through the atmosphere. (Reuters, Houston Post, 8/7/64)
NASA announced it had selected General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics Corp. to perform preliminary work, estimated to be worth about $1.7 million, on development of advanced type of nuclear reactor for use in powering spacecraft. Company would conduct studies on use of tungsten to contain uranium fuel in compact high-powered reactor that might power a rocket. Work would be performed for Space Nuclear Propulsion Office operated jointly by NASA and aec. (nasa Release 64-173; WSJ, 7/15/64)
Usaf launched Thor-Agena booster combination from Pt. Arguello with unidentified payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/25/64)
United Technology Center (utc) had developed hybrid rocket combining best features of solid and liquid propellants and 20% more powerful than any solid-propulsion rocket operational today. Rocket used solid fuel—butadiene rubber—and liquid oxidizer—liquid oxygen. utc Assistant Manager of Advanced Technology Douglas D. Ordahl said the rocket also was safer than solid-fueled rocket motors and was simpler and more reliable than liquid-fueled rockets. (WSJ, 5/26/04)
Unnamed NASA official quoted 'by Howard Simons in Washington Post as saying there was “increasing evidence” that U.S.S.R. was building powerful new rocket booster. However, it was not used in launching three-man voskhod i spacecraft. U.S. Government officials were said to believe voskhod i launched by “old, reliable space boosters . . . mated into a multistage rocket.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 10/ 14/64)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket reached 85-mi. altitude in launch from Chamical, Argentina. Instrumented payload apparently obtained good data in measurement of electron density, electron temperature, ultraviolet and solar x-radiation flux. Test was second of two Nike-Cajun launches by NASA and Argentina’s National Commission of Space Research. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched a 110-lb. instrumented payload to measure upper atmospheric day-glow emissions from Wallops Station, Va., aboard a four-stage solid-propellant Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket. Day-glow studies were extended to higher altitudes than previous observations and tests of instrumentation being considered for future orbital missions were conducted. The payload, containing a spectrophotometer, ultraviolet photometers, and a rotating filter wheel photometer, was carried to an altitude of 548 mi. as scientific data were telemetered to ground receivers for 17 minutes. Impact occurred in the Atlantic 930 mi. from the launch site. (Wallops Release 64-79; nasa Rpt. srl)
New York Times reported that aec and USAF were jointly supporting work on a relatively simple nuclear rocket engine (Project Poodle) that was likely to be flyable in the next five years. The rocket would be clustered to propel an upper rocket stage, and it was reported that the newly designed device might save more than $300 million on space missions which had already been planned and for which conventional upper stages had been contemplated. The novelty of the new engine stemmed from the fact that its power would be derived not from a controlled nuclear reaction but from the decay of radioactive polonium 210. Propulsion would be provided in gentle acceleration of about % lb. thrust sustained for periods of weeks. (Witkin, NYT, 6/1/64)
According to Hebrew Univ. sources, Dr. Menahem Steinberg of Hebrew Univ. in Jerusalem had developed new oxidizer for use in solid-fuel rocket engines, said to be superior to those in general use because the gases produced by combustion would be of a low molecular weight and so would increase propulsion power. The sources said two years would be required to develop and confirm the new discovery. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 4/2/64)
NASA investigative committee recommended series of tests to determine whether static electricity caused accidental ignition of Delta rocket motor in the Spin Test Facility at Cape Kennedy last April 14. In its preliminary report, the fact-finding committee said there were four possible causes for the ignition: heat, shock, outside radio signals, and electrical impulse. The first three possibilities seemed unlikely, but they would be studied further. Committee considered it “possible, however, that static electricity could have built up in such a way as to cause ignition.” Until the committee completed its study and made its fined report, NASA would not fly the X—248 motor. (NASA Release 64-98; KSC Release 55-64)
Officials of NASA’s Saturn program expressed interest in a miniature version of the Rover nuclear rocket engine. Called the “Poodle,” the liquid-propellant engine was developed under an AEC contract with Space Technology Laboratories of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge.	(M&R, 6/8/64, 22)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, called on defense industry at aiaa meetings to stop what he called unjustified and potentially dangerous “gloom and doom talk” about future defense spending. He said Pentagon r&d spending, currently at a $5.5 billion annual level, should remain relatively stable in coming years. Such pessimistic fears on part of industry, based on recent very small decrease in defense budget, Fubini said, could prompt top engineers and scientists to move into other industries and thereby weaken U.S. military posture by reducing industry’s capability of generating new ideas for dod and developing new weapons, (aiaa Booster, 7/2/64; NYT, 7/2/64,32M; Av. Wk„ 7/13/64,19)
NASA launched second re-entry experiment for aec, designated Reentry Flight Demonstration-2 (RFD-2), on a Scout booster from Wallops Island, Va. Nonradioactive mockup of nuclear isotopic generator was sent to 800-mi. altitude by three-stage Scout, before the payload reentered atmosphere on its ballistic trajectory and impacted about 250 mi. southeast of Bermuda. Primary objective of rfd-2 was to acquire data on generator disassembly and fuel capsule burnup rate for use in advanced generator designs. In previous flight test (rfd-1 in May 1963), nonradioactive model of Snap-lOA nuclear reactor was tested in atmospheric re-entry; rfd-i demonstrated that space reactors can be designed to melt down and disassemble upon re-entry. The nonradioactive mockup in rfd-2 was a model of an isotopic-thermoelectric generator. Earlier testing had shown that heat created during re-entry could be used to burn up isotopic generator, leaving very minute particles which then would be dispersed at high altitudes to eliminate any radiation danger. (Wallops Release 64-72)
1.5 million-lb.-thrust S—1-8 Saturn booster was successfully fired in a fullduration static test at msfc. Built by Chrysler Corp. at Michoud Operations plant near New Orleans, the booster was the first to be produced by private industry. (AP, 6/12/64)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., sent instrumented payload to 117-mi. altitude in successful test of the sounding rocket’s attitude control system with the improved inertial reference system. Payload was recovered immediately after impact and found to he in excellent condition. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to an altitude of 78 mi., to test the prototype Nike-Cajun grenade payload produced by Zimney Corp. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory, except for failure of 12th grenade to explode. (NASA Rpt. srl)
msfc . planners believed a post-Saturn V booster would be needed if the U.S. were to undertake a manned planetary exploration program, Missiles and Rockets reported. They also favored the so-called Block II vehicle, which would have two stages using new propulsion techniques and high-pressure engines. First stage would be recoverable. (M&R, 7/13/64, 9)
U.S. airmail stamp honoring Dr, Robert H. Goddard was released at Roswell, N. Mex. Stamp was first U.S. stamp with rocket motif since Fort Bliss stamp of 1946. U.S. stamps also had been issued for Project Echo (1961) and Project Mercury (1962). (NASA Historian)
The French Government reported two successful firings of its four-stage Berenice rocket, a mach-12 re-entry test vehicle, from the lie du Levant testing center in the Mediterranean. Tests were conducted by the Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (ONERA). The Berenice project was designed to supply re-entry data for use in France’s strategic missile program. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,25)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carried instrumented payload to 127-mi. altitude, in successful flight to obtain data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and on those responsible for auroral absorption. Instrumentation included five charged-particle detectors, an aspect magnetometer, and an accelerometer, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
After two previous failures, usaf successfully launched four-stage, solidfuel Athena missile. Rocket was fired from Green River, Utah, on estimated 15-min., 475-mi, flight to White Sands, N. Mex., carrying one of series of subscale experimental re-entry vehicles being tested as part of program to develop advanced re-entry vehicles for space travel and ICBm’s. No other details of flight were given. (AP, Hartford Courant, 7/9/64)
USAF was considering developing new 40,000-lb. thrust third stage for Titan III launch vehicle, Aviation Week reported. Burning high-energy fuels, the new stage would replace the 16,000-17,000-lb.-thrust transtage. Meanwhile usaf asked six firms for proposals for a back-up and/or replacement rocket engine system for the transtage, said to be experiencing development difficulties. But usaf was not asking for upgrading of the 16,000-lb.-thrust system at this time. (Av. Wk., 4/6/64, 13; SBD, 4/10/64,59)
Lightning damaged certain electrical systems in Titan II launch vehicle and ground checkout equipment at Cape Kennedy, where the booster rocket was being prepared for launching of unmanned Gemini spacecraft (GT—2). NASA spokesman said: “The over-all effect of this condition may result in a delay of the first manned flight [GT-3] into next year.” (Houston Post, 8/19/64; upi, NYT, 8/19/64, 15)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska instrumented payload attained 107-mi. altitude and obtained data on the visible aurora and on vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors also were included in die payload. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded two NASA contracts for work to be performed at NASA Mississippi Test Facility: $3,801,146 contract to Chaney and James Construction Co., Inc., for construction of booster storage building, RP-1 dock, and booster transfer dock; and $2,401,542 contract to Farrell Construction Co. for construction of main canal. (dod Release 128-64)
Cape Kennedy celebrated its 14th anniversary as a missile and space vehicle launching base. The first missile from the Cape was a hybrid Bumper (V-2) booster with an Army Wac Corporal second stage, launched on a 200-mi. trajectory on July 24, 1950. Since then more than 1,400 launches had been made. Since its establishment in 1958, NASA had been responsible for 84 flights. (Marshall Star, 7/29/64, 9)
S—ic—1, first stage of the Saturn V booster, rolled out of the Manufacturing Engineering Lab at msfc exactly on schedule. The stage was moved to the Quality arid Reliability Assurance Lab where it would be checked out automatically in preparation for static firings, (msfc Release 65-239)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with four nrl solar-study experiments was launched from wsmr to 115-mi. altitude. Rocket performed well and three experiments functioned as planned, providing good data: ultraviolet spectroheliograms were obtained, spatial detail in Lyman-Alpha light on the solar disk was photoelectrically recorded, and solar Lyman-Alpha flux measurements were made by the ion chamber. The fourth experiment was to have recorded the comet Ikeya-Seki against the corona, but because of a mechanical failure in the white-light coronagraph experiment these data were not obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Evaluation of the Soviet space effort should be done in terms of Russian rather than U.S. requirements and considerations, suggested William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: “To look at things from the Russian angle for a change may provide a new view of the whole space race.” Hines suggested that the orbits of the Molniya satellites were egg-shaped because with 12-hr. periodicity “the Molniya-type satellite stays over the homeland about two-thirds of the time and comes back at exactly the same time each day.” He said that the U.S.S.R. probably had no weather satellites “because it does not need this branch of the weatherman’s art.” A possible reason that there were no polar-orbiting Soviet photographic reconnaissance satellites like the U.S.’s Samos was that they were not needed. No Saturn V-type launch vehicle development was evident, Hines concluded, possibly because “Russia’s approach to [lunar landing] is not necessarily ... the same as America’s. ... A revealing hint along this line is contained in a recent issue of Moscow News. . . . The author puts forward the suggestion that a lunar landing and return mission might be organized using two spacecraft rather than one, each of which could be launched by a rocket smaller than Saturn V.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/65, A14)
NASA had awarded Thiokol Chemical Corp. approximate $16-million, multiple-incentive-development contract to develop a 100-lb.-thrust rocket engine for use in spacecraft attitude control and maneuvering systems and for launch vehicle ullage and attitude control systems. Designated c-1, the engine would be powered by storable hypergolic liquid propellants, (nasa Release 65-322; msfc Release 65-262)
S-IVB stage for the Saturn V booster was successfully test-fired for full duration at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento Test Center. In a test simulating a lunar flight, the stage ran for three minutes, was cut off for 30-min. orbital coast period, and then re-ignited for 355-sec. run. (Marshall Star, 8/25/65, 1)
Soviet professor V. V. Fedynskiy, in an interview with UchiteVskaya Gazeta, said that proton i had demonstrated the possibility of getting more powerful spaceships into orbit, which, if necessary, could lift into space a crew and a large quantity of research equipment. He said use of the new rocket booster would permit more intensive studies of space, including those that would allow a more thorough research of the physical fields and internal structure of the earth directly from space. Such studies would be of primary interest for geophysics and geology, he said.	(17chitel’skaya Gazeta, 7/22/65, 4)
NASA launched 3.5-ton Aerobee 350, new two-stage research rocket, from Wallops Station, Va., in first flight test. The 52-ft.-long, 22-in.-dia. rocket carried 367 lbs. of performance instrumentation to peak altitude of 235 mi. and impacted in Atlantic Ocean 160 mi. from launch site. Designed and developed by Space-General Corp., Aerobee 350 had a main stage “sustainer” propelled by four liquid-fuel engines, each developing 4,100 lbs. thrust. Booster stage used a solid propellant Nike motor with 51,000 lbs. thrust. Booster and sustainer stages fired simultaneously, with the booster burning out and separating about 3.2	sec. later. The rocket would boost a minimum-weight payload of 150 lbs. to an altitude of 290 mi. and a maximum payload of 500 lbs. to 210 mi. (Wallops Release 65—37; nasa Rpt. srl)
Indonesia test-fired a research rocket from a site “somewhere in Indonesia,” Djakarta radio reported. The rocket reached 210-mi. (338-km.) altitude, (upi, Houston Chron., 8/8/65)
Soviet news agency Tass announced that firing of a new type of multistage rocket booster on Jan. 31 had been so successful that further tests in the Pacific series had been canceled. The rocket had travelled more than 8,000 mi. in the Pacific southwest of Hawaii, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/2/65; upi, IE ash. Post, 2/3/65)
R. E. Clarson, Inc., of St. Petersburg, Fla., was awarded a $2,179,000 contract for alterations to Launch Complex 34, Cape Kennedy, to accommodate the Saturn ib rocket. Army Corps of Engineers made the award, (ap, Miami Her., 2/3/65)
NASA Aerobee 300A sounding rocket was successfully launched from Wallops Station, Va., to a peak altitude of 326.2 km. (203.6 mi.). Primary objective was the nighttime measurement of the density and temperature of neutral No using an omegatron mass spectrometer, and the simultaneous measurement of electron temperature and density using a small cylindrical electrostatic probe. A secondary objective was the testing of a lunar optical sensor especially developed for thermosphere probe application. Univ. of Michigan provided the experiment instrumentation. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had selected the Apparatus Div. of Texas Instruments, Inc., for contract negotiations expected to exceed $1 million for development of a weather-measuring device to be carried on the Nimbus B weather satellite: an experimental sensor, Iris (Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer), would he designed to collect information on the atmosphere’s vertical temperature, ozone, and water vapor distribution on a worldwide basis. Nimbus B was scheduled for launching by a Thorad Agena D booster in 1967. (gfsc Release G-21-65)
Second Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with experiment to obtain measurements of comet Ikeya-Seki was launched by nasa from Wallops Station, Va. The 205-lb. payload, consisting primarily of an Ebert-Fastie scanning spectrometer and an attitude control system for pointing the instrumentation at the comet, was boosted to peak altitude of 117 mi. (Wallops Release 65-69)
An unmanned instrument-packed Gemini spacecraft (gt-2) was launched from Cape Kennedy on Titan II launch vehicle in suborbital shot preliminary to U.S.’s first two-man venture. Aboard was an automatic sequencer which issued orders at precise times en route to fire the rocket’s second stage, to separate the spacecraft from the rocket, to jettison the spacecraft’s storage section, to cartwheel the spacecraft into a reentry attitude, and to open the spacecraft’s parachutes. The rocket reached a maximum altitude of 98.9 mi. and a speed of 16,708.9 mph before impacting 2,127.1 mi. downrange. The Gemini spacecraft descended by parachute into the Atlantic 16 mi. short of the planned impact point and 52 mi. from the carrier U.S.S. Lake Champlain which recovered the capsule an hour and 45 min. after launch. The capsule was reported in excellent condition. Major experiments for which the test was intended were apparently complete successes: a test of the heat shield; a test of the retrorocket system; and a test of the sequencing system. Despite its successes, the test had some difficulties: a fuel cell that would be the primary electrical system in the spacecraft during long-duration manned flights failed to operate before launching because of a stuck valve; the temperature was found to be too high in the cooling system of the spacecraft, (nasa Release 64—296; MSC Roundup, 1/3/65, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/19/65; Houston Chron., 1/19/65; upi, Rossiter, Wash. Post, 1/20/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 1/20/65)
Potential of the Saturn IB was noted in the New Orleans Times-Picayune: “The payload potential of the Saturn I—B boosters now under production at Michoud seems to have escaped general attention in discussions about space missions and the rocket assemblies assigned or assignable to carry them out. These and other factors are significant in connection with efforts under way, just coming to light, to intrude on, supplant or degrade the SI-B in the Apollo or other programs for which it is fitted. “The first of the ‘new Saturns,’ or intermediate Saturns, of the Chrysler Corporation’s Space Division has reached Cape Kennedy for the initial lift-off in tests and flights that will lead to human exploration of the moon. “Payload requirements vary of course for different objectives of this 12-shot series. Regardless of what is first put aloft, the i-b assembly is designed to send into desired orbit 36,000 pounds of functional vehicle—not to mention the 30,000 pounds of a burned-out second-stage, should that lagniappe be added. “This rating compares with the 26,000-pound payload Soviet spacemen boosted into orbit last July 16; with 21,000 pounds sent into orbit by the Titan 3-C June 18; with the rated 25,000-pound payload capacity of the Titan 3-C; with the 22,000-pound payload rating of the ‘old Saturn’; with the 18,000-pound payload dispatched by an ‘old Saturn’ a year or two ago; and with 4,000 pounds orbited by the Atlas.” {CR, 8/19/65, A4674)
Patent granted to Barnes Engineering Co. on an instrument that could distinguish a rocket flash from a sunset—an important distinction in the automatic tracking of missiles. The invention was already in use at a Government launch site for research in missile development, reported the New York Times. Lockheed Aircraft Co. received a patent for a reentry vehicle designed for more accurate landings than had been made with the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft. Invented by Charles H. Christenson, the craft had wings that could be extended for flight in the atmosphere or folded for launching and space travel. The vehicle’s tail section would exert considerable drag after reentry; ring-shaped control surfaces could reduce the drag when extended rearward. (Jones, NYT, 9/4/65, 27)
France announced successful launching in the Sahara of the Emeraude stage of the Diamant booster. (M&R, 3/15/65, 11) dies on declining basis until 1970. Sen. A. S. Mike Monroney (D-Okla.), Chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee investigating ways to keep helicopter lines alive, suggested increased support from major airlines as possible alternative to Federal aid. Stuart G. Tipton, President of Air Transport Association which represented almost every scheduled U.S. airline, testified that helicopter lines received about $1 million a year in indirect support and that “as a matter of principle, this is as far as the airlines should go or be expected to go.” He added that experience and advances in helicopters and poor-weather landing equipment were about to make helicopters potentially profitable in all large cities. Withdrawal of Federal support now would be disastrous. (Clark, NYT, 3/9/65; Clark, NYT, 3/10/65, 69)
A $784,600 contract had been awarded to Mechling Barge Lines, Inc., for towing three Saturn space vehicle barges, NASA MSFC announced. Two of the barges, Promise and Palaemon, would be used to carry the Saturn I and IB boosters. A third, being readied, would transport the larger Saturn V booster. The contract covered a one-year period. (msfc Release 65-128)
Italy launched a French Centaure rocket in collaboration with the European Space Research Organization (esro), the Italian Defense Ministry announced. The rocket was launched from the Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia to gather information on atmospheric particles at between 60- and 100-mi. altitude. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/8/65, 3)
Memorandum of Understanding for a cooperative Argentina-U.S. program of meteorological sounding rocket research was signed by Teofilo Tabanera for the Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales (cnie) and Hugh L. Dryden for NASA. Specific purpose of this experimental program was to obtain high-altitude meteorological data in the vicinity of Chamical, Argentina, by Boosted-Dart and Areas sounding rockets and to evaluate Argentine ground support equipment in conjunction with the payloads. General purpose of the experimental program was “to develop a basis for future meteorological rocket soundings on an operational basis.” The program was contemplated as “one element in a projected inter-American, experimental, metero-logical sounding rocket research network (exametnet) .” (Memo of Understanding)
British Meteorological Office’s Skua solid-propellant sounding rocket was described by Kenneth Owen in Indian Aviation. The eight-foot-long, five-inch-diameter rocket had been in use since the beginning of the year as a tool for weather observations and other research. A series of Skuas would be launched as part of iqsy; launchings were planned at the rate of three a week during the nine two-week periods of IQSY known as “World Geophysical Intervals.” (Indian Aviation, 3/65, 73-74)
The first flight-model S-IVB second stage for the Saturn IB booster was test-fired at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento Test Center to demonstrate its flight readiness before formal acquisition by NASA. The stage’s 200,000-lb.-thrust J-2 engine was fired for 452 sec. (7V2 min.) without mishap. Test was computer-controlled throughout, marking “the first time a fully automatic system has been used to perform a complete checkout, propellant loading, and static firing test on a space vehicle.” (nasa Release 65-267; msfc Release 65—202; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1, 10)
NASA and DOD had approved first phase of a General Dynamics proposal for 30% -uprated Atlas slv x3 booster. This phase covered only reliability improvement by introduction of new components. Order to proceed on actual uprating was expected this month. (M&R, 3/15/65,
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket, launched from Wallops Station, Va., attained peak altitude of 90.5 mi. (145 km.). Primary experimental objective was to measure spectral irradiance of the stars Spica and Alkaid in the wavelength interval from 1,100 A to 4,000 A. Instrumentation consisted of an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer with photometers and optical telescope. Attitude control was obtained with a modified Attitude Control System (Acs), a roll-stabilized gyro platform, and an optical tracker—the combination known as Strap. The Strap system performed correctly. Due to an incorrect gain setting, the star-tracker failed to lock-on throughout most of the flight. The telescope and spectrometer functioned properly, but obtained no data due to the failure to lock-on. Experiment was conducted by GSFC. (nasa Rpt. srl) During May: A camera capsule from the Saturn I sa-7, launched from Eastern Test Range Sept. 18, 1964, was found in shallow waters off San Salvador in the Bahamas. Color film in the capsule had deteriorated and was not usable. The capsule was the third one found of the eight flown on the sa-7. The first two were found in November 1964, near San Salvador and Eleuthera Islands. Film in these capsules was in good condition. (Marshall Star, 5/19/65, 6)
U.S.S.R. made public a statement issued by Soviet Foreign Ministry accusing Britain of using its territory to train West German troops in “handling rocket weapons that can bear nuclear warheads.” The British Embassy in Moscow, recipient of the statement, made no comment, (ap, NYT, 9/13/65)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station, boosted 51-lb. payload with ionosphere experiment for the Univ. of Illinois and the gca Corp. to 113-mi. (182-km.) peak altitude. Payload carried instrumentation to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in D and E layers of the ionosphere. No recovery was required since data from the experiments were radioed to ground stations during the seven-minute flight. Experiment was last nasa 1964—65, iqsy project. (Wallops Release 65-79; ap, Wash. Post, 12/17/65, A8)
Soviet Union launched a “new type” space booster that spanned more than 8,000 mi. of the Pacific, according to Tass. The firing was said to have been so successful that a second planned shot was canceled. (M&R, 1/8/65, 8)
Prof. S. N. Vernov, corresponding member of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, noted in Tass interview the unusual weight of proton I and its special equipment for studying cosmic particles of super-high energy. He said the method for counting the particles, worked out eight years ago by Prof. N. L. Grigorov, had made it possible to determine the total energy of each particle separately. Scientists had hesitated to use the method in space because of the weight of the equipment. This problem had been solved with the creation of a more powerful booster, he said. (Bakinskoy Rabochiy, 7/20/65, 2)
NASA announced it would negotiate a two-phase contract with Aerojet General Corp. for design and development of a liquid-hydrogen, regeneratively cooled exhaust nozzle for the Phoebus nuclear rocket reactor test program. First phase of the contract would include a four-month preliminary design study of nozzle concepts and an evaluation of fabrication and testing methods. This phase would be negotiated on a cost-plus-fixed-fee basis at an estimated value of $400,000. Using results of Phase I, the contractor would design, develop, test, and deliver three nozzles to the Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nev. Phase II would be awarded as an incentive contract with an estimated value of $10 million. Phoebus, a 5,000-megawatt reactor, would be tested as part of the program to develop nuclear propulsion devices for space missions. ( nasa Release 65-28)
The first stage of the Titan II booster which orbited GEMINI V was recovered intact in the Atlantic about 450 mi. northeast of Cape Kennedy. An Air Rescue Service plane reported that the 71-ft. stage was in the water 25% submerged, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/22/65, A34; upi, NYT, 8/22/65, 13)
USN fired a Hydra-Iris sea-launched sounding rocket, to 184mi. altitude carrying a 100-lb. payload. The rocket was launched from a point about 1,400 mi. east of Montevideo, Uruguay. Mission was to measure radiation intensity within the inner Van Allen radiation belt. (M&R, 2/8/65, 8)
A Soviet booster capable of generating more than 60-million hp. had launched the instrumented spacecraft of the Proton series, Prof. Georgi V.	Petrovich disclosed in Aviatsiya i Cosmonavtika. Each engine had produced about 3-million-lbs. thrust at liftoff, usaf Titan m-c had produced 2.4-million-lbs. thrust when it was launched with an instrumented payload June 18. (Shabad, NYT, 11/14/65, 74)
Argo D—4 Javelin sounding rocket was successfully launched with 80-lb. instrumented payload from NASA Wallops Station to peak altitude of 549 mi. (883.9 km.). Furnished by the Univ. of Pittsburg under contract to NASA, the experiment measured the quantity of helium and hydrogen gases and the ionization of helium in the exosphere. Impact occurred 653 mi. (1,051.3 km.) downrange in the Atlantic. (Wallops Release 65-52; nasa Rpt, srl)
W. Y. Jordan, Jr., R. J. Harris, and D. R. Saxon, all of MSFC, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics article that clustering of nuclear rocket systems up to 10,000 mw. of power had been studied. These studies indicated the concept showed sufficient promise to warrant more detailed design studies, and these studies had been initiated. They stated that a “modular nuclear vehicle system concept, which offers a flexible multipurpose space-transportation capability, now appears possible through development of only one basic propulsion system and vehicle stage. . . .”	(A&A, 6/65, 48-52)
Canada’s Black Brant research rocket underwent its first successful launch from Ft. Churchill, Manitoba. (M&R, 6/28/65, 11)
First cooperative sounding rocket experiment sponsored by NASA and the Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research (zwo) was successfully conducted by Dutch scientists at Coronie, Surinam. Object of the experiment was to measure winds in the equatorial upper atmosphere by releasing a cloud of sodium vapor to be illuminated by the sun and tracked. Launching, using a Nike-Apache rocket, was first of four to be conducted under a memorandum of understanding signed in June 1964. The three subsequent launches were successfully conducted Sept. 21, Sept. 24, and Sept. 27. Dutch launch team had trained at Wallops Station, Va., earlier this year. (NASA Release 65-299; nasa Rpts. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket reached a peak altitude of 91.1	mi. from Wallops Island, Va. Purpose was to simultaneously measure the altitude of sodium airglow with sodium vapor and interference filters and determine atmospheric density with a 26-in., metallized, inflated mylar sphere, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Two simultaneous iqsy launches for high-altitude research were made by usaf from Eglin afb, Fla., in support of each other, one with a Nike-Cajun rocket and the other with a Sparrow-Areas. (Eglin afb Release 65-449)
Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, Soviet commander of the strategic rocket forces, said in Krasnaya Zvezda:	“Representatives of the aggressive imperialist circles often brag about their rocket-nuclear weapons. In answer to this we can state with assurance that in respect to the quality and quantity of rocket-nuclear weapons, we not only do not lag behind those who threaten us with war, hut far surpass them.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/6/65, 2, atss-t Trans.)
Soviet Union announced new rocket tests in the Pacific Ocean west of Hawaii and asked all countries to leave the area during the testing period. An official announcement by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said “a new modification of a space vehicle booster” would be launched. Tass said the test area covered “a circle with a radius of 40 n. mi., with a center of 19°8' north and 178°46' west.” The test firings would take place between October 31 and December 30. (Pravda, 10/30/65, 1, atss—T Trans.)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun with acoustic grenade experiment at Point Barrow, Alaska, to obtain upper atmospheric meterological data within the Arctic Circle. 12 grenades were ejected and detonated at intervals from about 25 to 56 mi. altitude as the rocket ascended. By recording the sounds on five sensitive microphones on the ground, scientists could obtain wind direction and velocity, atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure data. This was the first of a series of such experiments to gather upper atmospheric data within the Arctic Circle. Point Barrow was 1,100 mi. from the North Pole and 300 mi. within the Arctic Circle, at 71° north latitude. (Wallops Release 65—4; ap, NYT, 1/29/65)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., to investigate characteristics of the Ikeya-Seki comet. Reaching peak altitude of 111 mi., the 245-lb. payload, designed by scientists at the Univ. of Colorado and JPL, contained a scanning spectrometer, a filter wheel photometer, and related equipment to obtain spectra of the head and tail of the comet and to measure radiation. Data would assist in analyzing the materials in the comet and would be coordinated with observations conducted by other scientists. (Wallops Release 65-67)
Second two-stage Dragon sounding rocket launched by France from Skogasandur, Iceland, to 248-mi. peak altitude. Payload was instrumented to study protons and electrons in the Van Allen radiation belt, (ap, NYT, 9/5/65, 48)
An editorial in Red Star, the Soviet Defense Ministry newspaper, revealed that the booster that had launched voskhod ii had developed 1.43 million lbs. of thrust. The article said Soviet rockets were “unmatched” and that the voskhod ii flight “expedites the appearance of orbital stations and the landing of people in the heavenly bodies.” (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/24/65)
Lance battlefield missile was successfully test fired at the White Sands Missile Range. Built for the Army by Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., the Lance was said to combine guided missile accuracy and range with the low cost and high reliability potential of a free rocket. It would complement division artillery and expand the capability for nuclear and non-nuclear fire, (ap, NYT, 3/18/65, 57)
GSFC was pushing Aerobee 350 sounding rocket toward operational status to get second- and third-generation upper altitude data, wrote William S. Beller in Missiles and Rockets: “With much of the first-generation work already performed in the altitudes from about 50 mi. to 100 mi., a more sophisticated rocket is needed. . . . “The Aerobee 350 shows more than twice the performance of the 150: for heavy payloads, the factor tends toward 2.5, showing the most significant advantage; for lighter payloads, the factor approaches 2.0. “The Aerobee 350 launched from Wallops Island will carry a payload of 150 lbs. to 290 mi. altitude; or 500 lbs. to 210 mi. If the launching takes place at White Sands, N.M., which is at 4,000 ft., the rocket will put out 15—20 mi. more altitude performance for the same payload weight. An Aerobee 350 launch tower is to be built at White Sands.” (Beller, M&R, 9/27/65, 26)
NASA successfully launched Argo D-4 sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., to peak altitude of 588 mi. Objective of 17y2-min. lest was the measurement of phase differences to determine electron density along the rocket trajectory. Experiment was provided by Pennsylvania State Univ. (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe experiment to measure pressure, temperature, and density from 15-km. to 115-km. altitude was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada. Rocket and experiments functioned properly and good data were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
British Black Knight research rocket reentered earth’s atmosphere at 10,800 mph after a successful firing at the Woomera range, Australia. Rocket had reached 390-mi. altitude, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/27/65, A2)
Vesta, a new French meteorological sounding rocket, was successfully fired for the first time from the Hammaguir Range, Algeria. The single-stage rocket, propelled by liquid fuel, carried an instrumented payload to 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude. (NYT, 10/28/65, 74M)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf), addressing American Management Assn, conference in New York City, announced recent approval and initation of usaf Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Reentry Tests program (Start), “a four-fold research spacecraft program to develop unmanned test vehicles capable of maneuvering to a precision recovery site after reentering from orbit.” In a Baltimore Sun editorial, Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., said that the Martin Co. had designed for this program a new, wingless V-shaped plane, maneuverable in atmosphere because its shape would provide aerodynamic lift. The program would:	(1) launch the SV-5 by Atlas booster, (2) continue Asset experiments to test vehicles entering atmosphere at very high speeds, (3)	study effects of vehicles passing through atmosphere at slower speeds, and (4) relate to allied studies that had not yet led to specific designs for identifiable reentry vehicles. (Text; AFSC Release 31.65; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 3/4/65)
West Germany was waging vigorous campaign by letter, circular, and word-of-mouth to persuade German technicians to leave their jobs in Egyptian aircraft and rocket industry. The campaign could be result of recent arrests in Cairo of several West German citizens on espionage charges. (Olson, NYT, 3/6/65, 7)
British designers had perfected a miniature rocket costing only $2,240 per copy, it was reported. Nine ft. in length with a 7%-in. diameter, the rocket would use solid fuel and reach a speed of 3,500 mph, sending the casing containing scientific instruments to maximum altitude of 80 mi. plus, (ap, Kansas City Times, 1/4/65)
200,000-lb.-thrust j—2 engine was captive fired for 388 sec. on a new test stand at nasa msfc. The J-2 engine would be used to power the Saturn s-ivb stage, second stage for the Saturn V. Ten tests of the liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen powered rocket engine had been conducted at msfc since the J-2 engine test facility was put into use in August 1965. (msfc Release 65-300)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was successfully launched from USNS Croatan carrying an instrumented payload to provide data on the neutron intensity, solar x-ray flux, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionosphere electron density at different latitudes. Experiment was conducted for the Univ. of New Hampshire, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
A Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Sta., Va., to peak altitude of 109.9 mi. (176.8 km.) in an experiment Lo measure electron densities. Good signals were received on all telemetry channels throughout the flight; indications were that good data were obtained. Instrumentation was provided by gca Corp. (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA announced that it would negotiate with Space Technology Laboratories and Thiokol Chemical Corp. for six-month, fixed-price contracts of approximately $1.5 million for definition of a program to develop and produce a 100-lb.-thrust rocket engine. The multipurpose engine, designated c-1, would be designed for spacecraft attitude control and maneuvering systems and also for launch vehicle ullage and attitude control systems. It would be powered by the hypergolic, storable liquid propellants monomethylhydrazine (mmh) and nitrogen tetroxide. (nasa Release 65—41)
On the occasion of the Smithsonian Institution Bicentennial Celebration, President Johnson said: . . the Institution financed by Smithson breathed life in the idea that the growth and the spread of learning must be the first work of a nation that seeks to be free. “These ideas have not always gained easy acceptance among those employed in my line of work. The government official must cope with the daily disorder that he finds in the world around him. “But today, the official, the scholar, and the scientist cannot settle for limited objectives. We must pursue knowledge no matter what the consequences. We must value the tried less than the true. “To split the atom, to launch the rocket, to explore the innermost mysteries and the outermost reaches of the universe—these are your god-given chores. And even when you risk bringing fresh disorder to the politics of men and nations, these explorations still must go on.” {Pres. Doc., 9/20/65, 276)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range to peak altitude of 115 mi. (185 km.). Objectives were to photograph the solar disc and to measure solar flux. Parachuted payload was recovered without observable damage; development of film was in process, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range to study the ultraviolet radiation of Orion and a group of stars, reached ll4-mi. (183.5-km.) altitude and performed successfully, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa successfully launched explorer xxviii Interplanetary Monitoring Probe (Imp-C) from ETR on a three-stage Thor-Delta booster. A slightly longer than planned burn by the third stage engines placed the 130-lb. probe into an orbit with 164,000 mi. (264,040 km.) apogee and 120 mi. (193 km.) perigee instead of the scheduled orbit of 130,000 mi. (209,300 km.) apogee and 120 mi. (193 km.) perigee. Inclination was 34°; period, 5 days, 22 hrs. The spacecraft was equipped with devices to report on the earth’s magnetic field, cosmic rays, and the solar wind throughout its highly elliptical orbit. Confused telemetry signals from the explorer xxviii for 3% hrs. after launching made it seem the spacecraft had not separated from the third stage of the booster; however, later signals indicated that all spacecraft systems were operating normally, that separation had occurred. The Imp series began with explorer xviii (Imp-A) launched Nov. 26,1963. (nasa Release 65-164; Wash. Sun. Star, 5/30/65)
With arrival of the sea-going launch platform USNS Croatan at Valparaiso, Chile, NASA completed a successful expedition of launching scientific experiments off the west coast of South America. A total of 77 sounding rockets were fired, 45 of them Nike-Cajun and Nike-Apaches, and 32 of them single-stage meteorological rockets. Firings occurred at various position from 5° north to 60° south of the equator. Five experiments were conducted at or near the 60th parallel at about 78° west longitude. The project was part of the NASA sounding rocket program being conducted during the 1964-65 International Quiet Sun Year. Expedition data would be correlated with findings of scientists throughout the world conducting experiments on iqsy phenomena. (Wallops Release 65-22)
A half-length 260-in.-dia. solid rocket motor generated 3.5 million pounds thrust during a successful two-minute test firing at Aerojet General’s Dade County, Fla., facilities. Firing tested strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the cast propellant, the insulation, and the ablative nozzle; it demonstrated that massive quantities of solid fuel could be controlled under firing conditions. Test was part of the national large solid motor technology program initiated by usaf in 1963 and transferred to NASA in 1965. (nasa Release 65-295, 65-311; lrc Release 65-65)
Poland launched its first meteorological rocket. The two-stage vehicle was 2.5 m. (8.2 ft.) long and reached an altitude of 37,000 m. (121,360 ft.).	{M&R, 6/28/65, 10)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure data was launched from Wallops Island, Va. to altitude 73.5 mi. (118.2 km.). Twelve grenades were to have exploded during rocket ascent, but two did not explode. All other instruments performed as anticipated. A similar experiment was launched from Point Barrow successfully. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Harold B. Finger, Director of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power and Manager of the aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed NASA’s electric thrustor program in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “We conducted the first successful flight test of an electric rocket engine in July, using the SERT 1 spacecraft. This flight demonstrated that ion beam neutralization will take place satisfactorily in space and, therefore, eliminated the only uncertainty regarding the basic feasibility of successful space operation. A second major accomplishment was the design, fabrication, and test of a 30 kilowatt thrustor. This thrustor is 10 times larger than previous ion engines, and demonstrates that we are successfully developing the engineering relations required to build the mega-watt size thrustors needed for spacecraft prime propulsion.” Discussing nuclear propulsion programs, he said: “1964 was a year of significant progress in the Nuclear Rocket Program. It was marked by the successful completion of the kiwi series of reactor development experiments and the successful initiation of the nerva reactor testing. These reactor experiments, coupled with work in other portions of our Nuclear Rocket Program, provide assurance that the graphite core nuclear rocket can be available to fulfill its role as the next major space propulsion system. “Of particular significance in 1964 was the successful demonstration of the adequacy of the reactor structural design, the elimination of reactor structural vibrations, full power reactor operation for over ten minutes at an altitude equivalent specific impulse of about 750 seconds, a rapid automatic startup, the ability to restart the rocket reactor, the determination of the effect of a maximum reactor power excursion, and the neutronic investigation of two rocket reactors located side-by-side as would be necessary in clustered engine configurations. . . . “During this year emphasis will be placed upon extending our reactor technology to higher temperature, longer duration, and higher power while we proceed as rapidly as possible to close coupled nuclear rocket engine system testing. We face this task of developing nuclear rocket technology including component, subsystem, and engine system work, with a confidence that is based on the solid accomplishments in our reactor development program and with the knowledge that the technology we are developing will provide the propulsion capability that will ultimately be required for extensive space exploration.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 243-300)
Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge had proposed to NASA a design for a Deep Space Planetary Probe System to he used in a flyby of Jupiter, Saturn, or Pluto. The spacecraft would consist of a large dish antenna, possibly as large as 16 ft. in diameter, which would telemeter data back to earth. Power would be supplied by 10-watt Snap-19 generator. The spacecraft could be boosted by either Atlas-Centaur or Saturn IB-Centaur with upper-stage assist from available solid rockets or from the Poodle, a low-thrust radioisotope rocket engine. Flyby missions for the probe could be made in 1970 to Jupiter, to Saturn in 1972, and ultimately to Pluto. (SBD, 4/23/65, 297)
Super Guppy, a five-story-high aircraft designed to carry large rocket sections, made a safe emergency landing at Edwards AFB after part of its aluminum skin peeled off during a high-speed dive. No one was injured. Aircraft was undergoing flight tests for certification by faa. (ap, Wash. Post, 9/26/65)
Agreement was signed for a cooperative Brazilian-U.S. sounding rocket project to obtain meteorological information, NASA announced. Project provided for cooperation in obtaining wind, temperature, and other meteorological information between 40 km. and 100 km. by rocket soundings using the acoustic grenade technique. Experiments would be conducted from the Brazilian launch range at Natal. The agreement, in form of a memorandum of understanding, was signed by representative of the Momissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) of Brazil and nasa. It was the third to be concluded between CNAE and nasa during 1965. (nasa Release 65-372)	r
Indonesia successfully launched the second (of ten) Japanese Kappa 8L two-stage meteorological sounding rocket from a site near Bandung, West Java. The 62-kg. (136-lb.) rocket reached an altitude of 90 km. (56 mi.). First firing had been Aug. 7. (Interavia Air Letter, 8/16/65, 5)
Writing in the January 1965 issue of Astronautics and Aeronautics, Dr. Harold B. Finger, Manager of aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), summed up the various components of the advanced nuclear propulsion program and emphasized the importance of the solid-core nuclear rocket within the field: “Solid-core nuclear rockets are the best understood and most nearly developed of the many advanced nuclear-propulsion concepts being investigated in this country. They offer the most assured and earliest possible means for very substantial improvements and advances in space-flight propulsion capability. Furthermore, because solid-core nuclear rockets rely heavily on technology and techniques of chemical rocket engines and although much extension of these techniques is required, no fundamentally new engineering approaches are required to develop this new breed of substantially improved rocketry for actual flight use. Solid-core nuclear rockets can be relied on for our future space missions. “Progress has been made in electric propulsion, particularly in the thruster area, and important research data and technology are also beginning to be provided in the difficult area of nuclear-reactor electric generating systems required for prime electric propulsion. “Beyond these systems, other advanced nuclear propulsion concepts are not yet well-enough understood to justify undertaking significant development efforts.” (A&A, 1/65, 30-35) During January: Nine areas of scientific experiments for the first manned Apollo lunar landing mission had been summarized and experimenters were defining them for NASA. Space sciences project group expected to publish the complete report by Mar. 1, to be followed by requests for proposals from industry on designing and producing instrument packages. A major effort was under way by a NASA task force making a time-motion study of how best to use the limited lunar stay-time of 2 hr. minimum for the first flight. (Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 13)
In an article suggesting the possibility of catastrophe during the Gemini gt-4 flight, William Hines had said in the Washington Evening Star: “The truth is that the only ‘first’ the United States has a chance to achieve in Gemini 4 is ‘first casualties in space’—and nobody (including the Russians) seek this dubious record.” Commenting on the planned “rendezvous,” he said: “. . . the other and more questionable added spectacular on the present mission—is a risky business of unknown proportions . . . There are several purely technical objections to this exercise. First, it is not part of the original Gemini 4 mission, but an afterthought. Second, the spacecraft was not built for rendezvous. Third, the rocket was never envisioned as a target vehicle and is uncontrollable in space. . . . “But if tragedy should strike as a result of something that happens on the first few orbits of Gemini 4, how will the responsibility be fixed: As pilot error ... or politician’s error?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/65)
NASA and the Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) signed an agreement in Sao Jose dos Campos, Brazil, providing for a cooperative project for studying hemispheric weather patterns by launching meteorological sounding rockets from Brazil. Project would be part of the Inter-American Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). Under the terms of the agreement, Brazil would transport the rockets and equipment from the U.S. to Brazil, assemble and launch the rockets from Brazilian launch facilities, and provide meteorological data to other participants in the network. NASA would lend ground support equipment such as radar to cnae; train Brazilian personnel in the handling of sounding rockets and in reducing meteorological data; and provide data obtained at NASA’s Wallops Station, Va., to other participants in the network. Agreement was similar to one signed by the U.S. and Argentina on May 18, 1965. The project entailed no exchange of funds between the two countries, (nasa Release 65-258)
usaf awarded Thiokol Chemical Corp. a $2,000,000 initial increment to a fixed-price contract for production of solid rocket motors. Estimated final amount of contract was $5,000,000. General Dynamics Corp. received from afsc a $1,655,299 fixed-price contract for design and fabrication of reentry vehicle instrumentation and range safety systems, (dod Release 946-65)
Canada’s Black Brant research rocket underwent its second successful launch from Ft. Churchill, Manitoba. (M&R, 6/28/65, 11)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched in the second apparently successful attempt this week of Project Luster to capture particles of interplanetary matter during the Leonid meteor (shooting star) shower. The 105-lb. payload, containing special collection surfaces, was launched from White Sands Missile Range to peak altitude of about 100 mi. Instrument package separated from the rocket and descended into the range recovery area. Initial radar and telemetry data indicated that inflight performance of the rocket and its payload was as planned. Similar flight conducted Nov. 16 with an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands also performed flawlessly. (NASA Release 65—358)
Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) would cooperate with U.S. and Argentine scientists in a study of hemispheric weather patterns, NASA announced. NASA and cnae had signed an agreement July 1 providing for the cooperative project, which would be part of the inter-American Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). First launchings were scheduled before the end of 1965 from Natal, Brazil, and Wallops Station, (nasa Release 65-258)
A copper-plated 461//>-lb. “minilab,” instrumented to measure radiation variations in the earth’s magnetic field, was launched to 8,700-mi. altitude from Cape Kennedy on a four-stage Blue Scout Jr. rocket. It carried three sensing devices designed to produce a radiation profile during its two-hour climb into the Van Allen radiation belt and the two-hour plunge back through the earth’s atmosphere to the Indian Ocean, (upi, NYT, 3/31/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 138)
A job classification dispute at the Chrysler facility of the Michoud Saturn plant in New Orleans caused over 200 United Auto Workers (UAW) to walk off the job. Chrysler was responsible for developing first stage of Saturn ib rocket for nasa. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/10/65)
Kiwi-TNT (Transient Nuclear Test) was successfully completed at Jackass Flats, Nev. This was a safety test to verify predictions of behavior of graphite nuclear reactor during a maximum power excursion. Using data from the test scientists would establish safety standards, particularly for launching nuclear-powered rockets. Nuclear energy released in the test was well within the designated maximum of nuclear test ban treaty of 1963. Preliminary test results indicated: (1) from l/j-mi. to 50-mi. downwind from the test site, radiation did not approach accepted danger levels; (2) lethal radiation was confined to 200-to-300-ft. radius of the site, and beyond 500-to-600-ft. radius “a person would probably have survived unhurt unless struck by a piece of debris”; (3) pre-test predictions of the reactor’s behavior were accurate; and (4) cleaning up radioactivity at the site was easier than expected. Kiwi ground-test version of a nuclear-reactor rocket engine was a nasa-aec project, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/13/65; NYT, 1/13/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 1/13/65; JAMA, 2/8/65, 27—29; Rover Chron., n.d.)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket, with 51-lb. payload instrumented to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in the D and E regions of the ionosphere to peak altitude of 110 mi. Experiment, conducted for the Univ. of Illinois and the GCA Corp. from Wallops Station, was part of International Quiet Sun Year 1964-65. (Wallops Release 65—58; nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched a two part 994b. sounding rocket payload from NASA Wallops Station which reached an altitude of 614 mi. but did not separate in flight as planned. Launched on a four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) and designed as “mother-daughter” experiment, the payload was to separate into two sections at about 170-mi. altitude with radio signals to be sent from daughter to mother as they continued to rise separately. The technique was devised to provide more accurate profiles of electron density in the upper atmosphere. Telemetry data would be analyzed to determine why the sections did not separate. (Wallops Release 65-3; nasa Rpt. srl)
Atlantic Research Corp. announced the Frangible Areas meteorological sounding rocket, developed for USAF, had successfully passed flight tests at the Western Test Range. (M&R, 3/8/65, 11)
Launching pad damage caused by the Mar. 2 explosion of an AtlasCentaur rocket at Cape Kennedy amounted to $2 million and would take three to four months to repair, NASA reported. To avoid delay in the Atlas-Centaur launching scheduled for mid-summer, NASA was speeding completion of a new launching pad that was 90% completed and that could be ready in two months, (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 3/14/65)
Fred Callahan, 16, of Ft. Benning, Ga., prepared to launch Zeus 2, possibly the largest rocket built by an amateur. Zeus 2, nine ft. long with 2,000-lb. thrust, could reach peak altitude of 64 mi. Zeus 1 was launched by Callahan three years ago. (Wash. Daily News, 4/10/65)
USAF announced successful test firing of a simplified rocket engine called Scorpio. The engine had eight combusters in a ring around a nozzle and an injector that sprayed fuel into the combusters through several ports. Scorpio developed 200,000 lbs. thrust and would be modified to produce greater power, (afsc Release 44.65; ap, Balt. Sun, 3/30/65)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. would receive from usaf a $1,562,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for work on a solid-fuel rocket program. (dod Release 659-65)
USAF 1,175-lb. Project Asset reentry glider, last in a test series of six, was launched from Cape Kennedy by a Thor-Delta rocket booster on a 13,300 mph suborbital flight; the spacecraft then was lost at sea. The experiment was to test materials for future lifting body reentry designs; it consisted of 2,000 tiny heat-sensitive spots in ten different colors designed to change hue as the glider came back through the atmosphere from an altitude of 40 mi. usaf said that most of the information sought had been radioed to the ground during the 30 min. flight, but that visual examination of the glider was necessary for data on heat distribution. Officials presumed the glider sank into the sea, although intermittent radio signals received had indicated it had been at least partially afloat for some hours. Planes and ships were combing an area in the Atlantic Ocean about 2,750 mi. southeast of Cape Kennedy for the missing craft, (ap, Wash. Post, 2/24/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 134)
The $2-billion Rover nuclear-propelled rocket program was approaching a decision whether to move forward and prepare for early post-Apollo missions or let the technology dwindle, Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, told Aviation Week & Space Technology. The two-part decision was (1) whether to move forward with a flight-type engine of 200,000-300,000-lb. thrust— an advanced Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application), and (2) whether to start a $50-million construction program in Nevada for testing in the vicinity of the Nuclear Rocket Development Station near Las Vegas. Unless these decisions were made soon, “there will be a tail-off of technology,” Finger said. (Av. Wk., 12/6/65, 57)
NASA launched an ionosphere experiment from Wallops Station, Va., on a four-stage Javelin (Argo d-4) sounding rocket. Primary objectives of the flight were to measure ion and electron densities and temperatures and the ionic composition in the upper atmosphere. A malfunction in the launch vehicle caused the 140-lb. payload to reach an altitude of only 200 mi. instead of the planned 520 mi. Telemetry data were received for about nine minutes. Project officials termed the flight a partial success despite the failure to achieve peak altitude. (Wallops Release 65-31)
Lt. Gen. Nikolai Kamanin, commander of Soviet cosmonauts, said during a meeting with Moscow writers: “After the flight of Gemini v, Johnson said officially that the United States was inviting representatives of the Soviet Union to the next flight so that they could see U.S. rockets and rocket devices. We told him: Thank you but we do not intend to visit your launching site. We do not intend to go because we know all too well that all space devices are as a rule launched into space with the aid of military rockets. You do it this way and we do it that way. While military rockets are used for these purposes we are unable to show you our Soviet rockets because we know all too well that our rockets were, are, and we are convinced, will be the most powerful, with the greater distance and load capacity. This is of decisive importance for the defense of the country.” (Tass, 10/24/65)
rocket apart or caused an explosion that destroyed it, reported a USAF Flight Safety Review Board which had met with the NASA Design Certification Review Board. Series of continuing tests was being scheduled to assure reliability of future Gatv flights. (Text; Clark, NYT, 11/9/65, 3)
In an interview with Tass, Soviet rocket designer Prof. Petrovich said that Soviet scientists intended one day to put scientific expeditions on the planets of the solar system to uOiuCStlCStC them. Designers were concentrating their efforts on developing highly efficient new engines which could lift extremely heavy payloads to the prescribed orbits, he added. (Tass, 11/15/65)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. received from usaf a $3,195,500 fixed-price contract for design, development, and firing of a 156-in. solid rocket motor. USAF also awarded United Technology Center a $10,500,000 increment to a previously issued contract for design, development, fabrication, delivery, and flight testing of large segmented solid propellant motors, (dod Release 426-65)
A four-stage, 60-ft.-long Journeyman (Argo d-8) sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station, Va., carried a 137-lb. instrument package to an altitude of 1,060 mi. on a 25-min. flight that ended 1,700 mi. offshore in the Atlantic, east of Bermuda. After launch, the payload, unfurled two 35-ft. antennas to provide a single dipole antenna, measuring 70 ft. from tip to tip. Main objective of the mission was to measure the intensity of radio frequency energy originating largely from outside the solar system. This was done at three frequencies: 750, 1,125, and 2,000 kc. Secondary objectives were the investigation of previously detected radio noise on the top side of the ionosphere and measurement of electron density in that part of the ionosphere. Information would be used in planning future space radio astronomy experiments to investigate certain characteristics of antennas in the ionospheric region. Experiment was conducted in cooperation with the Univ. of Michigan. (NASA Release 65-214; Wallops Release 6540; ap, Balt. Sun, 7/1/65)
DOD’s Hibex, the high acceleration experimental booster, was successfully tested at White Sands Missile Range, N.Mex. (M&R, 3/8/65, 11)
France’s Emeraude rocket, first stage of the Diamant booster, was successfully launched from Hammaguir Range, Algeria, after three failures. Its liquid-fueled engine provided 62,000-lbs. thrust for 88 sec. Twelve Emeraude launchings were originally scheduled. Second and third stages of the Diamant launch vehicle, both solid fueled, had already been successfully tested. No attempt had been made to launch the three stages linked together. (Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 18; M&R, 3/22/65, 9)	....	.
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by Brazil from the Natal Range reached an altitude of 117 mi. The second Brazilian sounding rocket launch in a cooperative meteorological program with nasa, the flight was a nighttime twin-experiment of daytime experiment Dec. 15. (nasa Rpt. srl; Reuters, NYT, 12/20/65,45)
The 2,000th full-scale solid rocket motor of the Polaris A-3 model was shipped to Navy’s Pacific Missile Facility where it would be integrated into an operational missile. (}/Armed Forces, 4/24/65, 15)
Tokyo Univ. Aeronautical Institute announced successful firing of a three-stage Lambda research rocket from Uchinoura in southern Japan. The rocket reached an altitude of 680 mi. and landed in the Pacific northwest of the Marianas. (Reuters, NYT, 3/19/65)
Canada’s National Defence Research Council said it would negotiate an agreement with NASA for Canadian operation of the rocket launching range at Churchill, Manitoba. The announcement said such an agreement would open the way for a new partnership between the two countries in research. (NYT, 2/26/65, 13)
dod announced award to Thiokol Chemical Corp. of $2,300,000 increment to existing contract for production of Minuteman Stage I operational and flight test rocket motors, (dod Release 255-65)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to altitude of 204.67 km. (127.2 mi.) with Rice University experiment to make time resolution measurements of electron fluxes within an aurora for use in determining transit times of these electrons from their sources. Performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. srl)
An article by Omer Anderson on U.A.R. rocket program was inserted in the Congressional Record by Rep. Silvio Conte (R—Mass.). Based on interviews with German scientists just back from Egypt and with West German defense ministry officials who debriefed them after their return, the article said: “Egypt’s missile program is considerably further advanced than is generally realized in the West. “Some of these scientists who have returned to West Germany say that Nasser will have the missiles to devastate wide areas of Israel by late 1967 and that he will have rockets with a 1-ton payload by the end of 1965. “West German defense ministry experts who have questioned the returning rocket scientists regard their assessment of Nasser’s rocket potential as entirely realistic and possibly too conservative. “The scientists say Nasser has accelerated greatly his rocket program since the first test firing of four missiles on July 22, 1962.” (CR, 1/26/65, 1160)
It was reported that Lockheed Propulsion Co. had successfully test-fired a new solid-propellant rocket motor at the proving ground in Redlands, Calif. The lightweight “pulse motor” measured 10 ft. in length, 2 ft. in dia., and contained 40 solid-propellant wafers, each of which could develop more than 1,000 lbs. of thrust. This was possibly the rocket motor that would power the Sram (short-range attack missile) mentioned by President Johnson in his defense message to Congress [See Jan. 18, 1965]. (Miles, Wash. Post, 1/20/65; SBD, 1/18/65, 74)
To date, 46 sounding rocket launchings had been made from the USNS Croatan operating at sea off South America’s west coast, NASA announced. 32 of the firings were two-stage sounding rockets carrying upper atmosphere and ionosphere experiments; 14 were singlestage vehicles to obtain high-altitude meteorological data. Launchings were part of NASA’s sounding rocket program for the 1964—65 International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) when solar flare and sunspot activity were at a minimum. Expedition data would be correlated with findings of scientists throughout the world conducting experiments to study iqsy phenomena, (nasa Release 65-104)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Station, Va., to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure at a time of minimum zonal wind flow by exploding twelve grenades during the ascent of the rocket. Two grenades did not eject and a third exploded before complete ejection, causing complete failure of experiment. Coordinated firings did not occur simultaneously at Ft. Churchill or Pt. Barrow due to weather conditions and payload problems. (NASA Rpt. srl)
usaf launched an Honest John-Nike Hydac high-altitude research rocket with 250-lb. payload from Eglin afb, Fla. (Eglin afb Release 65449)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va.. to altitude of 37.7 mi, <141.1 km.I with experiments to measure the neutron intensity above the earth’s atmosphere, the flux of solar x-rays, and Lyman-alpha radiation; and to determine ionospheric electron densities. All instruments functioned as predicted. (NASA Rpt. SJtL)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe to measure pressure, temperature, and density from 15-km. to 115-km. altitudes. Experiment was not successful because of undetermined malfunction in the rocket during Apache-stage propulsion, (nasa Rpt. srl)
USAF announced a four-stage Blue Scout Jr. rocket combination with a scientific payload had failed after launch from Cape Kennedy. The second stage developed trouble about 100 sec. after launching, causing the range safety officer to send destruct signal. The stage broke apart on its own. The third stage, meanwhile, separated from the second stage, ignited, and followed approximately its preplanned path. The fourth stage failed to ignite; it and the payload plummeted harmlessly into the Atlantic Ocean southwest of Ascension Island. The probe was to have sent its instrumented payload 24,500 mi. into space to study earth’s magnetic field. (NYT, 1/29/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 132)
nasa had awarded a $67,135 contract to the Univ. of Utah for a one-year study of chemical processes occurring during combustion of solid-propellant rocket motors. Study would attempt to better understand the interaction of gaes in the combustion zone by using recently developed fast-scanning spectroscopic instruments, (nasa Release 65-390)
On U.S.S.R.’s Aviation Day, Soviet Defense Minister, CommanderinChief of Antiaircraft Units, Air Marshal V. A. Studets said in an interview with Nedelya that Soviet antiaircraft units could destroy any flying object with the first rocket: “. . . we have means that can in good time detect and destroy any flying apparatus of any size, at all altitudes, even the lowest. If the country is threatened by a ballistic missile, it will be met far away by an antimissile.” Soviet TV showed a film of a new aircraft reported to fly to nearly 95 km. (59 mi.) altitude at a speed of 6,500 km/h (4,500 mph) — mach 6. This aircraft would be used for cosmonaut training (as with the U.S.’s x-15a or nf-104a). No further details were available. (Nedelya, no. 33, 1965, 4-5; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/18/65; Inter avia Air Letter, 8/20/65, 5)
Jet airline pilots would no longer be required to wear oxygen masks when flying above 35,000 ft. according to a FAA rule effective as of this date. Under the new rule, the requirement for one pilot at the controls to use oxygen would apply now only above 41,000 ft., where the time element would be much more critical in case of sudden decompression. (faa Release 65—84) During, September: First useful photograph of the nightglow was recorded aboard a NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range. Rocket was at 173-km. (106.8-mi.) altitude; distance from the earth’s horizon to the center of the nightglow was 90 km. (55.9 mi.). Tri-X film was used. (M&R, 9/27/65, 15)
Designs for an aircraft with speed potential of 17,500 mph were being studied by both usaf and NASA, reported the Washington Daily-News. Called the Scramjet (Supersonic Combustion Ramjet) by usaf and the hypersonic Ramjet by nasa, the aircraft could reach about 180,000-ft. altitude with the Ramjet engine and then be boosted into space by a small auxiliary hydrogen rocket motor. Above 180,000 ft. there would not be enough oxygen to support the Ramjet engine’s combustion. The aircraft would fire retrorockets to reenter the atmosphere and return to earth. One of three competing companies would be selected to begin work on test engine hardware by summer 1966. (Wash. Daily News, 12/7/65, 3)
usn recommissioned two rocket launching ships, the Carronade and the White River, and assigned them to the Pacific Fleet to support amphibious landings. On Sept. 18 the rocket launching ships Clarion River and St. Francis River had been recommissioned, (dod Release 65265)
A land exchange between the U.S. Government and New Mexico was nearing completion, clearing the way for construction of a $20 million rocket testing complex to be built by Bell Aerosystems Co. near the White Sands Missile Range, (ap, Houston Chron., 3/24/65)
In a television interview, Israeli Premier Levi Eshkol urged West Germans to end the activity of German rocket experts in the United Arab Republic, said that these experts were helping the Arabs to prepare a war against Israel. The West German government had officially deplored the participation of German scientists and military experts in Arab rocket projects, but had not interfered on the grounds that the group was composed of private citizens who, according to the German Constitution, could work where they pleased. German rocket expert Prof. Wolfgang Pilz, leader of Germans working for the U.A.R., spoke in an interview of the pressure brought to bear by the Israeli Government, particularly the terrorist tactics of Israeli secret agents which made it necessary for Germans to be accompanied by body guards at all times. (ATT, 1/7/65, 5; Buchalla, NYT, 1/8/65, 1)
Lockheed’s 156-in.-dia., solid-fueled rocket motor fired for approximately 58 sec., developed over 3-million-lbs. thrust, and produced about 715 psi of pressure. Vector control system went through its three programed cycles without flaw. Fifth firing of a 156, test was conducted at Lockheed’s Potrero, Calif., facilities. (Av. Wk., 12/27/65,61)	.	_
Observers in Moscow believed that the Soviet Union would shortly launch a gigantic spacecraft with as many as four to six people aboard, said an article in Poland’s Trybura Ludu. The spacecraft would most likely be commanded by one of the experienced cosmonauts and would have a weight of over 12 tons. It would be placed in orbit by the booster which launched PROTON I. The latter, according to the correspondent, probably used solid fuel. The correspondent speculated that the spacecraft would remain in orbit one week and that several cosmonauts would take a “walk in space” simultaneously. (Trybura Ludu, 7/18/65)
First full-scale testing of a Coralie engine took place at Vernon, France, 15 days ahead of schedule. Firing of the engine, second stage of the European Launcher Development Organization’s ELDO Europa booster, lasted 96 sec. Compatibility of the four-nozzle liquid engine with the flight-type structure was checked out, and the low level of vibration was called highly encouraging. (M&R, 12/6/65)
nasa’s pioneer VI interplanetary probe was successfully launched into heliocentric orbit from Eastern Test Range with an Improved Thrust Augmented Delta booster. Main Delta engine and three solid strap-on motors fired together and burned for 43 sec.; burned-out casings were jettisoned 70 sec. after launch; main engine burned out after two minutes 45 sec. Delta second stage ignited after two minutes 59 sec.; first stage separated and fell away; shroud was jettisoned at two minutes 59 sec. Second stage burned six and two-thirds minutes, then stage coasted for some 16 min. During coast phase, spacecraft was pointed in direction for injection into solar orbit and, with third stage, was spin-stabilized. Nine seconds after spin-up third stage separated from second, then third stage ignited and burned for 23 sec. Two seconds after third stage burnout, pioneer vi separated from the burned-out stage 346 mi. above Africa and was now in solar orbit. Two seconds after third stage separation (about 25 min. after launch), spacecraft booms automatically deployed; automatic changes began to orient the spacecraft perpendicular to the sun. Sun orientation maneuver took about five minutes. The 175-lb., drum-shaped pioneer vi, first of four Pioneer spacecraft to be launched at six-month intervals, would study the solar windstream; investigate the sun’s magnetic field and chart it from several locations in the plane of earth’s orbit; attempt to differentiate between cosmic rays coming from the sun and galactic cosmic rays originating from beyond the solar system. Closest approach to the sun would be about 76 million miles and would be reached after 155 days of flight. The six scientific experiments, provided by four universities and arc and gsfc, were functioning normally, (nasa Release 65-375; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, A14; Wash. Post, 12/17/65, A8; ap, NYT, 12/17/65, 29; WSJ, 12/17/65,1)
First of four Stellar Acquisition Flight Feasibility (Staff) flights planned by usaf failed 73 sec. after launch of the experiment aboard a Polaris A-l booster. The experiment’s Stellar Inertial Guidance System (Stings) was operating open-loop and was not guiding the missile, which had to be destroyed when it veered off course. Stings had been locked onto the star Polaris and had tracked properly through the first 54 sec. of flight until time of second-stage ignition, when the trouble with the launch vehicle apparently developed. Period during which the Stings operated was time of highest dynamic pressure; data received were termed excellent. Main purpose of the Staff flight was to test a telescope-like device intended to allow a Stings to take a reading from Polaris after piercing the earth’s cloud cover and to plot an exact trajectory to a target area. (M&R, 4/19/65, 9)
nrx a-3 Nerva reactor, joint nasa-aec project to develop a nuclear rocket, was restarted and operated for the third time at Jackass Flats, Nev. Total operating time was 45 min., including about 7 min. at more than 40% of its designated 55,000-lb. thrust capacity. Function of the test was to explore control system response characteristics in low and intermediate power ranges. (snpo-N-65—9; upi, NYT, 5/29/65, 8; Rover Chron.)
NASA successfully launched an Aerobee 150a sounding rocket to peak altitude of 110 mi. from Wallops Island, Va., with instrumented payload to measure the ultraviolet and visible light emitted from the earth’s atmosphere between 37 mi. and 125 mi. An Attitude Control System (Acs) was also flown. Good spectral data were collected. (NASA Rpt. srl)
LRC completed 10 experiments to explore nuclear engine chilldown (cooling by liquid hydrogen propellant) and to determine the range of conditions for which flow oscillations would occur in an engine system. An additional 16 runs were conducted to obtain data on the “bootstrap” starting of a nuclear engine. Results of these tests indicated that nuclear rocket engines should be able to start smoothly and stably over a wide range of startup conditions. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1965,148-49)
Abort Dec. 12 of the scheduled Gemini vi flight received editorial comment in the New York Times: “Disappointing as this was, the event had its brighter aspects as well. It gave a vivid demonstration of the effectiveness of the failsafe arrangements. These permitted survival of the rocket and its crew despite the fact that ignition and a buildup of power had taken place before the safety mechanism sensed trouble and shut down the powerful motor.” (NYT, 12/13/65, 38)
The U.S. manned orbiting laboratory was aimed at “the practical testing of orbital nuclear weapons, not scientific space laboratories” in violation of a U.N. agreement not to orbit weapons of mass destruction, wrote Col. Gen. Vladimir Tolubko, deputy commander of Soviet rocket troops in Za Rubezhom. His remarks were Russia’s first comment on President Johnson’s Aug. 25 announcement that U.S. would develop a manned orbiting laboratory. (Wash. Post, 9/10/65, A25; Reuters, NYT, 9/10/65,12C)
In U.S. launch vehicles hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed recent study by the Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board’s Launch Vehicles Panel: “In considering the merits of canceling certain vehicles in order to provide quantity production of the remaining vehicles, the Launch Vehicle Panel of the AACB evaluated several alternatives against a forecast of DOD’s and NASA’s needs over the next 10 years. This space-mission forecast served as a basis for determining the number of launch vehicles required and the cost of producing the various combinations of these launch vehicles. “The result of the study is particularly interesting in that it shows a cost difference of less than 1 per cent among the alternative options. This difference is less than the accuracy of the data used in the analysis. The results indicate that any economies that might be realized by increased quantity production of boosters would be lost through cost of adapting specific mission spacecraft to a new vehicle where the costs of such work have already been incurred. . . . “The major advantages of the recent comprehensive study . . . , as distinct from previous reviews, were the development of much improved methods for estimating the costs of launch vehicles considering the effects of quantity production, variety of vehicles, and inplant workload; the use of an inclusive or overall forecast as a basis for determination of both dod and NASA space missions against which total launch vehicles costs could be calculated; and the value of the results of the study to NASA to confirm our judgment on the use of the SATURN i-b for the apollo and voyager missions. . . we are making extensive use of DOD-developed launch vehicles and will continue to do so for some time to come. However, a wider variety of first-stage boosters and upper stages is required by NASA space missions than by those of the DOD. We have requirements for a wider range of variety of size, payload, and velocity for our missions. We have been carefully investigating our future vehicle needs; optimum vehicle configurations; and the most promising advanced propulsion methods to be sure that our program will provide the options that the country will need in making decisions to undertake future missions. “. . . we are utilizing the channels and procedures established by the DOD—NASA launch vehicle agreement and by the AACB to coordinate the needs and activities of NASA and the DOD to assure the most effective national launch vehicle program. However, we are presenting to the Congress, in our budgets each year, the specific booster needs we have over and above those which can be met by DOD-developed systems. . . .”	(Hearings . . . National Space Launch Vehicles, 6-19)
usaf SV-5D lifting body was successfully launched from wtr by Atlas booster on reentry mission, but "due to an undetermined malfunction in the final phases of descent” was not recovered. Released at desired altitude, the 900-lb. vehicle had deployed parachute to slow its descent rate and reentered planned recovery area using lifting body principle. Goals of mission—first of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program—were to study aerodynamic characteristics of SV-5D shape, heat shield performance, guidance and flight control systems, instrumentation, and recovery system, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/66, A4)
Five successful sounding rocket launchings were conducted from the deck of usns Range Recoverer during eclipse of sun in Greece, NASA announced. Launchings of the Boosted Areas rockets, part of a cooperative project of the Greek National Committee for Space Research and NASA, were planned to investigate ionization of the upper amosphere during solar eclipse, (nasa Release 66-32; NASA Rpt. srl)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station on second development flight of series. The 53-ft.-long rocket developed 60,000	lbs. thrust and reached 222-mi. (357-km.) altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean some 106 mi. from launch site. Preliminary examination of data indicated rocket’s performance was close to predicted. Direction of sounding rocket program was under ossa, (nasa Release 66-221; Wallops Release 66-44)
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, each carrying payload of 19 acoustic grenades, from three launch sites—Point Barrow, Alaska, Churchill Research Range; and nasa Wallops Station—to gather data on atmosphere between 20- and 60-mi. altitudes over widely spaced geographic areas. Grenades were ejected and detonated at programed altitudes, yielding information on wind directions and speeds and atmospheric densities, pressures, and temperatures. Rocket launchings were first in series of nine planned for February. Similar experiments would be conducted throughout the year to observe atmospheric conditions during different seasons. (Wallops Release 66-9)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites'with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 96-mi. (154-km.) altitude in Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment designed to observe ultraviolet emissions from Venus. Scattered light produced by solar illumination of itt startracker optics prevented acquisition and lock-on of target Venus, hut good data were obtained on Lyman-alpha. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa’s second Project Scanner instrument package was successfully launched by three-stage solid propellant Trailblazer booster from nasa Wallops Station on suborhital trajectory to gather information on earth’s horizon. Two-channel radiometers measured infrared energy emitted from earth’s horizon by carbon dioxide and water vapor; star-mapper telescope provided data on attitude of spin-stabilized spacecraft. Project Scanner was a phase of horizon definition research conducted by LaRC. (Wallops Release 66-58)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range was third and last flight [see Feb. 9 and 16] in series of GSFC experiments to measure number and distribution of electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev, which produce visual aurora. Although radar lost track early in flight and peak altitude was not available, rocket performance was near predicted and series was considered completely successful, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
France’s Dragon sounding rocket was successfully launched from Norwegian range on Andoeya Island by Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). (Tech. Wk., 10/31/66, 13)
Successful launching of Boosted-Dart sounding rockets carrying chaff payloads from Natal, Brazil, and NASA Wallops Station marked first meteorological sounding rocket launchings conducted from North and South America the same day under coordinated NASA-Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) experimental program. Natal launch was first of a series of 32 launches planned by cnae for 1966 as part of InterAmerican Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). Brazil, Argentina, and U.S., cooperating in exametnet, were planning a north-south chain of stations through the Western Hemisphere to conduct coordinated sounding rocket launchings to obtain experimental data on hemispheric weather patterns, (nasa Release 66-12)
Radio astronomy experiment designed to measure average intensity of cosmic radio noise originating outside the solar system was launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Javelin rocket on 20-min. ballistic flight with 570-mi. (918-km.) apogee. Measurements were made at frequencies which couid not be accurately detected by ground-based receivers. Data would aid study of galaxy’s formation. (Wallops Release 66-31)
Proposal by Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Lab. that a scanning system be mounted in a lunar crater to report to earth the precise location of x-ray sources as they appeared over the crater’s rim because of the moon’s rotation, was discussed by Walter Sullivan in the New York Times. Recent rocket observations [see Mar. 2] had disclosed objects, some of them otherwise invisible, that strongly emitted x rays— part of the spectrum which cannot penetrate earth’s atmosphere. "A systematic survey of the sky in this wavelength,” Sullivan said, would "open an entirely new window on the universe.” (Sullivan, NYT, 3/20/66, 8E)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from wsmr to 142-mi. (229-km.) altitude to measure atmospheric composition and temperature at 62- to 124-mi. (100- to 200-km.) altitude range, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Memorandum of understanding for cooperative meteorological sounding rocket experiments was signed by the Spanish Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) and nasa. Purpose of project would be to obtain synoptic information on wind, temperature, and pressure at altitudes between 18 and 36 mi. Sixteen Boosted-Dart and Areas sounding rockets carrying chaff (tuned dipoles) or instrumented payloads would be launched from a range in Spain to be operated by the Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial (inta). conie would procure an Areas launcher, sounding rockets, payloads, and other equipment. NASA would provide, on a loan basis, an Mps-19 radar, van, Boosted-Dart launcher and additional equipment. NASA also would train Spanish personnel in equipment operations and maintenance. Scientific results of project would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 66-20)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, discussing applications of space technology at a meeting of Dallas County Medical Society in Dallas, said that "by adding to our knowledge of space, and of man in space, ... we are building a very large bank of knowledge that will serve generations of man in all major fields of activity.” In a news conference in Dallas, he said that the Soviet space program was ahead of the U.S.’s "and will be for the next year or two.” He said he felt the U.S. would beat the U.S.S.R. to a lunar landing, but was not as confident as 12 mos. ago: "A year ago I would have said the Saturn V would be far bigger than anything they could do. I’m not so sure now. They have a very vigorous program. . . . This year they have flown proton i and II—both four times the size of Gemini—and they have announced a big new rocket.” Asked if the Proton series promised ability to maneuver like U.S.’s Gemini spacecraft, Webb replied: "Anytime you can put up a spacecraft that weighs 27,000 pounds, you’ve got a capability to do a lot of things you cannot do with a smaller craft. You can develop the maneuverability, but it’s hard to develop the large capacity of large spacecraft—and this is where we have been behind and are still behind.” (Text; AP, Denver Post, 1/13/66)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 89-mi. (144-km.) altitude in NASA-American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to make a high-resolution survey of celestial x-ray sources. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
esro successfully launched France’s Centaure rocket from range at Paksuniemi, Sweden, to study the aurora borealis. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/21/66, A14)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Andoeya, Norway, carried scientific payload to estimated 133-km. (82.6-mi.) altitude. Experiment, conducted by gsfc and Norwegian Defense Research Establishment (ndre), was designed to obtain measurements at high spectral resolution of D-region composition, using a new spectrometer based on ion cyclotron resolution principles. Instrumentation functioned properly,- and clamshell nose cone ejected at programed 55 sec. (nasa Rpt. SRL)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to estimated 104-mi. (167-km.) altitude. Experiment conducted for Univ. of Michigan measured ambient air density from 19-75-mi. (30-120-km.) altitudes by radar track of two falling Mylar spheres ejected at plus 72 sec. Flight also measured solar heating effects by comparing diurnal variations of measurements, (nasa Rpt. srl)
First full-scale checkout version of 365-ft. Saturn V rocket had been assembled at KSC to aid installation of electrical and plumbing connections on three mobile launching towers. (Marshall Star, 4/6/66, 1)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range in engineering test preceding series of five gsfc launches to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy proton, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during Polar Cap Absorption event. Rocket performance was near predicted; however, nose cone did not retract because of override switch heating problem, and data were poor in quality, (nasa Rpt. siu.)
Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19-grenade payload in gsfc experiment coordinated with launch from Point Barrow, Alaska, to study atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as summer progressed toward time of maximum noctilucent cloud sightings. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Inventions and Contributions Board granted United Aircraft Corp. a waiver of title rights in all inventions made, or to be made, under NASA contract, which involved the RL-10 rocket engine. (KB)
Gemini VIII launch would be delayed at least 24 hrs. because of a leak in a unit of the spacecraft’s environmental control system and an overflowing fuel tank in the Atlas booster, nasa announced. Launch was reset, nasa announced March 15, for March 16. (Wilford, NYT, 3/15/66, 17; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 3/15/66; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/14/66, 1)
nasa announced plans to begin powered flights of M-2 and HL-10 manned lifting bodies at Edwards afb in early 1967. Equipped with 8,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine, vehicles would be flown at altitudes up to 80,000 ft. and speeds of 1,000 mph in series of 8-min. test flights designed to simulate spacecraft reentry conditions, (nasa Release 66-329)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 187-mi. (301-km.) altitude in GSFC-Univ, of Michigan experiment coordinated with Aug. 26 and 27 flights. Simultaneous measurement of N2 and electron density and temperature, measurements of atmospheric ion and neutral composition, and comparative data from two mass spectrometers and other experiments were obtained; rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmh carried high angular resolution x-ray collimators to estimated 103-mi. (165-km.) altitude in NASA-American Science and Engineering, Inc.-MIT experiment to determine size and location of strong x-ray sources in Scorpius. Rocket and instrumentation performed successfully [see May 23]. (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa’s Lunar Orbiter A spacecraft was mated to its Atlas-Agena D booster in preparation for scheduled Aug. 9 launch from ETR. {Tech. Wk., 8/8/66, 3)
Reported that usaf Titan II launch vehicle, which launched 12 out of 12 missions in the Gemini series, was expected to win a usaf incentive fee of over $2 million for Martin Co,, the prime contractor for two-stage booster. (Av. Wk, 11/21/66, 28)
Boosted Areas 2 rocket was successfully launched for first time from wsmr. Equipped with new Marc 42A1 1st stage, rocket carried 16-lb. payload to 90-mi. (145-km.) altitude. (Tech. Wk., 8/1/66, 10)
NASA successfully completed third rocket-launched test [see Nov. 5 and 21] of LaRC-managed parachute landing system for Voyager spacecraft. Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr deployed 30-ft.-dia. disc gap band parachute at approximately 130,000-ft. altitude. Voyager program was managed by jpl. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Four experimental ramjet missiles launched by France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera) reached speeds of nearly 4,600 fps between 40,000- and 115,000-ft. altitudes. Missiles were part of a 10-flight program code-named stataltex, to generate data applicable to eventual development of an atmospheric booster that could reach mach 5. (M&R, 5/23/66, 9)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 93-mi. (149-km.) altitude in third ARC-managed Project Luster experiment to collect meteoric debris during peak of Orionid meteor shower. Luster micrometeoroid sampling instrument deployed successfully during flight; debris was vacuum sealed at recovery. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
25th anniversary of Reaction Motors, Inc. Formed to develop James H. Wyld’s liquid-fueled rocket, corporation became in 1958 Reaction Motors Div. of Thiokol Chemical Corp. (Thiokol, Aerospace Facts, 11-12/66, 2)
JPL 100-kw. radar was flown successfully on nasa Convair 990 at 3-6-mi. (5—10-km.) altitude in preliminary test for rocket flight [see May 9]. (jpl Release, 6/26/66)
nasa successfully launched two companion sounding rockets five minutes apart from nasa Wallops Station for simultaneous measurements of properties of the neutral atmosphere, ionosphere, and solar radiation intensities at 120- to 380-mi. altitudes. Aerobee 150A sounding rocket with 180-lb. AFCRL-instrumented payload to measure solar ultraviolet radiation and electron temperatures as function of altitude reached 142-mi. (229-km.) altitude. While Aerobee 150A was still in flight, four-stage solid-propellant Javelin boosted instrumented payload to 380-mi. (611-km.) altitude to obtain simultaneous measurements of neutral gas densities, temperatures, and composition; ion densities and composition, and electron temperatures and densities. Data from both flights were telemetered to the ground and would be correlated to study effects of solar radiation on ionosphere and upper atmosphere. (Wallops Release 66-12; nasa Rpt. srl)
Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Apphcation) successfully ground-tested for first time at full power— 1,100 mw, corresponding to 55,000-lb. thrust in space—by nasa and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Two and one-half hours after initial ignition, engine was restarted and run for 15 min. at varying power levels, reaching a maximum at slightly less than full power. Nerva engine had operated successfully up to partial power—40 mw—Feb. 3. (aec Release J-54; Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Boosted Areas sounding rocket was launched from deck of usns Range Recoverer near Koroni Beach, Greece, as test for flight series to obtain data on electron and ion density distribution in ionospheric D region during solar eclipse May 20. No data were obtained because 2nd stage failed to ignite, but problem was corrected to ensure successful flights during eclipse, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) reactor (NRX-A5) was successfully ground-tested by nasa and aec at Jackass Flats, Nev. Test, in which reactor was operated at design power of 1,100 mw for 15Vi min., was first in series to "obtain additional data on reactor characteristics under extended operating duration” under joint nasa-aec Rover program, (aec Release J-151)
NASA Aerobee 150A launched from NASA Wallops Station carried afcrlinstrumented payload to 136-mi. (219-km.) altitude in experiment to measure incident solar radiation. Rocket vehicle coning motion made accurate solar pointing and consequent data acquisition possible only 60 per cent of the time, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried instrumented payload to estimated 180-mi. (290-km.) altitude, gsfc experiment measured magnetic and electric fields and low-energy electrons and protons in a visible aurora. Rocket aspect measurement and evaluation of a xenon flashing light for trajectory determination were secondary objectives, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Moscow parade celebrating 49th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution included rocket which Russians claimed was immune to any antimissile defense system and could be dropped out of orbit from any direction. (AP, Wash. Eve, Star, 11/7/66, Al, A6)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) ended three-day, seven-nation Inter-ministerial Conference in Paris without reaching decisive conclusions. Issues involved were: (1) Western Europe’s independent space role competitive with U.S. and U.S.S.R.; (2) extent of collaboration to keep pace with technological advance; and (3) continuation of initial eldo project, three-stage Europa-1 rocket. Cost estimate had more than doubled to $420 million, and recent proposal to move Europa-1 into space communications would add $60 million. Another meeting was scheduled for June. (Mooney, NYT, 4/29/66, 8; upi, Wash. Post, 4/27/66, A15; NYT, 4/28/66, 24)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrlinstrumented payload to 109-mi. (175-km.) altitude in experiment to photograph solar corona and disc and to measure solar disc variations and total solar flux in Lyman-alpha. Performance of rocket and instrumentation was considered excellent, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Launch crews began erecting Titan II booster on Pad 19 at etr in preparation for September launch of Gemini XI mission. (AP, Houston Post, 7/24/66)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 94-mi. (151-km.) altitude in GSFC-Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe experiment to measure atmospheric density, pressure, and temperature. Experiment, designed to observe diurnal variations in fine structure of region from 9-68 mi. (15-110 km.), was launched in conjunction with thermosphere probe experiments launched Aug. 26. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 50-lb. instrumented payload to 115-mi. (185-km.) altitude. Conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp., experiment was designed to measure electron density in ionospheric D region. (Wallops Release 66-36)
Sounding rocket launched by Spain from Arencillo base fell to earth within a hundred yards of launching site. Officials blamed failure in guidance system. Launch was part of series begun Oct. 15 to collect meteorological data from region at 30- to 60-mi. (48- to 97-km.) altitude. (Chic. Trib., 10/21/66)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried gsfc payload to 184-mi. (296-km.) altitude for simultaneous measurements of magnetic and electric fields, low-energy electrons, and low-energy protons in a visible aurora. Secondary objectives were rocket aspect measurement and evaluation of xenon flashing light for trajectory determination, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Two series of coordinated nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched from NASA Wallops Station, Churchill Research Range, Point Barrow, Alaska, and Natal, Brazil, in gsfc experiment to gather data—by means of exploding grenade technique—on atmospheric wind, temperature, pressure, and density as summer maximum of noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, except one rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station did not achieve predicted altitude, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aviation announced successful launch of Japan’s first television-equipped sounding rocket: 1.4-ton rocket carried 22-lb. TV camera to 200-mi. (322-km.) altitude, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/4/66)
Series of power tests for breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was completed by NASA and AEC at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Final 16-min. test studied duration capability at approximately design power and temperature—1,130 mw and 3,715°F. Engine system had been started 10 times during series [see Feb. 3, 11, March 3, and 16] and had operated for 110 min., including 29 min. at nominal full power. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Close of iaf Congress was dramatized when Spain launched her first sounding rocket—Carabela 4—from Arencillo base, near Huelva. British-built rocket, which cost approximately $1,700, carried 12-lb. instrumented payload to 81-km. (50-mi.) altitude and then impacted 40 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Two NASA officials—William Hausman, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, and Clotaire Wood, NASA European Representative—observed the launch, first of six in a long-range program to study meteorology. (Wilford, NYT, 10/16/66, 78)
nasa Nike-Apache meteorological sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried 25-grenade payload and dummy trimethyl-aluminum (tma) canister weighing 25 lbs. to estimated 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude. 23 grenade flashes were photographed by K-24 ballistic camera network in experiment conducted for British National Space Research Committee and Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee to obtain wind, temperature, and other meteorological data between 31-93 mi. (50-150 km.), (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Soviet rocket tests begun Aug. 25 in the Pacific had been completed six weeks ahead of schedule, Tass announced. (Tass, 9/6/66; upi, NYT, 9/7/66)
nasa conducted first rocket-launched test of parachute landing system for Voyager spacecraft at wsmr. Honest John-Nike rocket boosted 200-lb. experimental package to 104,000-ft. altitude, but ground command transmission did not correctly trigger deployment. Successful balloon-launched test in the LaRC-managed parachute experiment series had been completed Aug. 30. Voyager project was managed by jpl. (nasa Proj. Off.)
NASA awarded Honeywell, Inc., a $230,000 contract to determine alternate approaches and concepts for measuring horizon radiance characteristics over earth’s surface—knowledge essential for design of space vehicle guidance and control systems. LaRC-directed study, including investigation of factors affecting horizon radiance profiles, analysis of measurements and evaluation of possible flight techniques, would support Project Scanner rocket flight tests. (LaRC Release; NASA Release
nasa Nike-Tomahawk launched from Churchill Research Range reached 151-mi. (243-km.) altitude in last of four NASA-Univ. of California, Berkeley, experiments [see Sept. 1, 6]. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and measurements of flux, energy spectrum, pitch angle distribution, and time variations of mirroring and precipitating charged particles were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19-grenade payload to 78-mi. (125-km.) altitude. gsfc experiment obtained temperature, wind, density, and pressure data during auroral condition at altitudes to 56 mi. (90 km.) by recording sound arrivals of explosions of all 19 grenades, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 98 mi. (157 km.) in NASA-Univ. of New Hampshire experiment to provide data on neutron intensity at different latitudes, solar x-ray fluxes, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionospheric electron densities. Rocket performed satisfactorily and instrumentation performance was considered excellent, (nasa Rpt. srl)
150-mi. (242-km.) altitude in first of a series of four NASA-Univ. of California, Berkeley, experiments to obtain proton and electron measurements over energy range of 1-300 kev. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily [see Sept. 6, 16]. (nasa Rpt. skl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 111-mi. (178-km.) altitude, gsfc experiment, first in series of three, successfully measured number and energy distribution of electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev, which produce visual aurora, (nasa Rpt. srl)
U.S.S.R. began carrier rocket tests in the Pacific, to last until Oct. 25. Tass said center of area with 74-km. (46-mi.) radius had coordinates of 37°14' north latitude and 172°49' east latitude. Ships and aircraft were requested not to enter this area daily between noon and midnight local time. (Tass, Pravda, 9/25/66, 2)
NASA Nike-Apacbe sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 126-mi. (202-km.) altitude in NASA-Univ. of Michigan experiment to measure ambient neutral and ion composition and density as function of altitude and compare data with those obtained on February 1965 flights. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl) .
NASA announced transfer of project management of the RL-10—first hydrogen-fueled rocket engine—from msfc to lrc and of Headquarters program authority from NASA omsf to ossa. RL-10, which had powered Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IV) in six successful flights prior to conclusion of msfc’s Saturn I program July 30, 1965, also powered Centaur upper stage launch vehicle, managed by lrc. (nasa Release 66-74)
Site at Pakachoag Hill outside of Auburn, Mass., where Dr. Robert H. Goddard launched world’s first liquid-fuel rocket flight on March 16, 1926, was approved as a national landmark by Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall. (Dept, of Interior; SBD, 11/23/66, 119)
Two-stage Wasp (Weightless Analysis Sounding Probe) sounding rocket carried 1,500-lb. payload to 148-mi. (238-km.) altitude in ballistic trajectory from NASA Wallops Station in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen under near-zero gravity conditions. Payload, consisting of scale model of liquid hydrogen fuel tank, impacted 330 mi. downrange in Atlantic; no recovery was involved. Experiment under weightless conditions, continuing for seven minutes, was recorded by television cameras through transparent lucite tank and was telemetered back to Wallops. Cameras, mounted on five-foot extension booms, photographed the liquid’s sloshing motion when small thrusters were activated to show how well baffles positioned the liquid in the tank. (nasa Release 66-147)
Javelin sounding rocket was successfully launched by usaf Cambridge Research Lab. from Churchill Research Range, with payload designed to measure total and component magnetic field values and primary electron and proton fluxes during a magnetic-absorption event. (M&R, 5/16/66, iO)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried scientific payload to estimated 83-mi. (134-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment designed to measure spectral irradiance of the stars Sirius and Rigel. Control system, star tracker, and ultraviolet stellar spectrometer performed satisfactorily. Brief data periods, caused by failure of fine jet pressure regulator on control system gas supply resulting in high thrust, had possibly aided establishment of flux values at discrete wavelength intervals. (Wallops Release 66-4; NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched ComSatCorp’s intelsat ii-a comsat from etr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into elliptical transfer orbit in preparation for geostationary orbit. Transfer orbit parameters: apogee, 23,382 mi. (37,646 km.); perigee, 186 mi. (299.9 km.); period, 11 hr. 9 min.; inclination, 26.4 . At ninth apogee—on Oct. 30—ComSatCorp bred the apogee motor. Apparently the apogee motor nozzle was blown off shortly after the motor ignited, and intelsat ii-a entered orbit with 23,330-mi. (37,545-km.) apogee; 2,072-mi, (3,334km.) perigee; 12 hr. 16 min. period; and 17° inclination rather than planned 22,300-mi.-altitude synchronous orbit over Pacific. ComSatCorp announced that 192-lb. satellite, nicknamed "lani bird,” could receive and transmit television and other forms of communications, but that "significance of this potential remains to be assessed.” First satellite in ComSatCorp’s two-satellite Intelsat II system to provide transatlantic and transpacific comsat coverage, intelsat ii-a had been scheduled to extend commercial service to the Pacific; assist in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements; and provide capability for live transpacific TV by handling TV, data transmission, or up to 240 voice channels between "first class” ground stations. Intelsat II-B was planned for launch in early 1967. intelsat i ("early bird”) had been orbited April 6, 1965. (ComSatCorp Releases; NASA Proj. Off.)
NASA launched 210-lb. Reentry E payload by Scout booster from NASA Wallops Station to evaluate char integrity of low-density phenolic nylon heat-shield material and test its effectiveness in withstanding actual reentry conditions. In addition to four stages of Scout launch vehicle, 17-in. spherical rocket was attached to instrumented payload as velocity package, First two Scout stages lofted payload to 54-mi. (87km.) altitude. Remainder of vehicle coasted upward to 110-mi. (177-km.) altitude and at peak of trajectory, during 3rd-stage burn, guidance system began positioning vehicle for desired reentry angle. Fourth stage fired during descent, and then velocity package motor ignited, driving reentry payload to a velocity of more than 18,000 mph through earth’s atmos-sphere. Payload impacted 1,150 mi. downrange in the Atlantic; recovery was not attempted. Throughout flight, continuous telemetry channel furnished data before and after the one-minute communications blackout caused by reentry, and aircraft photographed visible portion of reentry. Delayed telemetry system, used successfully on previous flights to transmit during blackout period, failed to operate because of a transmitter malfunction, but data furnished by continuous channel on post-blackout conditions would permit evaluation of total performance and correlation with previous ground tests. Flight, fifth in series of experiments in Scout Reentry Heating Project designed to investigate heating environment of a body reentering earth’s atmosphere at 18,400 mph, was directed by LaRC. (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-18; Wallops Release 66-8)
usaf Flight Safety Review Board announced it had pinpointed cause of the Atlas booster failure during the aborted Gemini IX mission May 17: gimbaling of the booster engine which forced the Atlas-Agena into a hardover trajectory was caused by a short circuit in the electrical command system of the engine pitch servo valve. Although several other failures could have caused a similar occurrence, the Board said, only this one could have caused the exact set of data received from the launch vehicle. Malfunction was called a random failure, but to ensure that it would not happen again, new tests would be made on the Atlas and electrical connections in all new boosters would be x-rayed. nasa scheduled the mission, redesignated Gemini IX-A, for June 1. (upi, Wash. Post, 5/26/66, E17; NYT, 5/26/66; nasa Proj. Off.)
nasa named L/Col. Robert A. Rush worth (usaf) to receive Exceptional Service Medal for his "outstanding contributions” to U.S. aeronautical research programs "both as a pilot and as an engineer” on X-15 rocket aircraft. Col. Rushworth, who would leave X-15 program in summer 1966 to attend Armed Forces Staff College, would be presented medal at NASA awards ceremony in October, (nasa Release 66-159)
usaf space launch crews were being familiarized with new low-cost Burner II upper-stage booster developed by Boeing to inject payloads into orbit and then orient the payload accurately. Small, guided, solid-fuel stage, scheduled for operation in late 1966, would "economically bridge the payload gap between the dod-nasa Scout launch vehicle and the Delta and Agena upper stages.” (Boeing Release)
Final glide flight of M2-F2 lifting body vehicle before installation of XLR11 8,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine [see Dec. 30] was made at Edwards afb with Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry as pilot. Purposes of flight, 14th in unpowered series, were testing of stability and control and determination of vehicle performance characteristics, (nasa Proj. Off.)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr to 102-mi. (164-km.) altitude carried gsfc experiment to obtain ultraviolet spectral scans of bright stars from 1110 A to 4000 A. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache meteorological sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried acoustic-grenade payload to 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude in experiment conducted for Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee (suparco) and British National Space Research Committee. Grenades did not eject, but data were obtained from trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud release and spectrum photography. (NASA Rpt. srl)
S-IB stage for sixth flight Uprated Saturn I booster (S-IB-6), powered by eight Rocketdyne H-l engines, was successfully captive-fired at msfc for 145 sec., producing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-124)
U.S.S.R. had successfully completed series of carrier rocket tests in the Pacific 16 days early, Tass reported. Nov. 20 Tass statement had said that tests would continue until Dec. 30. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/14/66, Dll)
U, S. and Brazil would cooperate in sounding rocket program to study total solar eclipse in South America Nov. 12. Nineteen sounding rockets would be launched to altitudes as high as 175 mi. (280 km.) from Rio Grande launch site located near path of total eclipse. Program was based on July 1965 agreement between NASA and Brazilian Space Commission (cnae). (Wallops Release 66-51)
nasa launched four-stage Pacemaker rocket from Wallops Station to test performance of spacecraft heat shield design. First two stages lifted 135-lb. payload to 75,000-ft. altitude. As payload began to fall back to earth, last two stages were fired to drive it downward at about 6,800 mph. Information was obtained by tracking and photography and from the payload itself, which was recovered after parachute descent into Atlantic. (Wallops pao; upi, NYT, 11/1/66)
Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was tested by NASA and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Control positioning error in initial ignition led to automatic flow shutdown. In 18-min, test following second, low-pressure start, reactor reached design power of 1,090 mw and exhaust temperature reached 3,630°F maximum. Test was fourth in series which began Feb. 3 and marked system’s eighth and ninth start. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket with new 4th stage ignition system was launched from Wallops Station to 434-mi. (698-km.) altitude. Instrumented payload measured positive ion composition of ionosphere, electron density, and temperature; and mapped distribution of Lyman-alpha radiation to determine amount of atomic hydrogen in earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Agena rocket stage identical to one at KSC which NASA planned to use as target vehicle in the March Gemini VIII mission suffered an explosive start in ground firing at USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center. Failure, which followed five successful test firings, was similar to explosion which canceled Gemini VI mission Oct. 25, 1965. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/14/66)
Manufacturers of rocket components, faced with possible work shortage because of nasa’s delay in formulating plans for post-Apollo missions, were making "frank pitches to the U.S. Space Agency—and presumably to the Defense Department-—for more business,” wrote Alvin B. Webb in the Washington Post. Webb noted that "Chrysler is expected to begin building the last of its Saturn 1-B boosters by the end of this year. The same applies to Douglas production of S4B upper stages for the Saturn 5. "Boeing, under the present schedule, probably will begin to run out of work on the Saturn first stage in late 1967.” (Webb, Wash. Post, 5/16/66, D9)
U.S.S.R. began rocket test series in the Pacific Ocean. (Tass, 9/6/66) August 26: nasa officials revealed at Hq. news briefing that data accumulated thus far from lunar orbiter i indicated the moon’s shape departed from that of a perfect sphere with a bulge of about Vi mi. at its north pole, a depression of about Vs mi. around the Northern Hemisphere, a 3^-mi. bulge around the Southern Hemisphere, and a depression of about Yi mi. at the South Pole. Conclusions were based on assumption moon’s density was uniform. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/66, A3; Av. Wk., 8/29/66, 18)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallqps Station ejected mixture of barium and copper oxide at about 125-mi. (201-km.) altitude during ascent and at 160-mi. (258-km.) altitude during both ascent and descent. Three distinct clouds, visible for hundreds of miles, were photographed and tracked in second NASA-German Ministry of Scientific Research cooperative launch to measure electric fields and wind motions in upper atmosphere [see Sept. 24]. (nasa Release 66-248; Wallops Releases 66-46, 66-49; nasa Rpt. srl)
Javelin rocket launched from Wallops Station releases barium cloud visible over much of eastern United States. were feasible and that "development of a land-landing capability must be vigorously pursued.” NASA test pilot Milton 0. Thompson was awarded SETp’s 1966 Iven C.	Kincheloe Award, presented annually to the outstanding experimental test pilot of the year, "in recognition of outstanding professional accomplishment in the flight testing” of M2-F2 wingless lifting-body vehicle, (nasa Release 66-252; frc Release 18-66; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/24/66, A2)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aviation announced successful launch of 240-lb. meteorological sounding rocket from Uchinoura launching range in Kyushu, southern Japan. Single-stage rocket reached 40.8-mi. (65.7-km.) altitude in 2 min. 4 sec. Data were telemetered to ground station. (Wash. Post, 4/22/66, B2)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 90-mi. (145-km.) altitude in experiment to measure spectral irradiance of stars Alpha Lyrae, Lambda Scorpii, Zeta Ophiuchi, and Delta Scorpii. Flight marked first successful operation above earth’s atmosphere of Star Tracking Rocket Attitude Positioning (Strap) system. The 330-lb. telescope device telemetered almost 80 sec. of ultraviolet data and was recovered undamaged about 55 mi. from launch site for reuse in fall 1966. Data would give experimenters information on star surface temperatures, gravitational field intensity, and relative ages, (nasa Rpt. srl; gsfc Release G-16-66)
NASA assigned lrc responsibility for development of space vehicle design criteria in the area of chemical propulsion. Howard W. Douglass, former director of lrc’s Flox Project Office, was appointed Chief of Design Criteria Office and Assistant Chief of Chemical Rocket Div. (lrc Release 66-40)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 130-mi. (209-km.) altitude in second of three gsfc experiments to measure number and energy distribution of auroral-producing electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev. Satisfactory data were recovered despite malfunction of one detector, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA successfully launched explorer xxxiii (Imp-D) Anchored Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (Aimp) from etr using Thrust-Augmented Delta booster with FW-4S 3rd stage to study interplanetary radiation and magnetic fields. Because tracking data indicated at 3:30 GET spacecraft was in excess-energy orbit, alternate mission plan was put into effect at 4:30 get: retrorocket was fired, injecting explorer xxxiii into elliptical earth orbit with 278,990-mi. (449,174-km.) apogee; 18,975-mi. (30,550-km.) perigee; 13.5-day period; 28.9° inclination. Planned parameters: 4,000-mi. (6,440-km.) apolune; 800-mi. (1,288km.) perilune; 10-hr. period; 175° inclination. NASA later revealed booster’s 2nd stage had produced 70-80 fps over-velocity which would have caused spacecraft to reach moon’s vicinity too early to achieve lunar capture. Despite explorer xxxiii’s failure to achieve lunar orbit, all active experiments were operative and high scientific yield was expected. Fourth of seven Interplanetary Explorers planned by NASA and first to attempt lunar orbit, 206-lb. explorer xxxiii carried six scientific experiments and one engineering experiment—a solar cell damage study. Primary mission objectives were to study at lunar distances the earth’s magnetic tail and magnetosphere in interplanetary space twice a month by means of lunar anchored spacecraft; and to measure interplanetary magnetic fields, solar plasma, and energetic particles in cislunar space. Program was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Space Science and Applications (ossa), (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-162; upi, NYT, 7/2/66, 5; Strothman, Wash. Post, 7/2/66, A2)
Launch of NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 rocket, on mission to perform first double-ignition of a hydrogen engine in space, was aborted at ETR seconds before liftoff when a power cord failed to disconnect from the booster. Failure automatically stopped the Atlas engines from firing and countdown was halted at two seconds. No new launch date was set. (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/30/66)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range in GSFC-Univ. of Michigan pitot-static tube experiment to observe the fine atmosphere temperature structure at noctilucent-cloud altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried grazing incidence telescopes and bandpass filters to estimated 107-mi. (172-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs. Another GSFC-instrumented Aerobee 150 was launched from wsmr eight hours later to 121-mi. (195-km.) altitude to obtain solar spectral data from 2-60 A. Both rockets and their experiments performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA and West Germany’s Ministry for Scientific Research had signed cooperative agreement to investigate the physics of comets, interplanetary medium, and earth’s magnetosphere. Initial experiments, to be launched in fall 1966, would release vaporized metal in upper atmosphere, creating artificial ion clouds which would be observed from ground. Results would be reviewed to determine desirability of conducting similar experiments on larger vehicle at a distance of several earth radii. Under agreement, BMwF would provide rocket payloads, supplementary cameras, and photometric equipment. NASA would furnish one Javelin and one Nike-Tomahawk rocket, launching range, support facilities, and equipment for optical observations. (nasa Release 66-121)
Initial tests of first liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen turbopumps for nasa’s 1.5-million-lb.-thrust M-l rocket engine technology program had been successfully completed at lrc. Pumps, driven by 200,000-hp gas generator, were largest ever built for handling propellants for high-energy rocket engine, (lrc Release 66-10)
U.S.S.R. began new carrier rocket tests in the Pacific that would last until Dec. 30. Tass said area with 56-km. (35-mi.) radius had coordinates of 0°5' south latitude and 163°45' west longitude. Ships and aircraft were requested not to enter this area daily between noon and midnight local time. (Tass, 11/19/66)
nasa launched 49-lb. payload with ionosphere experiment for Rice Univ. to 116-mi. (186-km.) altitude from nasa Wallops Station with Nike-Apache sounding rocket to test theory that intense electrical currents flow at high altitudes over the earth and are strongest at about 120-mi. altitude. Data from magnetometer designed to detect magnetic field caused by the currents were telemetered from the payload to ground stations at Wallops during flight. (Wallops Release 66-11; nasa Rpt. srl)
Meteorological sounding rocket launched from Chamical, Argentina, was first in series of launches planned for NASA-Argentine Space Commission (cnie) cooperative program, cnie had scheduled 13 launches for i966 as part of Inter-American Experimental Meteorological Rocket Network (exametnet), in which Argentina, Brazil, and U.S. would cooperate to establish in the Western Hemisphere a north-south chain of stations for coordinated sounding rocket launchings to obtain experimental data on weather patterns. Brazil launched first rocket under exametnet program from Natal, Brazil, Jan. 12. (nasa Release 66-103)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 51-lb. payload to 115-mi. (185-km.) altitude and impact 88 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Payload instrumentation failed to function properly, however, and desired results were not obtained. Flight was last in a series of seven similar experiments conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois to measure seasonal charges and other effects in the D- and E-regions of the ionosphere. Previous six launches had ^been conducted successfully from Wallops Station in April, July, and November 1964; and June, September, and December 1965. (Wallops Release 66-1; nasa Rpt. srl)
Fourth flight Saturn IB booster (S-IB-4) left NASA msfc for Michoud Assembly Facility aboard the NASA barge Palaemon for post-captive-firing checkout, (msfc Release 66-27)
eldo successfully test-fired three-stage Europa rocket from Woomera Range, Australia. Booster was blown up over Simpson Desert 6 min. 42 sec. after launch. {Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 8)
Two Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launches, from Point Barrow, Alaska, and Churchill Research Range, were coordinated in gsfc experiment to obtain atmospheric data as time of summer maximum for noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rockets and instrumentation functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Small hydrogen-oxygen engine originally developed for Saturn S-IV rocket stage was being adapted to serve as heater for expanding helium gas used in repressurizing S-IVB propellant tanks in space. Burner, providing an 800-lb. payload gain through weight reduction, would make it possible to meet pressure requirements by using supercold helium from bottles immersed in liquid hydrogen inside fuel tank, and would serve as possible source of low-thrust ullage control power during weightless flight, (msfc Release 66-92)
First of uprated J-2 rocket engines designed to power upper stages of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles had been delivered to msfc for static firing, naa’s Rocketdyne Div. had increased engine’s maximum thrust to 230,000 lbs. by strengthening turbine wheels of turbopumps and modifying engine control system, (msfc Release 66-91)
First fully successful launch and air-snatch recovery of the Air-Launched Air-Recoverable Rocket (Alarr) was made over wsmr. A modified MB-1 Genie carrying instrumented payload for upper atmosphere research, Alarr was launched from F-4C Phantom II jet fighter at 44,000-ft. altitude. Rocket reached 150,000-ft. altitude and 180-lb. payload immediately separated. C-130B transport operating from Edwards afb made successful mid-air recovery of payload at 5,000 ft. in second pass at target. Test, conducted for Kirtland AFB, was to develop new technique for high-altitude space probes: launch aircraft’s speed would serve as first stage of a rocket—eliminating need for a launch pad; descending payload would be recovered to prevent damage or loss. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/29/66; M&R, 4/4/66, 8)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried sodium payload to 124-mi. (200-km.) altitude in experiment conducted for Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee to measure wind direction and speed at 50- to 124-mi. (80- to 200-km.) altitudes. No photography was possible since sodium flash, observed at +60 sec., was not followed by sodium cloud release, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Breadboard of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was tested by NASA and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Initial fixed-drum start tested control drum response; maximum power reached was 230 mw, compared with reactor’s 1,100-mw design power. Test duration was nine minutes, and maximum exhaust temperature was 1,540°F. After a second low-pressure start was aborted, system was given normal start; in 22-min. test it reached 350-mw maximum power and 2,130°F maximum temperature. Nerva engine had been successfully started twice on Feb. 3. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 7 hrs. 23 min. apart from NASA Wallops Station reached estimated 81-mi. (131-km.) and 95-mi. (152-km.) altitudes. Experiment, conducted for Univ. of Michigan, measured ambient air density from 19-75 mi. (30-120 km.) by radar track of two falling Mylar spheres ejected from each rocket at +72 sec. Spheres ejected as programed in first launch, but radar was unable to track first sphere until +14 min. Preliminary indications were that it did not inflate properly. Radar tracked second sphere for 18 min. During second launch, both spheres ejected and inflated properly, and radar tracking was continuous for 20 min. Diurnal variations of the measurements were compared to measure solar heating effects, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Martin Marietta Corp. was receiving $7,622,000 fixed-price contract from afsc for work on Titan III booster, (dod Release 536-66)
Second 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor (SL-2), Nation’s largest, was successfully test-fired for NASA in Dade County, Fla., by Aerojet-General Corp. Fueled with polybutadiene, aluminum and ammonium-perchlorate and fired nose down in a 150-ft.-deep pit, motor developed within 1% of the predicted 3.5-million lbs. thrust and burned for almost precisely the planned 126 sec. Test showed repeatability of the firing, proved that manufacturing techniques were reliable, and demonstrated that the motors could be produced at a predictable cost. First 260-in. motor (SL-1) was successfully fired for two minutes Sept. 25, 1965, producing 3.6-million lbs. thrust. Strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the cast propellant, insulation, and the ablative nozzle were tested. Large solid motor project was designed to demonstrate feasibility of building and operating solid motors of greater size than those in current use for multistage launch vehicle systems carrying heavy payloads into space, (nasa Release 66-31; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/24/66, A5; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/24/66)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfcinstrumented payload to 128-mi, (206-km.) altitude to obtain dayglow measurements. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Coordinated NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket series was launched from NASA Wallops Station, Churchill Research Range, Point Barrow, Alaska, and Natal, Brazil, in GSFC experiment to study atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as
France planned to continue work on large space boosters, either alone or with other interested European nations, despite British decision to withdraw from eldo’s Europa rocket program, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. French officials, open in their bitterness at the British decision, viewed the withdrawal as further proof that U.K. made "a poor European partner.” {Av. Wk., 6/13/66, 38)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude. NASA-Univ. of Maryland experiment was designed to (1) evaluate pulse and thermal equalization probes as research tools, (2) investigate electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere, and (3) investigate use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Administration officials had no indication that U.S.S.R. was man-rating a new booster for manned lunar landing program, Technology Week reported. They also doubted reports that U.S.S.R. would attempt landing mission in October 1967—fiftieth anniversary of Bolshevik Revolution—but anticipated another Soviet manned earth-orbital flight in 1966. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 3)
nasa had awarded Lockheed Propulsion Co. $96,000 contract to evaluate solid-propellant motor which could stop and restart spacecraft propulsion units on command. Current solid-propellant rocket motors did not have this capability. On future space missions concept could be applied to midcourse correction, probe separation, and orbit and space-probe injection. Lockheed, under contract to jpl, would conduct 18 test firings. (nasa Release 66-56)
NASA Aerobee 150 and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 35 min. apart from wsmr reached 116-mi. (186-km.) and 74-mi. (119-km.) altitudes in GSFC-essa Institute for Telecommunication Sciences and Aeronomy experiment. Aerobee rocket and instrumentation, designed to measure micrometeoroid and cosmic dust impacts and electron densities, performed satisfactorily. Although Nike-Cajun did not reach predicted altitude and two of seven experiments to obtain data on ionospheric D-region did not function properly, satisfactory results were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
USAF was awarding Thiokol Chemical Corp. $1,075,507 contract for design, fabrication, and testing of thrust vector control system for 156-in. solid rocket motor, (dod Release 897-66)
Full 2M-min. duration test of fourth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-4) was conducted on msfc’s East Test Area facility. S-IB-4 would leave msfc in late January for Michoud Assembly Facility for post-firing checkout. (msfc Release 66-25)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried instrumented payload to 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude. Conducted for Johns Hopkins Univ., experiment measured auroral spectral emission lines in the upper atmosphere as a function of altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
nasa awarded rca two-year $7,837,000 contract for logistic support of computers used to check automatically Saturn IB and V booster stages during manufacture and at launch site. Major equipment for the Saturn checkout systems would be the RCA 110A computer produced under separate contract with nasa msfc. (msfc Release 66-8; Marshall Star, 1/12/66, 1)
Four-stage Javelin sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station ejected multicolored barium clouds over eastern U.S. at 310-mi. (499-km.) and 570-mi. (917-km.) altitudes. Cooperative NASA-German Ministry of Scientific Research (bmwf) experiment measured electric fields and wind motion in upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking ionized clouds; secondary objective was observation of interaction between cloud and solar wind. Launch was followed by reported sightings of "brilliant” Ufo’s. (nasa Release 66-245; Wallops Releases 66-46, 66-48; AP, Wash. Post, 9/25/66, A23; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/25/66, A3; nasa Rpt. srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by nasa and Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) from mobile facility at Natal, Brazil, carried 225-lb. payload of four x-ray detectors on ballistic trajectory to 120-mi. (193km.) altitude. Payload, which impacted 66 mi. downrange in the Atlantic, telemetered scientific data to ground stations. First nasa x-ray astronomy experiment on a sounding rocket in the Southern Hemisphere, flight searched for specific galactic x-ray sources, observed Magellanic clouds for x-ray emissions, and obtained spectral information on known x-ray sources, (nasa Release 66-311)
First of fleet of nine, 135-ft. nasa barges for transport of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been placed in service on inland waterways between New Orleans and msfc’s Mississippi Test Facility, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., announced. Company had designed double-walled cryogenic tanks for mounting on modified existing hulls according to requirements of NASA, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and Coast Guard. The three 250,000-gal.-capacity hydrogen barges and six 105,000-gal.-capacity oxygen barges could carry "the largest quantities of the two liquids ever transported in individual vessels.” Docking facilities in test stand area at mtf would permit pumping of liquids directly into rocket fuel tanks, (ap&c Release, 3/24/66)
Two rocket engines which had key roles in U.S. space program—RL-10 and H-l engines—were being given to Smithsonian Institution by msfc for National Air Museum’s display on the history of rocketry, (msfc Release 66-95)
Sixteenth-century manuscript "On Rockets” by Conrad Haas (circa 1550) received at iaf Congress in Madrid. Concepts of rocket construction included multistage rockets and a design of a house-like upper stage. (Text)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 94-mi. (151-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs; rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. nasa Aerobee 150 launched 25 min. later to 109-mi. (174-km.) altitude in NASA-Naval Research Laboratory experiment photographed outer solar corona with moon near edge of field of view and sunlit particles near the rocket. Flight also obtained heliograms showing inner corona and solar disc and data on solar flux in Lyman-alpha. Rocket and instrumentation, except for a spectroheliograph, performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 136-mi. (219-km.) altitude in NASA-Univ. of Minnesota experiment to measure atmospheric temperature and composition from 62- to 124-mi. (100- to 200-km.) altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried two far-ultraviolet image converters to 83-mi. (134-km.) altitude in nrl experiment to obtain stellar spectra and photographs; rocket and instrumentation did not perform as expected, and no useful data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
S-IC-3 booster for first Saturn V flight was shipped from nasa’s Michoud Assembly Facility aboard Poseidon to msfc for static-testing scheduled for late October, (nasa Release 66-218)
Supersonic transport and rocket flights in the next few decades could raise the average surface temperature of the earth by almost half a degree by spewing tons of chemical pollutants into the atmosphere, said Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, ucla planetary and space physicist, in an interview with the Los Angeles Times. Heavy burning of coal, oil, and gas introduced by the industrial revolution in the 19th century and the automotive revolution in the 20th had increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by about 15 per cent, MacDonald estimated. The carbon dioxide created a layer of gas that allowed heat from the sun to reach the earth but stopped it from escaping when it was re-radiated back from the earth. This was the "greenhouse effect,” which raised the temperature below the layer and lowered the temperature above the layer. "Four hundred supersonic aircraft flying four flights a day on intercontinental routes, would affect surface temperatures as much as the whole industrial and automotive revolutions have to date,” MacDonald said. (Getze, L.A. Times, 4/18/66)
Test-firings of XE nuclear rocket engine—last major step before developing hardware for flight-rated nuclear engine—would begin in latter half of 1968, Milton Klein, Deputy Manager, nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, told Atomic Industrial Forum in Pittsburgh. Klein also disclosed that his office had begun preliminary design of new facilities with two test positions, each capable of testing a 200,000-lb.-thrust engine or an entire propulsion module under simulated altitude conditions. (Text)
Tokyo Uniy. Space and Aeronautics Institute announced it had launched a two-stage meteorological sounding rocket, last in a series of 15, from test center in Uchinoura, Kyushu—600 mi. southwest of Tokyo. (AP, NYT, 3/21/66, 27)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster successfully underwent short-duration—35-sec.—static firing at msfc. (msfc Release 66-288)
Simulated Aerobee 150 was launched from wsmr to 2-mi. (3.2-km.) altitude in gsfc flight test of proposed new Aerobee booster. Instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and booster performance was excellent, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Boosted Areas sounding rocket, last in series launched during solar eclipse from usns Range Recoverer near Koroni Beach, Greece, carried gsfc experiment to obtain data on electron and ion density distribution in ionospheric D region, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station reached 631-mi. (1,015-km.) altitude in Univ. of Pittsburgh-Syracuse Univ. experiment to observe ionization levels of exospheric helium. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, with 18-min. telemetry signal. Unanticipated high-energy electron particles were measured, and data were under study to determine their source, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station reached 99-mi. (159-km.) altitude and impacted 64 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Objectives of flight were to compare five ionospheric plasma probes using stable ionosphere as a laboratory for evaluating the probes and to check relevant theories of probe operation, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried jpl 100-kw. radar to 102-mi. (164-km.) altitude in experiment designed to gather data on behavior of radar echoes as a function of altitude for use in developing planetary terrain sounding technique. GSFC-managed flight marked first successful functioning of high-powered radar in space. Similar radar had been flown successfully on NASA Convair 990 April 27. (jpl Release, 6/26/66; jpl, Lab-Oratory, 6/66, 10)
First Europa 1 booster for European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) was successfully launched from Woomera Range although malfunction in an impact indicator at a downrange radar station led to early reentry. Booster, composed of British Blue Streak first stage and dummy French and German second and third stages, was programed for 143-sec. flight. Range safety officer cut flight short by eight seconds when radar indicated Europa 1 was heading off course to the left. There was no malfunction in the rocket itself. Reduction of data later showed booster had been on a correct course at 30.3-mi. (48.8-km.) altitude. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics officials estimated test was 90% successful, and that "objectives were achieved.” Europa 1 was sponsored by U.K., France, Australia, Italy, West Germany, the Netherlands, and Belgium, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/24/66, A12; NYT, 5/25/66, 22; Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 32)
AFCRL launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from wsmr to 117-mi. (188-km.) altitude to collect micrometeorite particles during Leonid meteor shower, (oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 404-mi. (650-km.) altitude in GSFC-Canadian Defence Research Board Telecommunications Establishment experiment to measure ion and electron density and temperature. Although rocket did not perform as expected, all instrumentation functioned normally and "excellent” data were received, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Horace Sheely of the National Survey of Historic Sites, Dept, of the Interior, inspected Pakachoag Hill, Auburn, Mass., site of first successful liquid-fuel rocket flight made by Dr. Robert H. Goddard. Accompanying Sheely were members of the Auburn Rotary and Lions Clubs joint committee to preserve the Goddard site. (Joint Comm. Ltr.)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 134-mi. (216-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to evaluate the method of the double floating probe as a tool for monitoring ionospheric electric fields. Rocket performance was excellent, and data obtained by one of two independent antenna systems was in quantitative agreement with the double floating probe theory. Other antenna system failed to deploy properly, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from wsmr to verify launch compatibility of rocket and modified Nike-Ajax military rail launcher, failed on premature staging at 150 ft; launch verification was successful. (NASA Proj Off)
AIAA Board of Directors endorsed hobbyists who built model rockets from paper, plastic, and balsa wood, but warned against the hazards of amateurs mixing their own fuels and experimenting with homemade metal rockets. Action preceded the National Model Rocket Championship contest scheduled to open in Mankato, Minn., Aug. 15. AIAA, which had for many years withheld endorsement of any type of nonprofessional rocket experiments, recommended that model rocketry be conducted only with adult supervision. (Wilford, NYT, 8/14/67, 37)
AFSC was conducting five-month study of ways to convert excess Minuteman I ICBm’s to launch vehicles, thereby saving millions of dollars. Results of study, to be completed by May, would determine feasibility of flight-test program in which two converted Minuteman boosters would launch instrumented payloads into circular orbits from etr. Preliminary studies had already shown that converted Minuteman booster could place large payloads into 575-mi circular orbit, or smaller payloads into an elliptical orbit 172 mi by 57,500 mi. (afsc Release 20-67)
NASA Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 38-mi (60-km) altitude in nots experiment to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo I Vs mission. First of a series of seven, rocket failed to attain experimental results because of parachute malfunction. (NASARptSRL)
Venus IV's launch site and launch vehicle had been prepared with assistance from military rocket experts, Deputy Commander Col. Gen. Vladimir Tolubko of Soviet strategic rocket forces reported in U.S.S.R.’s trade-union newspaper Trud. Emphasizing role of military specialists in the June 12 launching, Tolubko said they provided guidance during “first 10 minutes of the rocket’s flight,” and relinquished control to “the command measuring complex.” This complex, he wrote, had been controlling, for a decade, “various space apparatuses,” presumably both military and scientific vehicles, according to Baltimore Sun. “[Complex] receives measuring information and telemetry data from stations in Moscow, Siberia, the Far East as well as from special ships in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans,” Tolubko stated. Baltimore Sun reported: “Some Western observers believe all of the country’s massive lifting rockets fall technically under military control because of their potential as intercontinental missiles. Further command reverts to civilian hands if the rocket is on a scientific mission.” (B Sun, 11/17/67, All)
Prof. G. A. Tokaty of The City University, London, speaking to Royal Aeronautical Society’s Astronautics and Guided Flight Section meeting, in London, said: “. . . the Soviets have been (from about 1962) . . . working on a rocket system of 7 to 9 million lb thrust. Evidence of a general nature suggests that they are making good progress and have now reached an advanced stage in achieving a payload-carrying capability of the order of 400,000 to 550,000 lb. . . .” He added: “In the USSR, space science and technology have become an impressive source of new ideas, theories, industrial methods, especially in electro-radio-electronic instrument design [and] all these revolutionised the Soviet precision industry and accelerated the development of the national economy as a whole.” (Text)
The J-2 liquid rocket engine was restarted twice in simulated altitude tests conducted by msfc at aedc. Shut down after an initial 30 sec burn, the engine was restarted and run for 5 sec, then started and stopped again. Total burn time was 70 sec. (Tech Wk, 3/27/67, 24)
nasa Aerobee 150, Mod I sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. payload to 99.6-mi (160.3-km) altitude to obtain quantitative measurements of spectrum and intensity of solar x-ray flux in the 2-30 kev interval and to look for x rays from recurrent nova T Pyxides. This was first flight of new Aerobee configuration Mod I. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies experiment to 85-mi (136-km) altitude to: provide test of instrumentation; prove out feasibility of payload recovery and reuse; and provide geophysical observations of auroral zone under either quiet or disturbed conditions. All experimental objectives were met except payload recovery. (NASA Rpt SRL)
In related experiments, Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to obtain wind profiles by release of chemical and photograph of chemical cloud at 96-mi (154-km) altitude; another Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill to study shortterm variation of density, pressure, and temperature during 12-hr period to 80-mi (127-km) altitude; Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, to determine shortterm variations in upper atmosphere temperatures with payload of standard grenades. All rockets and payloads performed well, (nasa Proj Off)
Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, reached 496-mi (798-km) altitude in Southwest Center for Advanced Studies/Defence Research Telecommunications Establishment experiment to determine in conjunction with an overpass of an Isis satellite: vertical distribution of flux and energy spectra of soft electrons during a mild ionospheric disturbance; vertical distribution of thermal ion and electron densities and temperature of various species of ions; and flight qualification of a soft-electron spectrometer to be flown on isis—A spacecraft. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. experiment to 76-mi (125-km) altitude to determine x-ray spectra in the 0.3- to 3-kev energy range of several previously discovered cosmic sources and to search for variation with galactic latitude of diffuse x-ray background. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRl)
Existence of a secret three-station system which would have enabled sac to broadcast final messages to its surviving bomber and missile forces in event of a general nuclear attack on U.S. was revealed by Howard Silber in the Omaha World-Herald. System, operational since July 1963, had completed its mission and was being superseded by newer devices. Located near West Point, Wisner, and Tekamah, Neb., each constantly manned station had consisted of a guard house and three trailer-vehicles housing launch control equipment, electronics equipment, and a Blue Scout Junior rocket. The three-stage rockets were to have been launched in sequence so their messages could be sounded at specific prearranged intervals at altitudes of more than 100 mi. (Omaha W-H, 12/21/67, 1; AP, NYT, 12/22/67,31)
afcrl launched five Nike-Iroquois sounding rockets from Vega Baja, Puerto Rico, so that simultaneous observations of the ionosphere might he made using rocket instruments and the Arecibo radiotelescope. Rockets were designed to reach a peak altitude of 112 mi (180 km). Measurements of temperature, energy distribution, and density of ions and electrons provided basis for calibration and interpretation of ionospheric data acquired by Arecibo radiotelescope. (OAR Research Review, 12/67, 6-7) During October-November: Lunar Orbiter IV, launched May 4, was presumed to have crashed on lunar surface; contact with spacecraft had been lost July 17. (nasa Proj Off)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried GSFC payload to 131-mi (210-km) altitude in experiment to measure spectral irradiance of Gamma Velora and Zeta Puppis with a UV stellar spectograph, star tracker, and modified attitude-control system (strap). Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35—95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched first of five Nike-Apache sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station but canceled remaining four in the dusk-to-dawn series of launches because of unfavorable weather. Rocket ejected a trimethylaluminujn (tma) vapor trail of bluish color between 50- and 125-mi altitudes in experiment to measure wind velocities and directions at various altitudes in the upper atmosphere. Launchings were conducted for GCA Corp., under contract to GSFC. ossa had overall program responsibility. (nasa Release 67-179; WS Release 67—25; W Post, 7/23/67, A3)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR, carrying arc payload to 99.2-mi (159.5-km) altitude to verify performance of sparcs (Solar Pointing Aerobee Rocket Control System) and map the flight path magnetic field. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
House/Senate Conference Committee agreed on $4.86-billion NASA authorization bill—$234.2 million less than NASA had requested for FY 1968. It included $42 million for Voyager program, $347.7 million for aa program, $73 million for nuclear rocket program, and $157.7 million for launch vehicle procurement. Bill, which required Senate and House approval, was passed by the Senate Aug. 2. (nasa lar VI/83; Committee Release; Clark, NYT, 8/1/67, 13)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carried seven experiments to 100-mi (160-km) altitude measuring: spectral emission line intensity during an aurora as function of altitude; visible emission features of an aurora; and primary and secondary electron streams. Except for high voltage arcing, instrument performance was satisfactory; rocket performance was good, (nasa Rpt SRl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 118-mi (182-km) altitude in flight to observe profile of solar hydrogen Lyman-alpha line and to measure radiation in relation to earth’s planetary hydrogen. Experiments performed satisfactorily, but range schedule delay caused loss of coordination with Mariner V experiment, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried 14-in telescope with new strap iii stellar pointing control to 96.8-mi (155-km) altitude in Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to measure vacuum spectral emission lines from atmospheres of Venus, Jupiter, and Regulus. strap iii (used for first time) rocket and other instruments performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from wsmr to 114-mi (184-km) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain x-ray and euv photos of the sun and to flight test scat solar pointing system. Flight, first for scat, proved to hold pointing to within a few arc sec. Rocket and other instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 35-mi (56-km) altitude as second in nots series to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, and achieved all experimental objectives, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried ARC-instrumented payload to 88-mi (141-km) altitude to collect for analysis meteoritic debris during the peak of meteor shower. Three deployable module support arms held four module trays each, to entrap meteoritic debris. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASARptSRL)
usaf SV-5D lifting body vehicle was successfully launched from WTR by Adas booster on reentry mission and telemetered excellent performance data. Vehicle—third of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program—was second to perform preprogrammed cross-range maneuvers and first to be successfully recovered. First SV—5D vehicle was launched Dec. 21, 1966, and lost when parachute malfunctioned during reentry; second, launched March 5, sank in Pacific after losing its flotation gear. (Tech Wk, 4/24/67,13; Av Wk, 4/24/67,35)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried MIT x-ray experiment to 88-mi (142-km) altitude to search for undiscovered x-ray sources and to obtain data on celestial locations and energy spectra of “discrete celestial X-ray sources” in three regions. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
LeRC awarded four contracts totaling over $5 million for major systems of the sert n (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft: (1) $2,462,678 to Fairchild Hiller Corp. for system definition selection and qualification of components for spacecraft support unit; (2) $1,308,065 to Hugh es Aircraft Co. to develop prime power conditioning and control system for ion thrusters; $1,055,757 to Westinghouse Electric Corp. to develop backup power conditioning and control system; and (4) $290,987 to Cutler-Hammer Corp. to develop a radio frequency interference experiment to measure interference with radio communications generated by the ion engines. sert n was an orbital mission scheduled for late 1968 to advance the development of ion engines as propulsion units for future long-duration space missions, (nasa Release 67-188)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Minnesota experiment to 131-mi (210-km) altitude to measure composition and determine temperature of atmosphere in altitude range 62-124 mi (100-200 km). Experiment used three mass spectrometers and a yoyo despin system. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Fort Churchill, Canada, in experiment from Univ. of California at Berkeley to study charged particles in the auroral zone, 1-300 kev electrons, and 1—100 kev protons. Peak altitude was unknown because of loss of telemetry and radar signal. Payload malfunction accounted for failure to obtain complete data. (NASARptSRL)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried payload to peak altitude of 175 km (109 mi) to obtain atmospheric wind and temperature data up to 135 km (84 mi). Grenade and chemical cloud techniques were used by experimenters, Dr. D. Rees, London, England, and Mr. M. Rahmatullah, Karachi, Pakistan. Rocket performed satisfactorily; grenade-explosion timing sequence was late. (NASA Rpt srl)
U.S.S.R. had developed a device that enabled jet aircraft to take off almost straight up, reaching the stratosphere “in a matter of minutes,” Komsomolskaya Pravda reported. Article did not include detailed description of device but indicated it consisted of rocket engines that provided sudden thrust of tremendous force. (AP, NYT, 1/7/67, 10)
involvement in current Middle East crisis. (NASA Ann, 6/20/67; net Proj Off) During week of June 25: Ceremonies at NASA’s Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards AFB marked delivery of the millionth ton of cryogenic rocket propellants and pressurants. Eluids were used by North American Aviation, Inc.’s Rocketdyne Div. to test fire F-l engines prior to shipping them to msfc for use in Saturn V 1st stages, (msfc Release 67-139) June 26: NASA’s Mariner V spacecraft successfully completed two scheduled functions in preparation for Oct. 19 Venus flyby mission by switching its amplifiers to increase radio transmitting power and, 30 min later, turning off its battery charger on commands from Goldstone, Calif., Deep Space Network station. All systems onboard spacecraft, launched from ETR June 14, were continuing to operate satisfactorily. (NASA Release 67-165)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 111.5-mi (179-km) altitude to measure and record spectra of Spica and Zeta Ophiuchi in extreme ultraviolet range. Rocket and instrumentation performed well. (NASA Rpt SRL)
First Indian-developed rocket, Rohini-75, designed to carry meteorological experiments, was successfully launched from Thumba Equatorial Launching Station (terls). (Reuters, NYT, 11/21/67, 5)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, on floor of House praised NASA’s Surveyor program: “It successfully demonstrated the technique of soft-landing [and] . . . with the successfully concluded Lunar Orbiter program, it found and certified manned landing sites....” He said the program had supplied scientists with the first real information on the chemical composition of the lunar surface. In the eastern Sea of Tranquility, for example, Surveyor V determined that the surface was made up of the same elements common to the surface of the earth; namely, oxygen, silicon, and aluminum. He concluded: “Since both Surveyor and its Centaur booster encountered enormous problems in the early stages of development, the eventual success of the program demonstrated the skill, perseverance, and determination of the NASA-industry-university team.” (CR, 11/20/67, H15619)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrlinstrumented payload to 120-mi (193-km) to obtain spectra from a stellar ultraviolet image converter spectrograph and stellar photometric data from two ultraviolet photon counters. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
President Johnson sent $149.8-million FY 1968 budget amendment to Congress which included $91 million for development of Rover nuclear-powered rocket engine. In his message, the President stated: “Government scientists and engineers have now concluded that a much more powerful nuclear engine would have distinct advantages over rockets now in use. I am recommending that . . . [U.S.] move ahead with the development of a nuclear engine having a potential of 200,000 to 250,000 pounds of thrust. “Such an engine could be used for a new and much more powerful third stage for our Saturn V launch vehicle. Because of its high efficiency, it could: [1] permit us almost to double the weight of the present payload of the Saturn V vehicle, [2] increase our ability to maneuver spacecraft, and [3] be used in future manned landings and explorations of far distant planets. . . .” (PD, 3/6/67, 334-5)
usaf SV—5D lifting body was successfully launched from wtr by Atlas booster on reentry mission and telemetered “excellent” performance data to earth before losing its flotation gear and sinking in the Pacific. Released by Adas booster at desired orbital altitude, the 900-1]) vehicle became first spacecraft to perform preprogrammed cross-range maneuvers when it glided away from a straight line and then returnee] to original flight path. Purpose of flight—second of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program— was to further test theory that a vehicle could be designed to operate like an orbital spacecraft and be maneuvered like an aircraft when it reentered and traveled through the atmosphere. First SV—5D vehicle, launched Dec. 21, 1966, performed successfully but was lost when parachute malfunctioned, (afssd Release 77.67; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 23; Miles, LA Times, 3/6/67)
NERVA (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) reactor (NRX-A6) was successfully ground-tested by NASA and AEC at Jackass Flats, Nev., achieving major goal of one-hour duration for nuclear rocket technology program and demonstrating that rocket reactors could be operated for periods longer than those required for most space missions. Test, in which reactor operated for 60 min at 1,100-mw design power, was sixth in series to obtain additional data on reactor characteristics under extended operation duration in joint NASA—aec Rover program, (aec Release K-285; Aero Tech, 1/1/68, 13)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried ARC-instrumented payload to 86-mi (137-km) altitude to collect meteor-itic debris during peak of meteor shower. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Further examination of the 12 collection modules would be required to determine if micrometeoroid particles were collected, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 112-mi (181-km) altitude to observe solar spectrum from 3 A to 400 A in conjunction with Oso III spectrometer instrument [see Mar. 8]. Rocket and instrumentation performance were satisfactory. (NASARptsRL)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to 88-mi (141-km) altitude to determine electron density in lower ionosphere (during period of nonblanketing Sporadic-E), electron collision frequency, electron temperature, and positive ion densities of species in the 8- to 60-a.m.u. range. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and excellent results were anticipated. (NASA Rpt SRl)
France would launch 330-lb Saros comsat—138 lbs heavier than ComSatCorp’s intelsat II comsats—in 1970 from new French Guiana launch site using eldo’s Europa booster, Reuters reported. Saros would provide direct telephone, radio, and television communications between France and French-speaking countries. (Reuters, W Post, 2/23/67, A3)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried instruimented payload to 26-mi (42-km) altitude to gather micrometeoroid particles during a quiet period immediately before the Zeta Perseid/An-etid meteor shower. No scientific data were obtained because “burn-through” near the igniter headcap caused an explosion, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (59-km) altitude, sixth in nots series of seven to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRl)
NASA Areas sounding rocket, launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 33-mi (53-km) altitude, third in nots series to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission, achieved excellent results. Rocket and payload performed properly, (nasa Rpt srl)
Seventh attempt to launch eldo’s Europa I rocket from Woomera, Australia, failed when mechanical fault developed in release system of the French Coralie 2nd stage. (Reuters, C Trib, 7/31/67)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade experiment to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (35—95 km) at the transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
French scientists were teaching monkeys that pressure on one out of five buttons produced a gum drop, in preparation for series of space flights with Vesta sounding rocket from Hammaguir Range, AP reported. Researchers hoped to determine effects of weightlessness on animals’ behavior patterns. (AP, W Star, 1/7/67, A2)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, and carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 141mi (227-km) altitude to obtain data on charged particle (luxes and investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere during auroral displays. Rocket performance was satisfactory, but only partial data were received from electric field experiment. {NASA Rpt SRl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, in experiment on vertical and horizontal variation of auroral light emissions. Peak altitude was not obtained because of heavy fog effect on radar tracking. Rocket and experiment performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
afcrl successfully launched 65-lb payload by Trailblazer II booster from Wallops Station in experiment to study reentry communications problems by carefully measuring plasma sheath properties and their effects. Booster’s 3rd and 4th stage engines fired at 187-mi altitude to propel nosecone downward; at 60-mi altitude rocket achieved a velocity of 18,000	fps creating an envelope of plasma identical to the envelopes which block radio and microwave communications with reentering spacecraft. Since a pure plasma was essential to the success of the experiment, reentry vehicle had no ablative coating and burned up completely in the atmosphere, afcrl would use results of measurements to develop techniques for predicting exact behavior of a radiating system during reentry, (oar Release 67—9)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 128-mi (209-km) altitude to gather data on charged particle fluxes and to investigate distribution of electric fields in the ionosphere during auroral displays. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, but vehicle spin rate was excessive. Most scientific data were lost because nose cone failed to eject properly and antennas failed to deploy, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 109-mi (176-km) altitude to study special uv radiation of star Zeta Ophiuchi. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory; no spectra were obtained because a thin film of oil-like substance covered grating and mirrors. Source of substance was under investigation, (nasa Rpt srl)
Two Boosted Areas I sounding rockets launched from Resolute Bay, Canada, without tracking facilities carried gsfc experiment to obtain D region ionospheric data in vicinity of magnetic north pole. First rocket lost telemetry at seven seconds; recovery search would be attempted if arctic conditions permitted. Second rocket had 255-sec burn (300 + sec planned), so altitude was probably insufficient. Both.experiments used ground-based transmission of rf energy to rocketborne receivers (Fara-day-rotation experiment). These were first U.S. rocket launchings from this facility, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 35 to 95 km at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRl) 324-801 O—69
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in the Pacific northeast of Midway Island to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Series, which began Sept. 2, was first to last as long as scheduled. (upi, NYT, 10/31/67,44; M/S Daily, 10/31/67)
msc awarded Rocket Research Corp. a $405,000 contract to deliver by
eldo Technical Director Dr. W. H. Stephens announced that eldo would develop Europa III following development of Europa II. Europa III booster would have Europa I 1st stage (Blue Streak) and liquid hydrogen-oxygen 2nd stage with two 14,000-lb-thrust rocket engines. Configuration would be able to boost 6,000-lb payload into low earth orbit. Using high-energy 3rd stage, new launch vehicle would be able to place 1,200	lbs into synchronous orbit; adding two strap-on solid rocket motors rated at 420,000 lbs thrust each, launch vehicle could place 4,000 lbs into synchronous orbit. Low-thrust, very-high-specific-impulse systems were being considered, Stephens said, for use in transferring payloads from low to high orbits, and for accelerating to escape speeds. Using Dragon reactor technology, a small reactor could also be employed in such a system. (S/P, 12/18/67, 150)	.
U.K. was considering halting its activities at Woomera Rocket Range because of large expense due to distance between England and the Australian range and because only a few of its missile projects required such an extensive facility, Space Business Daily reported. (SBD, 12/ 6/67, 181)
eldo’s Europa I rocket was launched from Woomera Rocket Range but was automatically destroyed in mid-air after French Coralie 2nd stage failed to ignite. U.K.’s Blue Streak 1st stage performed satisfactorily. Purpose of suborbital flight test was to evaluate performance of the Coralie and separation of the three stages. (AP, NYT, 12/6/67,16; SBD, 12/7/67,189)
Nation’s most powerful 260-in solid-propellant rocket motor, SL-3, developed 5.7 million lbs thrust and burned 1.6 million lbs of propellant in 80-sec test-firing conducted for NASA by Aerojet General at Homestead, Fla. Only flaw was explosion of a portion of the exhaust nozzle at the end of the test. Purpose of firing, third in NASA’s Large Solid Rocket Technology Program, was to test “a large, submerged-type, ablative nozzle; the use of inert slivers to control the burn-out of propellant; elements of a motor failure warning system; and a higher burning rate propellant.” First two 260-in motors, SL-1 (fired Sept. 25, 1965) and SL-2 (fired Feb. 23, 1966), both operated about two minutes and produced 3.5 million lbs thrust in tests to check strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the case propellant, insulation and ablative nozzle, and the repeated performance of test hardware. Managed by LeRC under OART direction, program was designed to demonstrate feasibility of building and operating solid motors of greater size than those in current use for multistage launch vehicle systems carrying heavy payloads into space, (nasa Release 67151; Lewis News, 6/9/67, 1; Reistrup, W Post, 6/18/67, A2; NYT, 6/18/67,6; Marshall Star, 6/21/67,10)
Detector to measure cosmic dust influx into earth’s atmosphere and meteoroid registration would be tested in NASA/German Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) cooperative project, part of continuing program first started July 19, 1967. Influx of cosmic dust would be measured by charge emission in detectors (developed by Max Planck Institute of Nuclear Physics, Heidelberg, Germany), which would be launched on NASA-supplied Nike-Apache sounding rockets from ESRo’s range in Kiruna, Sweden, May or June 1968. NASA would supply rocket launcher and train Germans in rocket preparation and launching, bmwf would provide two payload packages and ground support equipment, (nasa Release 67-288)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced U.S.S.R.’s possible development of a Fractional Orbital Bombardment System [see Oct. 16]. While ICBm’s followed a ballistic trajectory from launch to impact and had an apogee of 800 mi, fobs, he said, was fired into a very low orbit, and before first orbit was completed, rocket engine would slow down payload and cause it to drop out of orbit—payload then following a reentry path like reentry of ICBM. He said that “we suspect [they] are pursuing the R&D of a FOBS . . . [and] it is conceivable that they could achieve an initial operational capability during 1968. Because of the low altitude of their orbits, some trajectories of a fobs would avoid detection by some early warning radars . . . [and] impact point cannot be determined until ignition of the rocket engine [deboosting payload]— roughly three minutes and 500 miles from the target. And the flight time can be as much as 10 minutes shorter than an icbm.” Accuracy of fobs would be significantly less than that of icbm and payload a fraction of that of icbm, according to McNamara, fobs’ disadvantages had compelled dod to decide that FOBS “would not improve our strategic offensive posture . . . while development of [fobs] could be initiated at any time for relatively rapid deployment.. . .” Anticipating that early warning radars (including bmews) could not detect fobs “because of the low altitude cf [fobs] orbits,” McNamara said: “. . . already we are beginning to use operationally over-the-horizon radars which possess a greater capability of detecting fobs than does bmews. These will give us more warning time against a full-scale attack using fobs missiles than bmews gives against a heavy icbm launch.” (Text; DOD Release 1060-67) Communist-Chinese-oriented abm system—deployment approved by DOD Sept. 18—was named the Sentinel System, according to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s announcement, l/g Alfred D. Star-bird (usa) was named Army’s System Manager for new system; currently Director, dca, Starbird would assume new position Nov. 15,1967, and would be responsible for development and timely deployment in a three-pronged organization: Sentinel System Office, Washington, D.C., to be an element of C/Staff’s Office, USA; Sentinel System Command, Huntsville, Ala., to develop, procure, and install new system; and Sentinel System Evaluation Agency (ssea) at wsmr to provide independent evaluation, review, and testing. Existing Nike-X organization, under command of l/g Austin W. Betts (usa) , Chief of r&d, would continue (separately from Sentinel System) to perform: r&d, design of equipment to be used for tests of the penetration capabilities of U.S. offensive missiles, and mission of protecting U.S. against large-scale attacks, (dod Release 1059-67)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 67-mi (108-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performance were only partly successful due to low apogee of rocket, which placed the highest grenade burst at only 42-mi altitude, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill carried Rice Univ.-instrumented payload to 467-mi (752-km) altitude to measure ratio of fluxes of auroral zone precipitated protons, and alpha particles, fluxes and spectra of low-energy protons and electrons, and energy spectrum of protons with energies of 100 to 500 kev. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched three artificial cloud experiments from NASA Wallops Station. In first experiment Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket ejected multicolored barium vapor clouds over eastern U.S. at altitudes of 142 and 200 mi (246 and 322 km) to measure electric fields and wind motions in the upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking ionized clouds. Experiment had been scheduled for March 28 but was postponed because of overcast skies. In second and third experiments Nike-Apache sounding rockets carried separate triethylborane (Teb) experiments to 100-mi (161-km) altitude to investigate distribution of, and radiation from, atomic oxygen. Teb, a new test material, for measuring upper atmosphere wind profiles, was ejected at 90- to 50-mi (145- to 81-km) altitudes and photographed by special photometer as it dispersed. Launches were followed by reported sighting of bright ufo’s. (nasa Release 67—74; WS Release 67-12; AP, W Star, 3/31/67, All)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in second Pacific area near Midway Island to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Tests in other areas had been completed Dec. 13. Series, which began Nov. 28, had been scheduled to last until Dec. 30. (upi, NYT, 12/14/67, 16; SBD,12/18/67,246)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 72-mi (115-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASARptSRL)
Sounding rocket launched by esro from northern Sweden to study aurora borealis reached 116-km (72-mi) altitude. (Reuters, NYT, 2/6/67,3)
Phoebus IB reactor was operated for 45 min—30 min at 1,500-mw design power—in test conducted by aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office at nrds, Jackass Flats, Nev. Primary purpose of test, part of Rover program, was to study high-power-operation effects on reactor— including test conditions to be found in 5,000-mw Phoebus 2, slated for test late this year. Phoebus series would provide advanced technology for solid-core graphite rocket reactors, eventually providing 200,000250,000	lbs of thrust. (Joint aec-nasa Release K—46)
nasa had awarded naa’s Rocketdyne Div. a $1.4-million contract for continued technological investigation of the advanced aerospike rocket engine. Studied by oart for 1% yrs, the engine utilizes a doughnutshaped combustion chamber which discharges exhaust gases against the surface of a short center cone. In conventional rocket engines, gases are expanded inside long bell-shaped nozzles. Current concept specified an engine 8 ft in diameter and 4% ft high—about 50% shorter than conventional bell nozzle engines. A new “aerodynamically compensating nozzle” would permit use of the engine at sea level or high altitude, making it potentially suitable for both lower and upper stages of launch vehicles. Contract completion date was May 31, '1968. (nasa Release 67-221)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Minnesota experiment to 131-mi (210-km) altitude to measure composition of atmosphere and determine temperature in altitude range 62—124 mi (100-200 km) using three mass spectrometers. Two of three spectrometers did not function properly; however, data obtained appeared satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station in third flight test carried 110-lb instrument package to 1,495-mi (3,007-km) altitude before impacting 690 mi downrange in the Atlantic. No recovery was attempted. The 11,600-lb solid-fueled rocket—most powerful sounding rocket in U.S.—transmitted 30 min of data on flight characteristics. From preliminary examination of data test appeared successful, but scientific data on cosmic noise effects were lost because rocket’s spin rate was too high for proper deployment of experimental antennas. Astrobee 1500 was being developed by NASA “to provide a research rocket capable of carrying heavy scientific payloads to high altitudes, with a relative ease-of-handling. . . .” First launch attempt (April 8, 1963) failed 16 sec after launch because of a nosefairing failure; second attempt (Oct. 21, 1964) was successful. (WS Release 67-5)
nasa Nike Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to 149.5-mi (237-km) altitude in a Univ. of Maryland-Geophysics Corp. of America experiment to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes, investigate electron energy distribution in a normal daytime ionosphere, and investigate the use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. One door covering gca antennas prematurely ejected causing a complete loss of experimental data and a rocket apogee 4 mi lower than predicted. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from wsmr, reached 107-mi (172-km) altitude in nrl experiment to obtain stellar spectra in 1,230-1,800 A far uv wavelength range and photometric data on stellar fluxes in 1,050-1,180 and 1,230-1,350 A bands. Attitude-control system programming error-pointed instrument 60° from desired targets; only limited data were obtained, (nasa Rpt SRI.)
Three sets of experiments were continued at Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Point Barrow, Alaska [see January 31]. Last five of a series of six Nike-Apache sounding rockets were successfully launched from Ft. Churchill to obtain wind profiles of upper atmosphere to 96-mi (154km) altitude. Last five of a series of six Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ft. Churchill to study short-term variation of density, pressure, and temperature during 12-hr period where altitudes ranged from 94 mi (152 km) to 102 mi (164 km). In first launch, Nike booster malfunction resulted in payload malfunction; for other four launches, rocket and payload performance were satisfactory. Last five of a series of six Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were successfully launched from Point Barrow at two-hour' intervals to determine short period variations in • upper atmosphere temperatures, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 96-lb payload with joint U.S.-India ionosphere experiment to 88-mi (142-km) altitude before impacting 100 mi downrange in the Atlantic. Purpose of flight was to prove out instrumentation and test new antenna design. Experiment, which measured electron and ion densities and Lyman-alpha flux in lower ionosphere with a riometer—cosmic radio noise absorption device—and a Langmuir probe, was being developed for series of cooperative nasa-incospar launches from Thumba range, India, (nasa Release 67-61; WS Release 67-8)
eldo’s Europa I rocket, launched from Woomera Rocket Range after 10 postponements, crash-landed when French Coralie 2nd stage failed to ignite. Malfunction was traced to equipment associated with the release system designed to separate the Coralie from U.K.’s Blue Streak 1st stage. Rocket, which should have flown 4,828 km (3,000 mi) into the Pacific, landed 965 km (600 mi) north of Woomera in the Simpson desert. (Reuters, NYT, 8/5/67, 7)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket carrying 55-Ib payload to obtain electron density profile was launched from nasa Wallops Station to 121-mi (193-km) altitude. Minutes later, Nike-Cajun grenade experiment was launched over the Atlantic for atmosphere temperature support data at 50- to 56-mi (80- to 90-km) altitudes. Launchings, first two in series of three to study relation of high absorption radio waves in ionosphere to seasonal temperature variations in upper atmosphere, were conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois, gca Corp., and gsfc. Rockets and equipment functioned satisfactorily. (Wallops Release 67-4)
Two sounding rockets were launched from NASA Wallops Station. NikeApache carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 60-mi (96.4-km) altitude to obtain a vertical profile of the density of nitric oxide in region at 47—75-mi (75-120-km) altitude with a scanning uv monochromator. Payload was first to utilize Tomahawk clamshell nose cone. Instruments performed satisfactorily, but late ignition of rocket’s 2nd stage caused 12-mi (20-km) loss in apogee. Nike-Cajun carrying GSFC-instrumented payload used grenade-explosion technique to measure temperature, pressure, density, and wind in region 22—59-mi (35-95-km) altitude in coordination with nitric oxide experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, reaching 68-mi (109.6-km) altitude. The near-simultaneous launches were intended to permit analysis of theory relating nitric oxide concentration to temperature and absorption of radio energy, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with grenade payload was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly circulation to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt srl)
Two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets carrying instrumented payloqds were successfully launched by NASA from wsmr. First rocket carried an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer and input telescope to 97.5-mi (156.8km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of five early stars in 1,100 to 4,000 A wavelength. Second, carrying detectors to observe sky in the infrared, reached 98.5-mi (158-km) altitude. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 44-mi (68-km) altitude to develop experimental atmospheric composition profiles in mesospheric region and to measure ozone distribution in regions of 12—40 mi (20-65 km). Because of malfunction in parachute system only two minutes of ozone data were acquired. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA had successfully completed series of ground tests to qualify improved graphite nozzle insert in FW-4<S solid rocket motor which had malfunctioned during launch of Scout booster in January. Malfunction had caused postponement of Feb. 15 launch of ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C, because FW-4 was 3rd stage of its booster, Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta, (nasa Release 67-60)
Last NASA Areas sounding rocket in series of seven was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (59-km) altitude, in nots experiment to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IVs mission. All experimental objectives were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried instrumented payload to 86.5-mi (139.2-km) altitude; it measured spectral irradiance of two early-type stars in wave length intervals 1100 A to 4000 A. The other two target stars were pointed at but could not be observed through opacity of fuel and oxidizer released through control jets. (NASARptSRL)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station ejected barium vapor at 75-, 115-, and 140-mi altitudes, forming three distinct green and purple clouds visible for hundreds of miles. Experiment was conducted for afcrl to (1) measure electric fields and wind motion in upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking movement of ionized barium clouds, and (2) measure attenuation on passage of radio signals through ionized barium plasmas. (WS Release 67-32; upi, W Star, 10/4/67, D2)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried gsfcinstrumented payload to 98-mi (159-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of Venus. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but telescope and camera separated from recovery body during reentry and were damaged at impact, (nasa Rpt SRL)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk launched from Barreira de Inferno Range, near Natal, Brazil, carried Univ. of New Hampshire-instrumented experiment to obtain data on neutron intensity at different latitudes, solar x-ray fluxes, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionospheric electron densities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL; Tech Wk, 4/10/67, 15)
Two NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets, launched from Andoeya, Norway, carried gsfc electric field experiments. Four barium clouds released by the first were photographed from all sites for analysis of electric fields from motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during aurora condition. The second rocket was launched to correlate electric field measurements with measurements of magnetic fields, flux, and energy spectra of low-energy particles, but failed on loss of radiofrequency signals, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire experiment to provide data on the neutron intensity at different altitudes using a neutron detector, solar x-ray fluxes using an x-ray counter, and 2-10 A Lyman-alpha radiation using a photoionization chamber. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Cone-shaped RAM C-l spacecraft was successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Scout booster at 1:33 pm, edt. On termination of eight-minute ballistic flight, impact occurred 725 mi down-range about 150 nm northeast of Bermuda. Spacecraft, 15 in long and 26 in in dia with 12-in-di^ hemisphere nose, plunged hack into earth’s atmosphere at 17,000 rnph in flight test to study methods for preventing loss of radio .signals from reentering spacecraft. No recovery was attempted. NASA’s Project RAM (Radio Attenuation Measurement) was to measure effectiveness of water addition concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Additional experiments were also included to evaluate X-band telemetry system as a means of overcoming blackout: study plasma and ablation effects on antenna performance; measure attenuation as a function of signal frequency; and obtain measurements of ion densities in the flow field of the spacecraft in the presence of ablation and water injection. Water was injected at three points on spacecraft—on nose cap and on each side—with nitrogen gas as pressurizing agent. Ion density changes, due to varying amounts of water injection, were measured. X-band frequency experiment showed blackout period of communications was reduced by 6 sec, using water-injection method. Series of Arcasonde meteorological rockets were launched from Bermuda before and after RAM C-l experiment to collect upper atmosphere density, temperature, and wind data, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67261; WS Releases 67-33,67-34)
jpl had selected Avco Space Systems Div. for negotiations on a six-month, $240,000 contract to study feasibility of launching a flyby spacecraft and atmospheric entry capsule to Venus in 1972. NASA had approved selection of the firm, which would head a team effort with Northrop Systems Lab oratories. Study, expected to begin in May, would investigate all aspects of launching by an Atlas-Centaur booster a Mariner-class spacecraft weighing about 1,200 lbs. Near Venus, 100-lb capsule system would separate from flyby portion of spacecraft and enter Venusian atmosphere to take direct measurements during descent to surface. Capsule would not be designed to survive impact on Venus, (nasa Release 67-72)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 93-mi (130-km) altitude in flight to measure the radiation from celestial objects in the spectral region, 2,800-1,200 A, 40-50 A, and 2-8 A. Experiments performed satisfactorily, but parachute did not deploy and payload crashed because of faulty wiring. Recovery was not required to obtain scientific data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (58-km) altitude, fifth in NOTS series of seven to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Continuing Brazil/U.S. space cooperation, experiment to measure airglow would be carried out by National Space Commission (cnae) of Brazil and NASA, an Aerobee 150 to be launched from Brazil’s Barreiro do Inferno range this fall [see Oct. 14—15]. A monochromator would measure day airglow in equatorial regions at altitude of about 130 mi in the range of 2,000A. One of two kinds of upper atmosphere’s visible radiation (aurora being other), airglow existed when sunlight interacted with upper atmosphere to create visible radiation. CNAE would be responsible for preparation and operation of launching range and associated facilities, and for providing personnel for training. nasa would provide Aerobee rocket, payload, and mobile launch facility currently located in Brazil, (nasa Release 67-277)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 78-mi (126-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (3595 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket was planned as companion shot with Nike-Cajun launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, April 10. Weather conditions at Wallops Station prevented launch on same day. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Soviet references to low-altitude nuclear weapon that would drop on target before completing full orbit of earth appeared to confirm Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s analysis of dod intelligence reports that U.S.S.R. had a nuclear-warhead missile capable of sudden attack from relatively low altitude. Commemorating U.S.S.R. Rocket and Artillery Forces Day, Strategic Rocket Forces Commander-In-Chief Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov and Col. Gen. Nikolai V. Yegorov described missiles that could deliver “nuclear warheads . . . along ballistic and orbital trajectories.” (Anderson, NYT, 11/19/67,15)
NASA’s broad program of lunar exploration included, according to Space/ Aeronautics, “quickening conversion of data and designs into hardware and techniques for . . . planting a coordinated set of instruments on the lunar surface for remote, year-long readout; bringing back those lunar samples for exhaustive, quarantine-flavored analysis in custom labs; going back with wheels, rocket pogos, and sophisticated drills for more extensive exploration; [and] exploiting, eventually, the moon’s capacities as a base for astronomy, or as a source for fuel.” (S/A, 5/67,68)
Undulating, banana-shaped barium cloud, released from a Nike-Iroquois sounding rocket launched from Eglin AFB in USAF experiment on air currents, touched off dozens of reports of UFO’s throughout southeastern U.S. (upi, NYT, 1/18/67, 48)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried GSFC payload containing pitot-static probe to measure atmospheric density, pressure, and temperature in observing diurnal variation in the fine structure of the region from 15 to 110 km. Probe was launched in conjunction with thermosphere probe experiments. The 2nd stage of the sounding rocket did not ignite because of low current application. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 71.1-mi (114.4-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 35 to 95 km at the transition from wintertime westerly to summertime easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl; Tech Wk, 4/10/67,15)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from nasa Wallops Station, reached 102-mi (167-km) altitude in Univ. of Maryland experiment to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes as research tools. Experiment also investigated electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere and use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Experiment was successful. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrl payload to 107-mi (173-km) altitude on flight to measure, with Euv heliograph and coronagraph, micrometeoritic particles close to rocket and to take pictures of solar disc. Excellent results were obtained; coronagraph package yielded more than 50 photographs of white-light solar corona from three to 10 solar radii, (nasa Rpt srl)
msfc awarded two contracts: (1) a $2.4-million, two-month contract extension to Chrysler Corp. for procurement of long-lead time items for additional Uprated Saturn 11st stages. Extension would enable Chrysler to continue procurements necessary to maintain capability to assemble four Uprated Saturn I boosters annually; (2) a $14,811,540 fixed-price-incentive-fee contract to naa for 60 additional H-l rocket engines for use on 1st stages of Uprated Saturn I boosters. Order increased total number of engines purchased to 322. Delivery would continue through September 1968. (msfc Releases 67-136, 67-138)
NASA Argo D^t (Javelin) sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Syracuse Univ. Research Corp. payload containing vacuum-ion chamber to 625-mi (1,006-km) altitude on flight to measure ion densities in the upper atmosphere. Telemetry signal was received for 18 min. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried a Rice Univ.-instrumented payload to 493-mi (794-km) to determine spatial and temporal variations and transit times of auroral particle fluxes and perform pitch angle studies including backscattered particles. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Puerto Rico in Univ. of Illinois experiment to probe lower regions of ionosphere up to about 125 mi (200 km), achieved satisfactory results. In first of three such rocket flights, measurements were made simultaneously with those of Arecibo Ionospheric Ohservatory’s giant radar-radio telescope, 30 mi from Vega Baja Airport launch site. World’s largest radar-radio telescope took ionospheric readings, using its 1,000-ft-dia wire mesh reflector. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-230; WS Release 67—28)
X—24A (formerly SV-5P), Nation’s newest manned lifting-body vehicle, was publicly displayed and officially turned over to usaf in ceremonies at Martin Marietta Corp.’s Baltimore plant. The 5,000-lb wingless vehicle, constructed by Martin Marietta Corp. under afsc contract, would be air-launched from B-52 aircraft at afftc and would be driven by Thiokol rocket engines to higher altitudes and supersonic speeds before gliding to controlled landing. Flight tests would be conducted by five usaf and nasa pilots in late 1967 under joint nasa/usaf lifting-body program, (afsc Release 59.67; Clark, NYT, 7/12/67, 1)
Use of 260-in solid rocket motor as 1st stage for advanced manned launch vehicle was advocated by MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Aerospace Technology reported. Dr. von Braun, whose support for motor was revealed in Oct. 11, 1967, testimony released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, said concept was advantageous for resupply of flights to space stations and for space rescue systems where 80% of emergencies in manned spacecraft in earth orbit were “time critical.” NASA and DOD, in joint study, were considering use of 260-in motor and its development
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 126.5-mi (203-km) altitude to obtain solar extreme UV spectra from 40 to 390 A and from 10 to 390 A using bbrc—spc 300D solar pointing control and recovery system. Despite better than expected performance, no solar spectrum was detected. (NASA Rpt SRL)
usaf and United Technology Center announced that hybrid rocket engine using solid propellant and liquid oxidizer had successfully fired Sandpiper missile from F—4 aircraft in secret test Dec. 12, 1967. Ac
nasa was unsuccessful in second Project shape (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiments) attempt at WSMR when parachute was ejected prematurely from five-foot-long canister after three-stage rocket had successfully propelled payload to 33-mi altitude. First test Oct. 23 had been successful, (nasa Release 68—216)
nasa launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 166.5-mi (268-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes in 1- to 10-kev region while payload was passing through or close to visible auroral display. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; all scientific objectives were achieved. Launch was second in series of four [see Feb. 5], _ Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 6-mi (9.6-km) altitude to study atmospheric parameters of temperature, pressure, and density using Pitot-static-probe technique and measure extreme UV emission to determine energy disposition with altitude of incoming particles. No scientific data were obtained because of vehicle malfunction. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station ejected triethylborane (teb) vapor trails during descent from 95.2-mi (153.5-km) altitude to study nighttime airglow and variations in wind structure, determine vertical profile of atomic oxygen with photometer, and measure electron energy distribution in normal nighttime ionosphere with Langmuir probe. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Launch, postponed Feb. 21 to check instrumentation for high voltage breakdown, was one of seven launches in series conducted for gca Corp. under gsfc contract [see Feb. 21-22]. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc payload to gather data on charged particle fluxes associated with aurora and to investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere, occurrence of radio noise, and ionospheric electron densities during auroral displays. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; good data were acquired, (nasa Rpt srl)
afsc awarded United Aircraft Corp. $3,300,000 initial increment to $33,476,000 contract for advance development program to demonstrate high-performance reusable oxygen-hydrogen rocket engine, (dod Release 4-68)
NASA Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 73.3-mi (118.5-km) altitude to evaluate vehicle performance and measure payload environmental instrumentation, including three-axis acceleration, lateral and longitudinal vibration, three-axis gyro, 10 temperatures, and motor pressure. Rocket performed as predicted and was recommended for acceptance by NASA. All instruments operated to impact, (nasa Rpt SRL)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 184-mi (296-km) altitude to measure intensity and polarization distribution of hydrogen Lyman alpha at night. Although rocket performance was satisfactory, instruments failed to function, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 102.6-mi (165.1-km) altitude to obtain monochromatic picture of sun using spectroheliograph and to measure solar spectral irradiance using photoelectric radiometers. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa successfully deployed 40-ft-dia parachute with predicted 10lbpercubic-ft dynamic pressure at mach 3.5. Parachute was ejected from five-foot-long canister which had been propelled to 33-mi altitude by three-stage rocket launched from wsmr. Test was to determine possible use of parachute for aerodynamic deceleration in planetary entry missions. Another test in Project shape (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiments) was scheduled for November, (nasa Release 68-185; AP, NYT, 10/27/68, 66)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Max Planck Institute (Germany) experiment to 114.2-mi (183.5km) altitude to measure micrometeoroids by sensitive microphone detectors and electron emission and to measure electrical fields in ionosphere by static voltmeter. Good data were received. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt SRL)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 66.4-mi (109.7-km) altitude to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes (1—10 kev) while passing through or close to auroral display. Rocket did not perform as expected; spin rate was below that anticipated. Payload broke away from rocket and no useful data were received from experiment. Launch was third in series of four [see April 23]. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Maryland experiment to 150-mi (241km) altitude to study dissipation processes and electron acceleration mechanisms in aurora. Four experiments measured energy spectrum of electrons from 1 ev to 200 kev. Photometers, UV emissions, and plasma probes were included. Three of four electron experiments returned data on energy spectra; no data were acquired from optical and plasma experiments because clamshell nose cone failed to deploy. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr, carried Columbia Radiation Laboratory experiment to 88.3-mi (142-km) altitude to examine x-ray polarization of Sco XR—1 in 10- to 25-kev region with x-ray polarimeter. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Experiment worked as expected, but some counter or electronic failure, or both, occurred during early part of flight, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 90.9-mi (146.3-km) altitude to measure neutral atmospheric density and temperature profile at altitudes of 12.4—74.6 mi (20—120 km), compare night measurements with day measurements by rocket launched Aug. 8, evaluate lunar position sensing device for use in resolving payload altitude, and measure wind velocities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; data were obtained as planned. Launch was to be last of this Pitot static payload configuration. New Pitot probe system would be used in future. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets to 74.6-mi (120-km) and 70.6-mi (113.6-km) altitudes to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rockets and instruments performed satisfactorily; sound arrivals were recorded from 19 grenades on each rocket. Data would be compared with data from launches from NASA Wallops Station and Point Barrow, Alaska, (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Andoya, Norway, carried gsfc experiment to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during auroral condition. Preliminary results indicated good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites, (nasa Rpt SRL)
esro successfully launched Centaure rocket from Kiruna Range in Sweden to collect micrometeoroid data. (SBD, 5/23/68,118)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from portable launcher at wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 3.14-mi (5.05-km) altitude to: (1) flight-qualify production lot of VAM—20 variboosters, (2) demonstrate feasibility of Aerobee rail launch, (3) determine exit loads, (4) establish rail-launching procedures, and (5) verify boost-phase dispersion calculations. System was ballasted with water and lead to produce mass and mass distribution of fully loaded rocket with 200-lb net payload. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Booster web burning time, booster pressure, acceleration, velocity, and system impact occurred as predicted. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Iowa experiment to 500-mi (805-km) altitude to observe frequency-time spectra and measure relative phase and amplitude of magnetic and electric fields of VLF radio noise in 30 hz—10 khz range; measure electric field amplitude of naturally occurring radio noise from 7—70 khz; measure differential energy spectra for protons and electrons over 5 ev—50 kev energy range; and measure DC electric field perpendicular to payload spin axis. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory and all scientific objectives were met. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apaehe sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 81-mi (129-km) altitude to gather data on charged particle flux associated with aurora and to investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere, occurrence of radio noise, and ionospheric electron densities during auroral displays. Experimental results were 70% successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to study auroral activity as it developed and dissipated for comparison with data from similar Nike-Apache launch. Flight was unsuccessful because of undetermined failure related to pitch/roll couple. Radar and loss of telemetry indicated payload breakup, (nasa Rpt srl) *	Sixty-day simulated earth-orbited mission, using Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div.’s 12-ft-dia, 40-ft-long space cabin simulator, had begun for four California college students—Jack G. Angaran, Dennis Giroux, Guy H. King, and Robert B. Zeuschner. NASA OART had awarded $200,000 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. to conduct what was believed first test in which crew would subsist in space cabin on “closed water and oxygen loop” for lengthy period. Students would use reclaimed water and oxygen from human waste. Additional missions to evaluation of integrated life support system were evaluation of waste management; crew’s ability to maintain, service and repair life support system; and crew’s physiological and psychological reactions. Life support system resembled that needed for three-year spacecraft mission. Crew’s contact with outside world would be by radio, (dac Release 67—172; St. Louis G—D, 2/21/68)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of California payload to 161.9-mi (260.6-km) altitude to study flux-energy-spectrum pitch-angle distribution and time and space variation of mirroring and precipitating charged particles in auroral zone. Launch was one of series of four. Apogee was 11% below predicted; telemetry was satisfactory. Electrostatic analyzers performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Plasma experiment on boom was 100% successful. Boom deployed late, providing satisfactory data from last 30% of flight. Electric field did not produce necessary data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA launched two Javelin sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station. One carried GSFC payload to 497-mi (800-km) altitude to observe helium ionization levels in exosphere with vacuum-ion chamber and to observe helium and oxygen-ion resonance dayglow with filtered photometer. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Telemetry signal was received for 16 min 40 sec. Second rocket carried Syracuse University Research Corp. vacuum-ion chamber to observe helium ionization levels in exosphere and Univ. of Southern California filtered photometer to observe helium- and oxygen-ion resonance day-glow to 497-mi (800-km) altitude. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Danish government announced it had banned U.S. rocket flights to probe sunspot effects at high altitudes over Greenland during 1968 because of popular apprehension which followed January crash of nuclear-armed usaf B—52 aircraft near Thule afh. Disappointed scientists noted 1968 was peak in 11-yr sunspot cycle; 1969 would offer hardly enough sunspots for study. (C Trih, 7/6/68, 5)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Syracuse Univ. Research Corp. payload to 520-mi (837km) altitude to observe ionization levels of helium in exposure. Data would be related to aspects of sun and earth relative to payload. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried National Center for Atmospheric Research experiment to 77-mi (124-km) altitude to retrieve high-intensity air sample from 26.7- to 40.4-mi (43- to 65-km) altitude, using low-temperature condenser. All cryogenic heat exchange and sampler functions performed satisfactorily; recovery parachute deployed and payload survived impact. Sample of eight moles of air was recovered between 26.8-mi (43.2-km) and 38.9-mi (62.8-km) altitudes, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 111.9-mi (185.4-km) altitude to measure intensity of spectral lines in 3,400—1,100A band. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of California experiments to study flux-energy-spectrum, pitch-angle distribution and time and space variation of mirroring and precipitated charged particles in auroral zone with variety of detectors. Good data were received from all experiments except electric field measurement experiment which had two damaged booms. (NASA RptSRL)
NASA Marc 42A2 Areas booster launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 4.8-mi (7.8-km) altitude in ballistic performance evaluation test. Booster and instruments performed satisfactorily; ballistic parameters agreed closely with predictions, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried 145-lb gsfc payload to 80.8-mi (130-km) altitude to evaluate parachute recovery system for Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun launch vehicles. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; excellent data were obtained from all telemetry channels. (NASA Rpt SRL)
ESRO successfully launched first two-stage Centaure rocket fired from Italy at Perdasdefogu, Sardinia, carrying Max Planck Institute (Landau, Germany) payload to 88.5-km (55-mi) altitude in 118 sec. (AP, W Post, 5/9/68)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC photometers and objective-grating wide-angle camera to 105-mi (168.9-km) altitude to measure radiation from celestial bodies in ^2800—X1300 spectral range. Payload instrumentation performed satisfactorily; Aerobee pointing control system (acs) malfunctioned. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 12-mi (19-km) altitude to obtain variations in temperature profile and atmosphere structure. Launch was one of series scheduled for winter 1968—69 at Churchill, Point Barrow, Alaska, and NASA Wallops Station. Nineteen grenades deployed and exploded as planned. Second stage failed to ignite causing low apogee, which prevented acquisition of useful data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried special parachute and payload to 41.7-mi (67-km) altitude to test parachute deployment at high altitude and to determine ozone distribution in 12- to 40-mi (20- to 65-km) region. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; parachute deployed at approximately 216,000 ft. Recovery attempts, initially unsuccessful because of 65-mi off-range drift, would be continued in attempt to recover onboard camera, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska experiment to obtain data on horizontal and vertical spatial variation of auroral light emissions and relationship between their intensities and volume emission rates. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory and experiment was successful. Peak altitude was not determined because radar lost track, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska experiment to 183mi (295-km) altitude to obtain data on horizontal and vertical spatial variation of auroral light emission and relationship between their intensities and volume emission rates. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Experiment was successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched from NASA Wallops Station carried payloads to 85-mi (137-km) and 88-mi (141-km) altitudes to investigate D region electron density during solar x-ray flare. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory. Preliminary data indicated launches were accomplished during period of decreasing solar activity, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Andoya, Norway, carried gsfc experiment to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during auroral condition. All four barium clouds were released in visible aurora as planned, and good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried payload to 65-mi (104.4-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of atmosphere parameters between 22- and 59-mi (35- and 95km) altitudes with exploding-grenade and falling-sphere techniques. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily except for one of the two spheres; other sphere was tracked for 23 min. Globe Exploration Corp. and Superior Engineering Co. experiments were correlated with firings from Kiruna, Sweden; Fort Churchill, Canada; and Point Barrow, Alaska, (nasa Rpt srl)
Phoebus 2A nuclear rocket reactor was successfully tested by NASA and aec at Jackass Flats, Nev. During 32-min ground test, reactor reached peak power level of approximately 4,200 mw, operating for about 12 min at above 4,000 mw. Power density exceeded that required for 75,000-lb-thrust nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application). Test was part of nasa/aec nuclear rocket program, (aec/nasa Release L-148; W News, 6/27/68, 3)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carried GSFC payload to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during an auroral condition. All four barium clouds were released in visible aurora as planned. Good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites. Peak altitude would be determined from triangulation of photos. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from vfsmr carried gsfc payload to 129.4-mi (208.2-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of Gamma star in constellation Vela and of Zeta star in constellation Puppis using UV stellar spectrograph. Rocket performance was satisfactory. Instrumentation performance was marred by loss of fine pointing 17 sec before end of second exposure, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA announced joint 1969 project with German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) to photograph earth’s magnetic lines of force high in space would involve release of barium vapor by NASA Scout rocket at 20,000-mi altitude. Scientists would use special optical equipment to view resultant glowing ionized cloud along magnetic field lines and visually map electromagnetic forces acting in barium area. Agreement on project called for BMwF to provide payload, two ground observer stations, and data analysis. NASA would furnish rocket, conduct launch from NASA Wallops Station, and provide tracking and communications services, (nasa Release 68—211)
Aviation Week reported anticipated $ 100-million cut in FY 1969 funding could halt contractors’ work on usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) in September, with slippage of flight schedule into 1972. Boeing Co. was working on new launch vehicle at nasa’s Michoud Assembly Facility under Project Scrimp. Booster would be vehicle 75 ft in dia and 80 ft high and use TRW engine based on Boeing lunar module ascent engine experience, with 2-million-lb operational thrust—although usaf had not decided to abandon Titan III—M as launch vehicle. (Av Wk, 7/29/68)
nasa and German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) were conducting series of four sounding rocket launches from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) to study upper atmosphere near Equator. NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets ejected barium clouds between 90- and 120-mi altitudes to investigate electric fields in upper atmosphere region of intense electric current. Results would be available to world scientific community. BMwF was responsible for chemical payloads, photographic equipment, and cloud observation; Indian National Committee for Space Research provided launch services; and NASA supplied sounding rockets and rocket launcher. (nasa Release 68—58)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Max Planck Institute (Germany) experiment to 114.2-mi (183.5km) altitude to measure micrometeorites and electrical fields in ionosphere. Preliminary analyses indicated good data were received. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 94.7-mi (152.4-kxn) altitude to measure neutral atmosphere density and temperature profile in 17.4- to 63.4-mi (28- to 120-km) -altitude range, compare day measurements with night measurements by rocket to be launched Aug. 9, and flight-test and evaluate new second-generation Pitot probe system flown without ejectable nose tip. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Pitot tube performed well and seemed capable of reaching higher apogees, even without nose-cone tip, than old system. (NASA Rpt srl)
French Armed Forces Ministry announced successful testing of two new long-range ballistic missiles during preparation for Pacific nuclear test series. First missile, sea-to-ground, two-stage, remote-controlled rocket, would be used on France’s first nuclear submarine, to enter service in early 1970. (Reuters, NYT, 7/5/68, 13; W Post, 7/5/68, A27) July 4^8: NASA launched 417-lb Explorer XXXVIII, Radio Astronomy Explorer (rae—a) , from wtr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Delta booster in first of two missions to measure frequency, intensity, and source direction of radio signals from solar, galactic, and extragalactic sources. Spacecraft entered elliptical transfer orbit, where it was spin-stabilized with 3,656.1-mi (5,884-km) apogee, 397.7-mi (640-km (perigee, 157-min period, and 59.4° inclination. Apogee motor was fired July 7, placing Explorer XXXVIII into planned near-circular orbit with 3,654.3-mi (5,881-km) apogee, 3,641.2-mi (5,860-km) perigee, 224.4min period, and 59.2° inclination. On July 8, yo-yo despin mechanism reduced spin rate from 93 rpm to 2.8 rpm. As primary objective, spacecraft would measure intensity and direction of radio signals from cosmic sources in 0.5- to 10-mhz range, not normally observable from earth. Secondary objectives were to place spacecraft into circular orbit of about 3,728-mi (6,000-km) altitude and to obtain useful data during first 30 days in orbit, for detailed study of dynamic spectra and decay rates of sporadic radio bursts. Spacecraft was expected to provide first low-frequency radio map of Milky Way and additional data on low-frequency signals from Jupiter and sun. Explorer XXXVIII was equipped with unique antenna system consisting of two antennas made of four i/j-in-dia booms which could be deployed up to 750 ft each, to form X-shaped array. Configuration was to be gravity-gradient stabilized [see July 22]. Spacecraft was also equipped with damper boom, dipole antenna, and TV cameras to monitor spacecraft performance and determine source of radio signals monitored with upper array. Radio Astronomy Explorer project was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, gsfc constructed, designed, and tested spacecraft and provided scientific instrumentation, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68—109K; Schmeck, NYT, 6/29/68; 8; AP, W Star, 7/5/68; AP, NYT, 7/5/68, 26; W Post, 7/8/68, A6; 7/9/68, A7)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload. Objectives were to detect and identify energetic charged particles that caused aurora, measure local electron density and correlate it with ground measurements of ionization, study aurora light emissions at several wavelengths and detect related electric fields, and investigate auroral ionospheric currents and magnetic fields driving them in ranges 1—15 kev and 2—30 kev and protons from 10—40 kev with electrostatic curved plate analyzers and channel multipliers. Launch was first in series of five to be launched from Churchill. Exact performance was not calculated because of early radar loss; time correlated performance indicated rocket functioned as predicted. Telemetry signals were strong throughout flight. All experimental objectives were achieved, (nasa Rpt srl)
First launch of British Aircraft Corp.-built Skylark sounding rocket from esrange near Kiruna, Sweden, carried London Imperial College experiment to 105-mi (170-km) altitude to investigate relationship between auroral events and polar “electrojet.” Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (SBD, 4/4/68, 199)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 211-mi (340-km) altitude to investigate role of quenching, dissociative recombination, ionospheric decay, and nonthe'rmal electrons on airglow during decay period immediately following sunset. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; peak altitude was as predicted, and 570 sec of telemetry was received. All measuring systems functioned properly and scientific objectives were met. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried nrl experiment to 117.4-mi (188.9-km) altitude to obtain UV photographs of sun’s disk and white light photographs of outer solar corona in conjunction with measurements made by others during total solar eclipse. Payload contained two externally occulting coronagraphs, with Univ. of Colorado solar pointing control. Solar pointing control operated properly, with exceptionally steady pointing; white light corona and streamers were recorded in both coronagraphs with excellent resolution, xuv heliograph and spectroheliograph were recorded with excellent resolution, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Rice Univ. payload to 500-mi (805-km) altitude to investigate auroral fluxes and backscattered particles. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Cone-shaped RAM c—II spacecraft was successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Scout booster at 11:16 am edt. After reentering earth’s atmosphere at 17,000 mph, 264-lb spacecraft completed its eight-minute ballistic flight by impacting 725 mi downrange 150 mi northeast of Bermuda. No recovery was attempted. Primary mission objective of RAM C—II—15-in-long, 26-in-dia spacecraft with 12-in-dia hemisphere nose—-was to measure electron concentrations in flow field at discrete locations along spacecraft during reentry at medium velocity. Secondary objectives were to measure ion concentrations in flow field as function of distance from spacecraft, measure antenna performance and signal attenuation during reentry under specified conditions, and measure spacecraft environmental parameters, including accelerations, pressures and temperatures. Launch was second in NASA’s Project ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) to study methods for preventing loss of radio signals from reentering spacecraft, ram c—i, launched Oct. 19, 1967, had successfully demonstrated effectiveness of water addition to flow field and use of X-band telemetry signals in maintaining communications through ionized plasma sheath, ram program was managed by LaRC under dart direction, ram c—ii spacecraft was designed, fabricated, and tested by LaRC. (nasa Proj Off; LaRC Proj Off; NASA Release 68-146; ws Release 68—17)
At awards dinner of National Institute of Social Sciences in New York, Charles A. Lindbergh said, “My hope that aviation would cause better relationships between our earth’s peoples gave way to realization that the airplane’s primary significance lay in its power of destruction. . . . My fascination with the rocket as a space-exploring vehicle has been replaced by my alarm at its ability to wipe out our civilization overnight.” Lindbergh and his wife, Anne Morrow, received gold medals for “distinguished service to humanity” for their work in conservation. (upi, W Star, 11/22/68, A2)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried NAS-Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to 107.7-mi (173-km) altitude to measure radiation from celestial objects in spectral regions 2,800— 1,200 A, 60-40A, and 15—2A using photometers and gas-filled proportional counters as x-ray detectors. Both x-ray and UV payloads functioned well and acquired data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC experiment to 102.5-mi (165-km) altitude to measure UV radiation from several early-type stars. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Rice Univ. payload to 121.6-mi (195.6-km) altitude to measure vector magnetic field in region between 90 and 130 km during electron current flow with sufficient continuity and signal strength to deduce altitude profile and absolute strength of current layer. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Clear magnetometer data were received during payload ascent and descent, (nasa Rpt srl)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in two Pacific areas to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Series, which began May 20, had been scheduled to last until June 30. (SBD, 5/29/68,144)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 99-mi (160-km) altitude to check instrumentation. Random failure occurred in control system, but pointing system acquired two of three target stars. Rocket performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA had concluded agreements for cooperative scientific experiments with space and upper atmosphere research authorities of Brazil, Norway, Spain, and Sweden. Brazilian Comissao Nacional de Ativi-dades Espaciais (cnae) and NASA project would include four sounding rocket launches into upper atmosphere to measure micrometeoroid flux and its variations with latitude in early autumn. Royal Norwegian Council for Scientific and Industrial Research and NASA project would observe earth’s magnetic and electrical fields and charged particle environment during stages of auroral activity by launch in September and October of three barium-release ion-cloud payloads followed by instrumented payloads. Spanish Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) and NASA project would require launch of 24 Boosted-Dart meteorological sounding rockets to 30- to 60-km (18.6- to 37.3-mi) altitudes at two-week intervals throughout 1969 to obtain synoptic wind and temperature data on structure and circulation of upper atmosphere and wind oscillations. Swedish Space Research Committee and NASA project would study D and E ionospheric layers with instrumented payloads on four Boosted-Areas II sounding rockets in autumn 1968. In all projects, principal experimenters would have first rights to data which subsequently would be made available to world scientific community. Each agency would bear full cost of its agreed responsibilities without exchange of funds, (nasa Release 68—138; SBD, 8/5/68, 148)
nasa launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating 19 grenades per rocket at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rockets reached 78.8-mi (126.8-km) and 77.8-mi (123.5-km) altitudes and performed nominally. Sound arrivals were recorded from all grenades. Data would be compared with data from Oct. 14 Point Barrow, Alaska, launches. (nasa Rpts srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Maryland-Geophysics Corp. of America experiment to 163-mi (262-km) altitude. Primary objectives were to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes, investigate electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere, and evaluate use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Rocket trajectory was nominal, but despin was higher than predicted. Problems were encountered in telemetry. GCA antennas broke off at deployment and no data were received. Clamshell deployed properly and exposed pulse probe as planned, but motor for boom deployment malfunctioned. No useful data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets two hours apart from Point Barrow, Alaska, to 80-mi (128.8-km) altitudes. Purpose of launches was to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating 19 grenades per rocket at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Data would be compared with data from two launches to be conducted from Churchill Research Range Oct. 15. Rockets and instruments performed satisfactorily; sound arrivals were recorded for all grenade ejections. Good data were anticipated, (nasa Rpts srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 180-mi (290-km) altitude to verify performance of quadrupole ion mass spectrometer in D and E regions of ionosphere and measure electron density using CW propagation technique. Rocket and telemetry performed satisfactorily and good results were obtained from spectrometer, but propagation experiment was lost at 43.4-mi (70-km) altitude, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station. First Nike-Cajun carried gsfc experiment to 42.6-mi (68.6-km) altitude to determine ozone concentration and water vapor distribution as a function of altitude and obtain finite data during parachute descent from 43.4-mi (70-km) altitude. Basic payload design proved operational. Rocket performance was good; peak altitude was 6% below predicted. Instrumentation’s tone ranging was lost after payload despin and new AB signal replacing FM signal slowly deteriorated after liftoff. Radar tracked all systems from liftoff to impact. Although parachute was not fully deployed during descent and aluminum oxide hydrometer failed to project because of spring malfunction, key events occurred within two seconds of predicted times and significant data were obtained. Midair-retrieval attempt was not successful, but payload and parachute were recovered. Second Nike-Cajun carried GSFC payload to 73.1-mi (117.6-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of temperature, pressure density, and wind data between 21.8- and 59-mi (35- and 95-km) altitudes by detonating 19 grenades and recording their sound arrivals at ground. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Grenade timer malfunctioned and instead of ejecting 19 grenades during ascent, vehicle ejected 1 grenade after apogee during descent and 12—14 grenades which detonated at sporadic intervals during descent. Final destruct grenade destroyed payload before impact. Some significant data could be correlated from ground arrivals. Areas sounding rocket carried U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Station payload to 34.5-mi (55.5-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration at 18.6- to 37.5-mi (30- to 60-km) altitudes by observing solar UV light attenuation by ozone during parachute descent. Rocket performed nominally; altitude achieved was within 10,000 ft of predicted. Instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Parachute deployed properly and payload was tracked by radar and retrieved in midair, (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried arc payload to 98.7-mi (159-km) altitude to check Solar Pointing Aerobee Rocket Control System (sparcs) and map flight-path magnetic field. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 26.5-mi (42.7-km) altitude to determine feasibility of launching Boosted Areas II from Areas tube launcher and to obtain data on complete system flight. Booster pressure and acceleration were nominal throughout flight. Pressure transducer produced data until 2nd stage ignition. However, there was no drag separation after booster burnout. Separation occurred at 2nd stage ignition. Radical coning occurred during burn and predicted altitude of 71.5-mi (115-km) was not attained, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried TRW, Inc., experiment to measure: total flux energy, including spectrum of precipitated energetic H atoms; spectrum of precipitated energetic protons and electrons; fluctuating and DC electron fields; H light-intensity altitude profile; and location and intensity of ionospheric current systems. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt SRl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 64.4-mi (103.6-km) altitude to determine absolute value of positive ion concentration in D and E regions of ionosphere. Quadrupole mass spectrometer for measuring relative abundance of positive ions malfunctioned and, consequently, launch of two supporting rockets was postponed. Vehicle performance and trajectory were good and experimental related events functioned well and on time, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched four-stage Pacemaker rocket carrying 52-lb spacecraft from nasa Wallops Station to test performance of phenolic nylon charring ablation material, foamed quartz material, mod v ablation material, and foamed Teflon material. Spacecraft reached 7,200 mph and was lowered into Atlantic by parachute after four-minute flight. Recovery helicopter retrieved payload, which would be evaluated at LaRC. (WS Release 68—12)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried MIT payload to 84.1-mi (135.3-km) altitude to obtain data on celestial locations and energy spectra of discrete x-ray sources in three regions and to search for weak, undiscovered x-ray sources using proportional counters. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), failed to climb to desired 45,000-ft altitude after air-launch from B—52 aircraft, apparently because of rocket engine malfunction. Vehicle glided to smooth 225-mph emergency landing on Rosamond Dry Lake. Flight from Edwards afb was to have been HL—10’s first powered flight, (nasa Proj Off; LA Times, 10/24/68)
nasa announced award of $1,046,123 contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Elkton, Md., Div. for development of more powerful solid-fuel rocket for automated missions, including possible use as 3rd stage for Centaur and Delta. New 3rd stage was expected to be ready for use in 1971. (nasa Release 68—210)
nasa successfully launched 600-lb Reentry F payload by Scout booster from NASA Wallops Station to obtain inflight fundamental research data on aerodynamic heating and transition from laminar to turbulent flow in boundary layer. Payload, graphite-tipped beryllium cone 13 ft long, tapering from 0.01 in at nose to 27.3 in at base, was designed to measure heat transfer in slender cone at hypersonic speeds for comparison with ground studies. Three of Scout’s four stages were used: 1st and 2nd stages fired during ascent, boosting 3rd stage and payload to 115-mi (175-km) altitude; and 3rd stage drove payload at up to 13,500 mph through earth’s atmosphere. Impact occurred 800 mi downrange, northeast of Bermuda. Reentry F experiment, sixth mission in NASA’s Reentry Heating Project, was designed and directed by LaRC. under sponsorship of NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology. Payload was constructed by General Electric Co.’s Re-Entry Systems Div. (WS Release 68—9)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried arc luster sampling instrument with collection modules, camera, and electronics package to 71.3-mi (114.7-km) altitude to sample material from noctilucent clouds as luster instrument passed through them. Sampling instrument was successfully flown and recovered. Instrument malfunction caused loss of four modules, but remaining eight were recovered in excellent condition. Experiment was considered highly successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
Soviet trade union newspaper Trud said mass production of powerful intercontinental rockets had started at U.S.S.R.’s “Rocket City” because “the conquest of space is expanding.” Device made at the unidentified city “will help our scientists discover new mysteries of the universe for the good of man.” (upi, NYT, 11/22/68, 22)
Team of NASA and Max Planck Institute scientists completed 28-day tour of Argentina, Chile, Netherlands Antilles, Peru, and Venezuela. They had explored potential sites for optical observation of high-altitude ionized cloud experiment proposed as cooperative project of German Ministry for Scientific Research and nasa. Release of barium vapor at 12,000- to 20,000-ft altitudes by Scout rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station was being considered. Barium cloud would be visible from large area of Western Hemisphere. (NASA Release 68-121)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Pittsburgh-Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to 96.3-mi (155-km) altitude to perform coordinated auroral experiments with spectrometers and photometers. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
U.K. successfully launched Skylark sounding rocket from Adelaide, Australia, to altitude of 149 mi (239.8 km) after initial delays caused by weather. (Reuters, NYT, 6/2/68, 55)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 180-mi (290-km) altitude to verify performance of quadrupole ion-mass spectrometer and measure electron density by CU propagation technique. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
P. J. Parker listed in Spaceflight “typical examples of space-inspired technology” which had either appeared or were expected to emerge from future space activity: low-weight, high-calorie “spacefoods” developed for mass-feeding undernourished peoples; adaptation of Saturn V air-bearing to other large items such as refrigerators; use of spacecraft automatic monitoring unit in hospitals for relaying data on patient’s heart condition to central point; use of high-pressure oxygen in astronauts’ suits to reduce lung collapse and to save lives of premature babies; potential cure for stuttering from examination of voice communication problems; electric switch adapted for use hy paralyzed patients to operate hospital call boards and wheelchairs; and lunar exploration vehicle redesigned into walking-chair with reciprocating legs. Industrial applications included solar cells used to drive small outboard motorboats and “outback” telephone booster units; heat-resistant coatings for spacecraft used in furnaces, aircraft, and domestic cookers; and new precision tooling methods that worked to nearest millionth of an inch. {Spaceflight, 9/68, 306—7)
Electric signals out of phase with jet engine noise could be introduced into exhaust flame and converted into sound waves to cancel out engine noise, according to United Technology Center scientist, Dr. A. G. Cattaneo. Idea, in principle, had been demonstrated by recent laboratory experiments in which acetylene torch flame converted electric signals into sound with high fidelity. Evaluation of combustion efficiency during rocket engine tests could be additional application. (Wilford, NYT, 2/11/68, 30)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 92.7-mi (149.5-km) altitude to measure intensity and energy spectra of low energy protons helium nuclei and heavier nuclei present during Polar Cap Absorption (pca) event. Launch was first of six scheduled during solar event. Parachute failed to deploy apparently because of technician’s failure to connect flight system pyro-techniques. Extendable nose cone malfunctioned for undetermined reason. Telemetry functioned for full flight duration, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska payload to examine spatial distribution of ionospheric currents near visual auroral forms with flashing light on rocket used to locate position of rocket on TV film of aurora. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory. Radar did not track vehicle to sufficient altitude to obtain peak altitude data. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 121-mi (193-km) altitude to take high-resolution spectra of carbon-2 resonance doublet at wavelength 1,334 and 1,336 A; to retake, for comparison, high-resolution spectra of oxygen-1 resonance triplet at 1,302, 1,304, and 1,306 A; and to measure total intensities of these lines. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Analysis of experiment results awaited recovery and processing of flight film, (nasa Rpt srl)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole said poisoning from overexposure to beryllium powder had resulted in 800 known deaths in U.S. during past 15 yr. Beryllium disease expert, Dr. Harriet L. Hardy of Massachusetts General Hospital, estimated total beryllium cases at 2,500, “about three times as many as we’ve heard about.” New uses for lightweight, heat-resistant metal had pushed production to 150,000 lb per year. Battelle Memorial Institute estimated output would grow at 20% rate per year for next five years; NAS estimated 1979 production at six times 1969’s. Beryllium was being used by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for wheel brakes in C—5A transport and heat shields for Poseidon missile. Boeing Co. used it for new Minuteman missile shield. In past three years estimated $25 million had been spent on beryllium rocket research, O’Toole said one scientist claimed test firing in California had so contaminated site that electrician working there developed beryllium poisoning. Neither NASA nor USAF planned to abandon testing beryllium rockets, however, and beryllium use had “kicked off a lively debate inside the Federal Government.” (W Post, 12/15/68, Al)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Maryland and Johns Hopkins Univ. experiments to 186-mi (300-km) altitude to investigate role of electrons in producing day airglow. Rocket and instrumentation—which included five-wavelength filter-wheel photometer with special sunshade, 3- to 800-ev electron spectrometer, and electron retarding-potential analyzer—performed satisfactorily. Data correlating ionospheric electron density distribution with day airglow emissions in ionosphere were obtained. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown for first time Dec. 22, 1966, made its second flight, following vertical tail fin modifications to direct more airflow over its control surfaces. Piloted by Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), HL—10 was air-launched from mother ship flying at 45,000-ft altitude and 400 mph. Rocket engine for craft was not used during 4)4-min flight and 6,000-lb HL—10 was piloted through “U” pattern to make a 220-mph glide landing. Built by Northrop Corp.’s Norair Div., HL—10 was flight-tested in joint NASA—usaf study of potential as spacecraft capable of maneuvering in flight to a ground landing under pilot control, (frc Release 8—68)
France had successfully test-fired lex, improved, single-stage experimental hybrid sounding rocket which used liquid oxidizer and inert solid propellant. Developed by Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera), French space agency, lex could carry 14-lb payload with meteorological experiment to 115-km (71-mi) altitude. {SBD, 1/16/68, 74)
nasa launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from WSMR. First carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to 86.5-mi (139-km) altitude to collect data on location and flux levels of celestial x-ray sources in 1- to 20-kev range using collimator, proportional counters, aspect camera, and attitude control system (acs). acs performance was poor because of timer malfunction; performance of rocket and instrumentation was satisfactory. Second rocket carried GSFC payload to 92.8-mi (149.3-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of four early-type stars in 1,100- to 4,000-A interval, using uv stellar spectrometer and strap system for attitude control. Rocket, instrumentation, and strap performed satisfactorily. Good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Kentucky experiment to 101.7-mi (163.6-km) altitude to determine gravity preference of small white rat when subjected to artificial gravity field [see Nov. 21]. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Good data were obtained. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 161-mi (258-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes in 1- to 10-kev region while payload was passing through or close to visible auroral display. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; useful data were obtained from all experiments. Launch was last in series of four [see April 30]. (NASA Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) carrying Indian-Japa-nese payload for x-ray astronomy studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 69.6-mi (112-km) altitude to collect data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.7- to 59.0-mi (35- to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming by exploding grenades. All 19 grenades exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was first in series of four to obtain upper-atmosphere data, (nasa Rpt srl)
Canadian Black Brant IIIB sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station reached 134-mi (215.6-km) altitude on first of two flights to evaluate improved Black Brant IIIB single-stage rocket and to provide data for payload environmental test specification [see May 1]. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carried Univ. of Alaska payload to 134.2-mi (216-km) altitude. Objectives were to examine spatial distribution of atmospheric currents near visual, stable, homogeneous and pulsating auroral forms and to examine relationship between electron and proton precipitation and visual auroral distribution produced. Forward experiment portion of payload functioned satisfactorily, but data reduction was difficult. Some data loss occurred on rear portion of payload and additional data reduction was required. One flashing light failed at apogee. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun, one Areas, and three NikeApache sounding rockets from Wallops Station, carrying experiments to measure meteorological, ionospheric, and composition characteristics of upper atmosphere during “winter anomaly”—unusual absorption of radio waves—which occurred during January or early February. Launches would contribute to specimen day program, coordinated investigation of winter variability of ,D region of ionosphere above Wallops. Nike-Cajuns carried GSFC payloads to 75.2-mi (121-km) and 12.4-mi (20-km) altitudes. All 19 grenades on each rocket detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded, but poor vehicle performance of second rocket prevented acquisition of useful data. Areas carried Naval Weapons Center payload to 33.2-mi (53.4-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration in 18.6- to 37.3-mi (30- to 60-km) region during parachute descent, but parachute did not deploy satisfactorily and payload descended too rapidly for recovery. First Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. payload to 141.1-mi (227-km) altitude to investigate winter variability of D region of ionosphere and measure differential absorption, Faraday rotation, and probe current to determine electron density, collision frequency, and temperature. Second Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Colorado payload to 71.5-mi (115-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of nitric oxide density, using scanning monochromoter. Third Nike-Apache carried GSFC payload to 72.1-mi (116-km) altitude to measure degree of polarization and intensity of nitric oxide emission at 2,147 A to determine whether resonance scattering of sunlight was responsible for emission in D and E regions. Secondary objective was to determine altitude profile in 46.6- to 65.2-mi (75- to 105-km) region. Desired spectrum was not observed, apparently because of mechanical failure in payload, (nasa Rpts srl; WS Release 69—3)
Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 63.5-mi (102-km) altitude to evaluate rocket performance for possible use at Resolute Bay, Canada. Vehicle underperformed according to predicted trajectory; peak altitude was below predicted and tone ranging appeared too weak for Resolute Bay. (nasa Rpt srl)
Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried 102-lb gsfc payload to 1,600.0-mi (2,575-km) altitude and transmitted 35 min of data. Primary objectives were to measure cosmic radio noise intensities over 600-khz to 3-mhz frequency band, continue evaluation of Astrobee performance, and verify new Alcor IB 2nd stage. Secondary objective was to test receiver system for Explorer XXXVIII Radio Astronomy Explorer (launched July 4, 1968). Solid-fueled Astrobee 1500 weighed 11,600 lbs and was being developed to provide research rocket to carry heavy scientific payloads to high altitudes with relatively easy handling. (WS Release 69-17; nasa Rpt srl)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies experiment to 481.6-mi (775-km) altitude to study ionosphere-protonosphere transition region by measuring vertical profiles of ionospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Excellent data on electron temperature, ion temperature, and ion composition were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carrying grenade payload for Spain to conduct meteorological studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Observers in Wisconsin, Iowa, Michigan, and Illinois reported sighting large meteorite or space debris flashing across sky and burning itself out as it entered earth’s atmosphere. Several airline pilots had seen it at O’Hare International Airport, Chicago. Northwestern Univ. astronomer James Wray said it probably was large meteor breaking up in atmosphere, ufo expert Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Chairman of Northwestern’s Astronomy Dept., said flash could also have been reentering debris of U.S. or Soviet space rocket, (upi, W News, 1/27/69, 30; AP, W Star, 1/27/69, B4)	...
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carrying grenade payload for Spain to conduct meteorological studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj
msfc announced issuance of RFp’s for 10-mo study to establish design concepts and development requirements for nuclear rocket stage to replace Saturn V 3rd stage for advanced missions in late 1970s and 1980s and payload design concepts and development requirements for flight test and early operational applications of stage using nasa—aec neRVA. Study, for which proposals were due April 17, also would in-' vestigate payloads for nuclear-stage test flights including interplanetary meteoroid experiment (ime) and barium cloud experiment (bce). ime would gather information on meteoroid environment in interplanetary space, particularly in asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, bce would create artificial plasma cloud in space to simulate comet’s tail and to study motions of ionized particles in earth’s magnetosphere. Work would be done at msfc. (msfc Release 69—105)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Columbia Radiation Laboratories payload to conduct stellar spectra studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
msfc announced Dr. Arthur Rudolph, special assistant to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and formerly manager of Saturn V rocket program, would retire Jan. 31. Dr. Rudolph had been awarded NASA Distinguished Service Medal Jan. 13 and on Nov. 15, 1968, had received NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal “for distinguishing himself by meritorious achievement” as manager of Saturn V program from August 1963 to May 1968. Starting career in rocketry in Germany in 1930, he later received patents for liquid-fuel rocket engines and demonstrated operation of liquid-fuel rocket. He came to U.S. with more than 100 other rocket experts in “Operation Paperclip” in December 1945. (msfc Release 69—10)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to 139.2-mi (224-km) altitude to examine isotropic component of cosmic x-rays in wavelength region of A> 5 A, using collimated, thin-window gas proportional counters. Peak altitude was 3.5% over predicted but x-ray counters failed to reach design pressure, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to collect data on air-glow. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements, (nasa Proj Off)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology payload to 83.2-mi (133.8-km) altitude to study neutral composition of polar atmosphere with neutral mass spectrometers. Rocket underperformed; burnout occurred at 42 secs. All instruments worked perfectly. Useful data were obtained in 68.4- to 87.0-mi (110- to 140-km) region, (nasa Rpt srl)
Engineer, journal of Engineers Joint Council, published “The Engineering Profession: A New Profile.” Management, not design or development, was most common job function of engineers. Only about 10% of engineers worked directly for Federal Government and 12% in total aircraft, missile, and rocket area. Median age of engineers was 43 and profession was more than 99% male. (Text)
Milton Klein, Manager of aec—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of Space Nuclear Systems, AEC, testified in NASA authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that for second decade “what is clear is that regardless of the specific directions the space program may take, if it is to be a progressive one, nuclear energy will play an increasingly important role. As payloads become larger and energy requirements become greater to move these payloads farther from the earth, the nuclear rocket will become a workhorse propulsion system. As we move farther from the sun or as the power requirements increase for the more sophisticated payloads, electric power generated from radioisotopes or nuclear reactors will similarly become more and more important. (Transcript)
Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched by NASA from Resolute Bay, Canada, carried gsfc payload to 68.4-mi (110-km) altitude to obtain electron-density and collision-frequency profiles of high-latitude quiet D region and positive ion-density measurements. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket carrying GSFC payload was launched by NASA from WSMR to conduct stellar uv studies, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried TRW Systems Inc. payload to 161.6-mi (260-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure total flux and energy, including spectrum of precipitated energetic (1—20 kev) H atoms and precipitated energetic protons and electrons; fluctuating DC electron fields; Hb light intensity altitude profile; and location and intensity of ionosphere current systems. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily; good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
Canadian Black Brant IV sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Barreira do Inferno, Natal, Brazil, carrying msc and Univ. of California payload to provide detailed scientific measurements of charged particle environment in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Secondary objectives were to measure magnetic field strength and flight-evaluate payload telemetry-system performance. Rocket reached 532-mi (856-km) altitude, with performance higher than expected. All experiments performed satisfactorily and data were obtained on all channels. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket with VAM—20 booster launched by nasa from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 116.5-mi (187.5-km) altitude. Primary objective was to obtain solar x-ray spectra from 2 to 400 A. Secondary objective was to obtain integrated solar flux from 8 to 20 A. Data would be used to check calibration of spectrometer on board Oso V (launched Jan. 22). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Harold R. Kaufman, Assistant Chief of Electromagnetic Propulsion Div., LeRC, would receive James H. Wyld Propulsion Award for “outstanding leadership in the field of electric propulsion, including the conception design, and development of the world’s most successful ion rocket” at aiaa 5th Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference in Colorado Springs, Colo., June 9—13, aiaa announced, (aiaa News; Lewis News, 5/9/69, 1)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology payload to 115.6-mi (186-km) altitude to study neutral composition of polar atmosphere with neutral mass spectrometers. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and experimental data showed “some extremely interesting results*” (nasa Rpt SRl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc payload to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density during period of atmospheric warming by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals on ground. All grenades were ejected and exploded as programmed. Launch was first in series of four to be launched from Point Barrow, (nasa Rpt srl)
In first test of nerva inflight configuration at Jackass Flats, Nev., engine was held to 1/10 maximum power development of 1,100 mw or 55,000 lbs thrust, during three 25-sec warmups. Full power tests would be held in April by Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory, when nerva was expected to produce electrical energy equal to one fourth that developed by Hoover Dam. Test-—to 110 mw and 5,500 lbs thrust to duplicate engine startup procedures in space and verify system performance with liquid hydrogen fuel—marked first test of rocket with nozzle down and thrust blasting into water-cooled firing pit. Engine had produced sufficient energy to boil ton of water every two seconds, (aec/nasa Release M—54; LA Times, 3/23/69)
U.S.S.R. announced it would conduct series of rocket tests in Pacific from April 17 to June 15. Aircraft and ships were asked to avoid 55-nm-dia circular area north of Midway Island with center at 35°23' north latitude and 172°24' west longitude, (upr, W News, 4/17/69, 9; SBD Space Log supplement, 4/18/69)
NASA Launch Vehicle Review Board recommended resumption of launch operations for spacecraft using Delta booster. In interim report board said recommendation was based on findings of Failure Review Board which had investigated failures of Delta 71 (July 25) and Delta 73 (Aug. 27). Delta 71, carrying Intelsat-111 F—5, had failed because of motor case rupture or nozzle failure; Delta 73, carrying Pioneer E, had failed because of vibrating relief valve which caused hydraulic oil leak. Failure Review Board suggested additional internal insulation, pressure tests, equipment x-rays, installation of specially tested and selected valves, and new acceptance tests of hydraulic system. Next mission scheduled with Delta was U.K.’s Skynet comsat Nov. 21. (nasa Release 69—152)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster carried GSFC experiment to 101.5-mi (163-km) altitude to search for cosmic x-ray radiation near Scorpius and north pole of galaxy. Rocket and experiments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to 85.1-mi (137-km) altitude for comprehensive investigation of auroral disturbances during active auroral event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 65.9-mi (106-km) altitude to measure density of hydroxyl radical between 43.5- and 62.1-mi (70- and 100-km) altitudes, using scanning uv monochromater. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and all experimental objectives were achieved, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried mit payload to 97.7-mi (157.9-km) altitude to study x-ray spectrum of Crab Nebula at long wavelengths and to search for weak x-ray sources associated with supernova remnants or with galaxies outside Milky Way. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket with VAM—20 booster, successfully launched from WSMR, carried Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to 103.2-mi (166-km) altitude. Primary objective was to measure vacuum uv spectral emission lines from Venusian atmosphere. Rocket and instruments worked satisfactorily, but experiment failed to receive strap acquisition and Acs failed to receive tracker lock-on. Except for terrestrial airglow, no useful spectral information on Venus or Pro-cyon was received, (nasa Rpt SRL)
France successfully tested Diamant-B carrier rocket 1st stage (L—17) for 112 secs at Vernon, France. Test was first in series of four planned in initial phase of qualification testing. (Interavia, 11/69, 1751)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying gsfc grenade experiment to collect data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Naval Research Lab. payload to 116.8-mi (187.9-km) altitude to record photographically 18 euv spectra of solar photosphere, chromosphere, and corona, using sparcs and flight-design verification unit of high-resolution spectrograph planned for ATM—A and ATM—B. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt sru)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying GSFC grenade experiment to collect data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj
. NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc payloads. First launch was to develop experimental techniques for determining atmospheric composition profiles in mesospheric region and to measure distribution of ozone by chemiluminescent technique and of water vapors by aluminum-oxide hygrometer in 40.4- to 12.4-mi (65- to 20-km) region. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Second rocket was launched to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in support of first launch by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Rice Univ. payload to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, second in series of four [see Jan. 17] in NASA—SSRC—SRC cooperative program, was successfully launched from Kiruna, Sweden, to study sudden upper-atmosphere warming conditions by detonating grenades between 24.9- and 55.9-mi (40- and 90-km) altitudes. Vehicle underperformed but satisfactory scientific data were expected, (nasa Release, 69—16; NASA Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp. payload to 130.5-mi (210-km) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere at vernal equinox during sunspot maximum. Rocket and dual-frequency propagation experiment for air-glow photometer performed satisfactorily. Langmuir-Smith probe and UV experiment produced no data and payload did not come out of calibration until near impact, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc experiment to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rocket, last in series of four launched during period of atmospheric warming [see Jan. 30], performed satisfactorily. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
dod announced Martin Marietta Corp. would receive $2,313,740 supplemental agreement to previously awarded usaf contract for design, development, fabrication, and delivery of Titan III booster. Contract would be managed by Space and Missile Systems Organization, (dod Release 1003—69)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster carried mit payload to 97.9-mi (157.5-km) altitude to determine precise position of two or more x-ray sources and evaluate small photoelectric detector. Rocket and instruments—including several bands of proportional counters, slot collimators, modulation collimators, aspect cameras, and attitude control system-—functioned satisfactorily. All collimators gave expected rates and modulation on star X—1 in constellation Scorpius (calibration) and on Sagittarius. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 Mr sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr with VAM—20 booster to 111.2-mi (179-km) altitude. Objectives were to obtain stellar spectra with 1 A resolution in 1,000—1,600 A far uv wavelength range and to obtain photometric data on stellar fluxes in 1,050—1,180 A, 1,230—1,350 A, and 1,350—1,470 A wavelength ranges. All experimental objectives were achieved and payload was recovered promptly, (nasa Rpt srl)
LeRC announced award of $2.5-million letter contract to United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. to build and test 18 RL-10 A3—3 rocket engines. Engine, developed in 1958 and first liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen engine to be flown in space, would be used on Centaur high-energy upper-stage rockets in early 1970s. (LeRC Release 69-68)
Harry F. Guggenheim said in Washington Evening Star article that rocket expert Dr. Robert H. Goddard “was to the moon rocket what the Wright brothers were to the airplane.” Guggenheim, administrator of Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics during period it helped support Dr. Goddard’s research, traced career of “Father of modern rocketry” from early experiments in 1908. Among Goddard’s inventions were: first liquid-fuel rocket, first smokeless powder rocket, and first practical automatic steering device for rockets. It was no wonder American Rocket Society had conceded to Goddard “the almost single-handed development of rocketry ‘from a vague dream to one of the most significant branches of modern engineering.’ ” He had left “testimony to the power of one solitary individual to effect change and to transform the future.” While Dr. Goddard had died without fame which had accrued to Wright brothers in their lifetime, “he died still believing that man would one day shatter the fetters of Earth’s gravity and stride majestically into the vast reaches of space. I wish he were here now to share this moment. It belongs to him.” (AP, W Star, 7/16/69, A15)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) and British Science Research Council (src) payload to 72.1-mi (116-km) altitude. Launch, third in series of four [see Jan. 19], was made to obtain data on atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density during atmospheric warming by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; 17 of 25 grenades detonated and were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
Canadian Black Brant IIIB sounding rocket was launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station to 133.6-mi (215-km) altitude. Primary objective was to evaluate improved Black Brant IIIB single-stage rocket, using flight-performance instrumentation. Flight, second of two (first was Feb. 28), was successful and sounding rocket was recommended for consideration as operational vehicle in NASA sounding rocket program, (nasa Rpt SRL; NASA Release 69-9)
NASA and AEC announced successful completion of NERVA nuclear experimental rocket engine (XE) testing in Jackass Flats, Nev. Tests, from March through August, had included 28 successful engine startups and 3 hrs 48 min cumulative operating time, with 3.5 min at full power (55,000-lb thrust). XE program had explored wide variety of operating modes and pressure and temperature conditions, demonstrated automatic startups using bootstrap techniques, demonstrated stability of nuclear rocket engine performance, and validated design and operation of engine test stand No. 1. XE engine runs concluded series of successful technology tests over several years. Design and development of flight-rated 75,000-lb-thrust nerva rocket was being initiated on basis of information produced. Nuclear rocket program was managed by AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, (nasa Release 69—134; AEC—NASA Release M-216)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) attempt to place Italian eldo F—8 spacecraft into polar orbit from Woomera Rocket Range failed when West German 3rd stage of Europa booster malfunctioned. U.K. 1st stage and French 2nd stage performed satisfactorily. (SBD, 7/16/69, 14; AP, W Star, 7/3/69, A3; nasa Int Aff)
NASA Wallops Station recovered parachute and payload launched on two-stage Sidewinder-Areas meteorological sounding rocket. Recovery—by fixed-wing Cessna 206 aircraft—was third success to date. Flight investigated performance of Sidewinder-Areas rocket system and demonstrated deployment of 16-ft-dia, disc-gap-band parachute at high altitude. Wallops scored first aerial recovery Nov. 9, 1966, when payload launched on Argentina Orion II sounding rocket was snatched by helicopter. (WS Release 69—7)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, with VAM—20 booster carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 102.3-mi (164.6-km) altitude. Objective was to search sky for diffuse and point x-ray sources in %- to 10-kev range and for possible existence of soft x-ray galactic corona and x-ray emission from Magel-lenic clouds. Rocket—first live Aerobee 150 launched from rail launcher—functioned satisfactorily. One source counter failed after one-third of flight; other counter operated perfectly, but door failed to open. Objective was not achieved, but some data on x-ray sources were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
April 12—14: NASA successfully launched series of three Nike-Apache sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc payloads to study energy spectra and relative abundances of various charge species of solar cosmic radiation during period of solar maximum. Each rocket carried three nuclear emulsion stocks and solid-state detector sensitive to protons above 30 mev. Rockets reached 98.4-mi (158.4-km), 96.4-mi (155.2-km), and 100.0-mi (161.0-km) altitudes and instruments performed satisfactorily. Payloads were recovered in good condition, (nasa Rpts SRL)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to investigate auroral disturbances. Mission was unsuccessful, (nasa Proj Off)
U.K.’s three-stage Black Arrow booster exploded 50 secs after launch from Woomera Rocket Range during first full-scale test, (upi, W Star, 6/28/69, A3)
Four-stage Pacemaker rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 58-lb instrumented payload to 65,000-ft altitude and reentered atmosphere at 7,000 mph. Primary objective was to evaluate performance of carbon phenolic, synthetic resin, as ablative material. Secondary objective was to evaluate performance of low-density ablative materials—pyronne foam, polymer blend, and phenolic nylon—for possible use on manned lifting-body reentry vehicles. (WS Release 69—12; WS Pio)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) carrying Indian-Japa-nese payload for x-ray astronomy studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 80.4-mi (129.4-km) altitude to provide data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.8- to 59.0-mi (35-to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming. All 19 grenades ejected and exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded on ground. Mission was launched in conjunction with Nike-Cajun launch from Arenosillo, Spain, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully deployed and recovered 40-ft-dia parachute in final Project SHAPE (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiment) test to evaluate possible use of parachute for aerodynamic deceleration for soft landings on planets with thin atmospheres. Parachute was ejected from five-foot-long canister carried to 33-mi altitude and 1,800 mph (mach 2.7) by three-stage rocket. Previous tests had been conducted Oct. 23 and Dec. 11, 1968. (nasa Release 69—95)
NASA Wallops Station announced award of 40-mo, $936,311 contract to Rice Univ. to investigate relationship between field-aligned currents and auroral particle fluxes and document and summarize findings. Rice would construct and test suitable flight and ground instrumentation for three Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket payloads; prepare and preflight-test payloads; and acquire, record, reduce, analyze, and publish resulting magnetic and auroral particle data. (WS Release 69—14)
U.S.S.R. announced completion of rocket tests begun in Pacific April 17. Tests had been scheduled to end June 15. (SBD, 5/26/69, 109; W Post, 5/24/69, A12)
NASA successfully launched first two in series of Nike-Apache sounding rockets carrying chemical cloud experiments from NASA Wallops Station. Rocket launched at 5:22 pm est carried sodium experiment which created reddish-orange cloud visible for hundreds of miles. Rocket launched at 7:30 pm EST carried trimethylaluminum (tma) experiment which created bluish-white cloud. Primary objective was to measure wind directions and speeds in 25- to 135-mi (40.2- to 217.2-km) region and temporal variations that occurred throughout night. Four tma experiments and two acoustic grenade experiments, postponed because of cloud cover, would be rescheduled. (WS Releases 69-19, 69-20)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Churchill Research Range carrying Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to investigate auroral disturbances. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was successfully launched from Kiruna, Sweden, to study sudden upper-atmosphere warming conditions by detonating grenades between 24.9- and 55.9-mi (40- and 90-km) altitudes. Launch was first in series of four scheduled under agreement between Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc), British Science Research Council (src), and nasa. ssrc provided ground equipment, instrumentation, and grenade payloads and was responsible for launch operations, nasa supplied Nike-Cajun rockets and dovap transponders. Second launch would be conducted Jan. 19. (nasa Release 69—16; NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster to 106.6-mi (171.5-km) altitude carrying Univ. of Colorado payload to measure height profile of nitric oxide, nitrogen, and ionized nitrogen and to test Mariner-Mars UV spectrometer. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA announced award by Lane of $2.5-million contract to LingTemcoVought Aerospace Corp. to design, develop, and flight-qualify larger lst-stage solid rocket motor for Scout booster. New Algol III motor would have 44- or 45-in dia, 4 or 5 in wider than Algol IIB, and would enable Scout to place 400-lb payload, 100 lbs more than IIB capacity, into orbit with 300-mi altitude, (nasa Release 69/126)
NASA launched four sounding rockets from Wallops Station to obtain upper-atmosphere data on normal winter day. Areas carried Naval Weapons Center payload to 34.9-mi (56.1-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration at altitudes between 18.6 and 37.3 mi (30 and 60 km), using photometer and optical filter wheel. Failure of recovery parachute to open satisfactorily caused fast descent and prevented payload recovery. Obtaining useful information was expected to be difficult, but good data were expected.	. Nike-Cajun carried gsfc payload to 79.4-mi (127.7-km) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded. Nike-Apache carrying Univ. of Colorado payload reached 72.7-mi (117-km) altitude on flight to obtain vertical profile of nitric oxide density in 15.5- to 65.3-mi (25- to 105-km) region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Second Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Illinois payload to collect data on ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts SRL; NASA Proj Off)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 127.2-mi (204.7-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution spectrograms of belt and sword stars of Orion. Excellent spectrum of star zeta in Orion was obtained and good spectrum of star epsilon in Orion was recorded, (nasa Rpt SRl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc grenade experiment to obtain data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Proj Off)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC payload to 125.5-mi (202-km) altitude to obtain solar euv spectra from 40 to 390 A and from 10 to 390 A using bbrc—SPC 330D solarpointing control and recovery system. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp. payload to 127.4-mi (205-km) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere on quarterly world day. Payload included dual-frequency propagation experiment. Rocket altitude was nominal but range was only one-fourth that predicted. Instrument performance was excellent and good data were expected from all experiments, (nasa Rpt SRL)
nasa launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc experiments. First rocket was launched to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was third in series of four launches from Point Barrow during stratospheric warming [see Jan. 26]. Second rocket was launched in conjunction with Jan. 11 launch to develop experimental techniques for determining atmospheric composition profiles in mesosphere and to measure ozone and water vapor distribution in 12.4- to 40.4-mi (20- to 65-km) region by separating
Areas sounding rocket Was launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carrying Swedish payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
Bullpup Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 45.1-mi (72.5-km) altitude to study capability of Bullpup Cajun as sounding rocket system and to test prototype ozone payload. Rocket performed satisfactorily but loss of signal at payload separation prevented analysis of payload performance. Parachute deployed as planned but payload was not recovered, (nasa Rpt SRJ.)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Wisconsin payload to 129.9-mi (209-km) altitude to examine auroral directions and intensities of isotopic component of cosmic x-rays. Magnetometer and startracker functioned as planned but doors and covers shielding proportional counters failed to eject and no x-ray data were received. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Harvard Univ. payload to conduct solar studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc grenade payload to obtain data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 80.2-mi (129-km) altitude to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket, last in series of four launched from Churchill during stratospheric warming [see Jan. 30], performed satisfactorily. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated as planned. Sound arrivals were recorded for 14—15 grenades because of power failure at receiving station, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and gca Corp. payload to 117.4-mi (189-kni) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere at midnight. Secondary objective was to test mechanical delay igniter and monitor, its performance. Simultaneous launch from Chamical, Argentina, studied particle precipitation and transport effects across equator. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried Columbia Univ. payload to 99.6-mi (160-km) altitude to study polarization of x-rays from Crab Nebula in 10- to 25-kev energy region, using x-ray polarimeter with lithium scattering blocks and gas proportional counters. All systems were perfect; good data were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Colorado payload to measure Vegard-Kaplan (1,500—1,700 A and 2,300—3,000 A) and Lyman-Birge-Hopfield (1,300—1,500 A) bands of nitrogen in uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Payload penetrated aurora, and data were excellent. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried 223-lb Cal Tech payload to 146-mi (234.9-km) altitude to study intensity, spectrum, and degree of isotropy of diffuse x-ray background in 0.1- to 20-kev range and to study energy spectrum of star X—1 in constellation Scorpius in 0.1- to 15-kev range. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained in all 12 prime data channels, (nasa Rpt SRL; WS Release)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried GSFC payload to 79.4-mi (127.7-km) altitude to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.8- to 59.0-mi (35-to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming. Seventeen of 19 grenades ejected and exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded. Mission was launched in conjunction with Nike-Cajun launch from Arenosillo, Spain, (nasa Rpt srl)
Initial thermal and vacuum testing of flight model of SERT ii (Space Electric Rocket Test) in preparation for fall 1969 launch had been completed, LeRC announced. SERT II, second flight test in development of ion propulsion for space use and first LeRC orbital spacecraft, would be launched from WTR by Thorad-Agena booster into 621-mi (999.4-km) circular orbit to evaluate inflight performance of electron-bombardment engines for six months or more, sert I had carried first ion thruster to operate in space on suborbital mission July 20, 1964. (LeRC Release 69-2)
Hans H. Maus, Director of Executive Staff at MSFC, and Dr. George N. Constan, Director of Michoud Assembly Facility, retired after combined total of 51 yrs Government service. Maus, expert in rocket development and production engineering, had received usa’s Exceptional Civilian Service Award and number of citations for development of manufacturing methods, process automation, assembly, and tooling concept development. Dr. Constan had served with USA at Milan, Joliet, and Redstone Arsenals before his appointment to Michoud in 1961. (msfc Release 69-167)
Japan successfully launched her largest rocket to date—four-stage, 75ftlong, 4.5-ft-dia, 43.8-ton MU3D—Kyodo News Service reported. Rocket reached 100-mi (160.9-km) altitude in 4% min, with last stage reaching 1.8 mps—about half speed thought needed to orbit satellite—and splashing down in Western Pacific after 7 min 35 secs of flight. (B Sun, 8/18/69, A4)
At Third International History of Astronautics Symposium Oct. 10, organized by IAF in connection with its 20th Congress, A. Ingemar Skoog of Swedish Interplanetary Society traced rocket development in Sweden from 1807, when military first understood possibilities of rockets in warfare, to mid-1860s, when rockets were taken out of service. “An examination of the rockets preserved at the Army Museum in Stockholm, has shown that all 14 rockets are still fitted with their original propellant. This will be tested by propellant experts later this year in order to find out the properties of a 140 years old propellant.” (Text) W. Geisler of Polish Astronautical Society had submitted paper on history and development of rocket technology and astronautics in Poland before 1949: use of rockets on Polish territory by Tartars in 13th century probably had marked introduction of use of rockets in Europe. (Resume) Frederick I. Ordway, III, of Univ. of Alabama delivered paper “The Alleged Contributions of Pedro E. Paulet to Liquid Propellant Rocketry.” “Paulet, a Peruvian chemical engineer-turned-diplomat, spent much of his professional foreign service career in Europe. . . . his claim to being a precursor of liquid propellant rocketry rests in a letter he wrote from Rome on the 23rd of August 1927 that was published in the 7 October 1927 issue of the Lima, Peru, newspaper El Comercio. Therein, he describes liquid propellant rocket engine experiments he had conducted ... in Paris thirty years earlier. . . . Relying on this source and derivatives, many subsequent writers have accorded Paulet a perhaps undeserved place in the history of rocketry.” (Summary)
NASA launched Areas sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying Pennsylvania State Univ. payload to study ion composition. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (NASA Proj Off)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carrying Swedish payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nik e-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFc payload to 77.1-mi (124-km) altitude to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades were detonated and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was third in series of four rockets to be launched from Churchill during stratospheric warming period [see Jan. 22]. (nasa Rpt SRI.)
Pakistan had successfully launched her first rocket, a two-stage vehicle to investigate upper atmosphere, Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee announced. (AP, W Post, 4/2/69, A7)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster, carried Univ. of Hawaii payload to 108,4-mi (174.4-km) altitude. Objectives were to obtain high-resolution spectra of solar disc from 1,800 to 2,000 A, using high-resolution echelle-grating spectrograph pointed by Univ. of Colorado biaxial pointing control. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and photographic spectra were obtained on both camera cycles, (nasa Rpt SRL)
U.S. authorities reported U.S.S.R. had conducted mid-February testfiring of defense rocket that could intercept attacking missiles at 100 to 450 mi from its launch site. Rocket appeared comparable to U.S. Spartan interceptor planned for U.S. ABM system. U.S.S.R. also was reported making progress on phased-array radar judged essential for swift detection and handling of several attacking missiles at once. (Corddry, B Sun, 3/3/69, Al)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to 826-mi (133-km) altitude to investigate auroral disturbances. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and payload was recovered successfully, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket, launched by nasa from WSMR with VAM—20 booster, carried Univ. of Colorado Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics payload to 124-mi (199.5-km) altitude. Objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of Carbon IV resonance doublet at 1,548 and 1,550 A using high-resolution, narrow-band spectrograph with echelle as principle dispersing element and sparcs solar pointing control. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried Brazil-Univ. of California payload to conduct stellar x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
usaf’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Gerauld R. Gentry (USAF), successfully completed first powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 12 200-km (40 000-ft) altitude. XLR-11 rocket engine burned 160 secs, boosting vehicle to 13 700-km (45 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.8 before it glided to landing on Rogers Dry Lake, Calif. Objective of flight, 10th in X-24A series, was to check operation of rocket propulsion system, stability and control system, and handling characteristics duringpowered flight. (NASA Proj Off; afftc Release 70-3)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Wallops Station carrying Univ. of Michigan payload to study atmospheric structure. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Black Brant IV sounding rocket was launched by Brazilian space team for NASA from Natal, Brazil, carrying MSC experiment to study energetic particles in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Rocket and instruments—including positive ion telescope, integral flux spectrometer, and two magnetometers—functioned satisfactorily. Launch was first of two in series; second would be launched Sept. 29. (SR list; MSC Release 70-105)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by_ NASA from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carried msc experiment to study uv spectra. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR fist)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Michigan experiment to study airglow. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
JPL and USAF officials commemorated 25 yrs of rocket engine testing at Edwards Test Station, Edwards afb, Calif., by placing historical marker at approach to ETS administration building. Plaque cited April 2, 1945, date of arrival at Muroc Dry Lake of first cadre of 10 jpl engineers and technicians. (Boron, Calif Enterprise, 4/2/70)
NASA launched two rockets from Wallops Station. Four-stage Trailblazer II launched at 6:56 pm est carried 34-kg (75-lb) AFCRL payload to 321.9-km (200-mi) altitude to measure plasma effects upon microwave systems during reentry. Launch supported USAF program to study techniques for improving transmission of radio signals from aerospace vehicles during reentry. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload reentered at 5.5 km per sec(18 000fps). Three-stage, solid-propellant rocket, launched at 10:17 pm est, carried 103.4-kg (228-lb) nrl payload to 1600-km (1000-mi) altitude before it impacted in Atlantic 25 min after launch. Primary objective was to measure, over wide range of wavelengths, the intensity, spatial distribution, and altitude variation of the diffuse far-uv radiation of the night sky and thereby determine its source. Secondary objective was to measure, over a wide range of wavelengths, the far-uv radiation from stars and other discrete sources. (WS Releases 70-21, 70-22)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried gsfc payload to 87.8-km (54.6-mi) altitude. Objectives of mission, first Aerobee 350 launch from wsmr, were to demonstrate suitability of complete Aerobee 350 system for scientific research and to investigate solar and stellar x-ray phenomena. Rocket performance was unsatisfactory because premature sustainer-thrust termination seriously limited apogee. Payload recovery system operated successfully and ACS turned on and tried to erect. No useful x-ray data were obtained, but good performance data were recorded. (NASA Rpt SRL)
U.S.S.R. announced completion of Pacific carrier rocket tests begun
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying gsfc experiment to study stellar uv. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by nasa from Wallops Station, carried noaa and Univ. of Michigan payload to 115.7-km (71.9-mi) altitude to measure ambient atomic oxygen between altitudes of 80 and 110 km (50 and 68 mi). Payload—including four silver probes calibrated to measure atomic oxygen, lateral magnetometer, solar-aspect sensor, and photocell to monitor nosecone ejection—was being flown for first time. Apogee and impact were less than predicted; instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
Papers of U.S. rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, recording his life work, were published by McGraw-Hill Book Co. of New York. (AFJ, 4/18/70, 6)	.
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks. Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Areas sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Cold Lake Range, Primrose Lake, Canada, carried GSFC payload to 67.5-km (41.9-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IVsatellite overpass. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Payload transmitter stopped transmitting 40 secs after ejection, but prefailure data were of good quality. Launch was first in two-rocket series; second would be conducted Oct. 17. (NASA Rpt srl)
Retrorocket parachute—with rocket to provide upthrust to descending parachute carrying heavy and delicate equipment just before it hit ground—was among items shown in Soviet film purchased for U.S. market, AP reported. Half-hour movie made to show Soviet people power of their armed forces, depicted what it called “awesome arsenal” including small rocket that skittered just off ground in search of enemy tanks. (C Trib, 3/29/70,1 A)
Meteorological rockets were being launched from EC-121 “Super Constellation” ailcraft at pmr for first time to test new sounding rocket system, pmr announced. EC-121 carried line of six rockets that were launched at 45° angle to rear of aircraft, curved to 91 000 m (300 000 ft) above flight level, and transmitted atmospheric data to aircraft while parachuting to ground, (pmr Release 1084-70)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of carrier rocket tests begun in Pacific March 21. Tests, scheduled for completion April 10, had been protested by Japanese government March 30. (AP, W Post, 4/1/70, A17)
Tass announced U.S.S.R. would conduct carrier rocket tests in Pacific from July 25 to Aug. 25 and warned ships and aircraft to avoid area 966 kin (520 nm) northwest of Midway Island with 74-km (40nm) radius between noon and midnight local time, (upi, W Star, 7/20/70, Al)
Fire in KSC rocket gantry extensively damaged “clean room” under reconstruction at Launch Complex 17, Pad B, one of two pads used to launch unmanned spacecraft by Delta boosters. There were no injuries. (WPost, 11/18/70, A8)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of Alaska payload to examine spatial distribution of ionospheric currents near visual auroral forms, examine relationship between electron and proton precipitation and usual auroral distributions produced by precipitation, and track flashing light on payload with image orthicon TV system while simultaneously observing aurora. Payload penetrated intense auroral arc forms near northern edge of auroral breakup. All experiments operated successfully and TV system tracked rocket through aurora. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Texas at Dallas experiment to study ionosphere. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (NASA Rpt srl ; SR list)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks, carrying GSFC payload to make simultaneous measurement of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released during disturbed magnetic conditions and good photographic coverage was obtained. Rocket was launched in conjunction with series begun March 1. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried arc experiment to study dust particles in atmosphere. (SR list)
Japanese government had asked U.S.S.R. to suspend series of carrier rocket tests begun in Pacific March 21, Space Business Daily reported. Japan said tests so close to Japanese islands of Kuriles, Shikoku, and Niigaia would disrupt shipping, air service* and fishing and warned that continuing tests could damage Soviei-Japanese relations. (SBD, 3/30/70, 138)
Areas sounding rocket launched by nasa from pmr carried gsfc experiment to study ozone in atmosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 494-km (307-mi) altitude. Objectives were to observe auroral protons and electrons over energy spectrum from thermal levels to several hundred kilovolts and to study electric fields and their relation to particle fluxes; density, temperature, and motion of ionospheric plasma currents; alpha particle and neutral fluxes in aurora; and auroral radiation. All experiments functioned satisfactorily and useful data were obtained. (NASA RptSRL)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets 11 min apart— one from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, and one from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks—carrying gsfc payloads. Primary objective was to make simultaneous measurement of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released from each rocket and good photographic coverage was obtained from ground stations. Similar launches had been conducted March 1 and 3. (NASA Rpts srl)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to study airglow, but mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. Aerobee 170 carried GSFC experiment to study x-ray spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, carrying gsfc payload to measure electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Rocket, last in Alaska series [see March 4], released four barium clouds that were photographed from ground, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Col. Gen. Nikita V. Yegerov, ideological chief of U.S.S.R.’s strategic rocket forces, died at age 62. (WPost, 5/7/70, B14)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying ncar experiment to collect air samples. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to study ionosphere. Mission was partially successful and met minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Bullpup-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried gsfc payload to 41-km (25.5-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in mesosphere and stratosphere and ozone in 20-to 65-km (12- to 40-mi) region. Rocket underperformed because of pitch-roll lock-in during 2nd-stage burn, which increased coning angle. Instrument performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA launched Aerobee 170—new 12.5-m (41-ft)-tall sounding rocket configuration consisting of liquid-fuel Aerobee 150 sus-tainer and solid-fuel Nike booster—from Wallops Station at 10:51 am EST, carrying 95.7-kg (211-lb) instrumented payload. Primary objectives were to flight-test first Aerobee 170 production vehicle, flight-test new water recovery system and conduct water recovery operation like one to be conducted during solar eclipse March 7, and fllght-qualify new telemetry instrumentation. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; payload and Aerobee sustainer were recovered. (WS Release 70-2)
Sert II (Space Electric Rocket Test), launched Feb. 3, had reached halfway point of six-month endurance test in space with ion engine operating satisfactorily for more than 2000 hrs, NASA announced. Experiment to determine whether electric rocket operation would interfere with radio communications between spacecraft, electric propulsion system, and nearby space indicated there would be no problem. Experiment to measure effects of ion thruster efflux on silicon-cell solar array showed solar cells were being adversely affected. As ions were emitted through molybdenum grid, small particles of grid broke off (sputtered) and were deposited on nearby surfaces, reducing ability of test patches to convert solar energy into electric power. Controllers had turned off electric bombardment engine for sever-. al hours March 7 to avoid damage during solar eclipse when Serf II intersected eclipse path on two orbits with sharp loss in electric power from solar cells. After engine was restarted it continued to function satisfactorily. Only problem had been Feb. 7 failure of miniature electrostatic accelerometer, one of four methods of measuring engine’s thrust. (NASA Release 70-69)
Aerobee 150MII sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr by VAM-20 booster, carried Univ. of Wisconsin payload to 168.3-km (104.6-mi) altitude to measure uv flux from three stars in constellations Lyra, Cygnus, and Ursa Major to provide check on prelaunch calibration of Wisconsin oao payload. Rocket functipned satisfac-tonly, but program stars were not acquired and experiment collected no data. (NASA Rpt srl)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Pacific Missile Range carrying gsfc experiment to study ozone in atmosphere. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Black Brant IV sounding rocket launched by Brazilian space team for NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried MSC experiment to study energetic particles in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Launch was second in two-rocket series; first had been launched Sept. 25. (SR list; MSC Release 70-105)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Island carried experiment to study helium geocorona. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying gsfc payload to conduct stellar studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Bob P. Helgeson, former NASA Director of Safety, died of cancer at age 49. Helgeson had retired from NASA in September 1969 because of illness. He had been Deputy Manager of aec’s Hanford Atomic Works and Director of aec-nasa nuclear rocket development station in Jackass Flats, Nev., before becoming Director of Safety in January 1968. (W Post, 1/19/70, D4)
Senate passed S.C.R. 49 to provide Congressional recognition of Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Goddard Rocket and Space Museum. (CR, 4/7/70, S5153)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried GSFC experiment to obtain data on atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA successfully launched 1500-kg (3300-lb) Serf II (Space Electric Rocket Test) from wtr at 6:49 pm pst by Thorad-Agena booster. Spacecraft entered orbit with 1008.9-km (626.9-mi) apogee, 998.4-km (620.4-mi) perigee, 105.2-min period, and 99.1° inclination. Deployment of solar panels, disabling and dumping of Agena attitude control system, and transfer of Agena horizon sensor to spacecraft were accomplished satisfactorily. Spacecraft attitude was being maintained by gravity gradient forces and control moment gyros to well within required limits. Primary mission objective was to operate electric ion thruster system in space satisfactorily for six months. Secondary objectives were to determine variation of thruster power efficiency with mission time; measure rf noise from ion beam in frequency bands associated with interplanetary communications systems; measure extent of coupling between ion beam and space plasma; measure magnitude of ion engine’s thrust by electrostatically suspended accelerometer, orbit change, or thruster measurements; measure long-term effects of ion thruster efflux on silicon-cell solar array; and measure change in equilibrium temperature of optically reflective coating in space environment. Sert II system had large solar array, cylindrical spacecraft support unit (ssu), and spacecraft ring housing two ion engines, electric propulsion experiments, power conditioning, power switching and signaling equipment, and reacquisition control system, ssu housed two telemetry transmitters, two command systems, two tape recorders for data storage, power distribution system, battery for reacquisition control, and four control moment gyros. Serf II was second mission in sert project, sert i, launched on suborbital mission July 20, 1964, had proved that ion engines could produce thrust in space, sert project was managed by LeRC under oart direction. Tracking and data acquisition were conducted by gsfc. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 70-8; LeRC Release 70-2)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying nrl experiment to study stellar uv. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Peter A. Hoag (usaf), successfully completed 36th flight at frc, demonstrating and evaluating powered approach to landing for first time. After air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude, HL-10 reached mach 0.07 and fired three hydrogen-peroxide rocket engines to approach landing on 6° glide slope instead of usual 18° slope used on unpowered flights. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Aerobee 150MI launched with VAM-17 booster carried Johns Hopkins Univ. and Univ. of Pittsburgh payload to 164.4-km (102.2-mi) altitude. Objective was to measure neutral and ion composition in auroral discharge, visible emission features of aurora, primary and secondary electron energy distributions, and auroral height profile. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of Colorado payload to 235-km (146.0-mi) altitude to measure Vegard-Kaplan and Lyman-Birge-Hopfield bands of nitrogen in uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Prototype parachute recovery system, being tested for first time, failed and payload was not recovered. (NASA Rpts SRL)
NASA successfully conducted first test firing of experimental solidpropellant rocket motor with 1.07-m (42-in) diameter and built-in thrust stopper at Eniwetok Atoll in Pacific. Motor burned 34 secs at 53 400-newton (12 000-lb) thrust before it was stopped by internal water-quench system. Motor had been constructed by Hercules Inc., for jpl. (NASA Release 70-12)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Minnesota payload to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Scientific data on March 7 solar eclipse collected by nasa Aerobee 170 sounding rocket at 173.8-km (108-mi) altitude had been recovered from 1783 m (5850 ft) under water by USN cable-controlled underwater recovery vehicle (curv III), Wallops Station announced. NRL payload carrying four cameras had photographed solar flash spectrum in eclipsed sun’s chromosphere, but parachute failed to open and payload sank 120 km (75 mi) off coast of Wallops Island, Va. After recovery, water-soaked film was maintained at 275 K (35°F) while scientists devised special processing techniques to restore film. Photos containing prime uv spectrum during total eclipse were salvaged. (WS Release 70-5)
Otto Hirschler, last U.S. Army employee among 118 German V-2 rocket experts brought to U.S. by Dr. Wernher von Braun, had lost his $25 000-a-year job as electronics expert with Army Missile Command in USA personnel cutback, Reuters reported. Most of other German rocket experts had transferred to NASA. (NYT, 7/5/ 70,2)
U.S.S.R. began series of carrier rocket tests in the Pacific about 725 km (450 mi) north northeast of Midway Island and warned ships and aircraft to stay away from area with 177-km (110-mi) diameter until completion of tests April 10. (AP, NYT, 3/22/70,7)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from TERLS carrying Indian payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. One carried gsfc payload to 210-km (130.5-mi) altitude to measure extreme uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, but door covering photometer did not deploy. Second rocket carried Univ. of Maryland payload into bright aurora to 252-km (156.6-mi) altitude to make detailed observations of visual aurora. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained. (NASA Rpts srl)
U.S. and Australia would begin construction of top-secret communications station at Woomera rocket range, Australia, AP reported. Australian Defense Minister Malcolm Fraser had announced $4-million contract had been let to Australian firm. U.S. would pay about three fourths of construction bill. Facility would be used for space and defense programs. (PBull, 1/8/70, 3)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying Univ. of New Hampshire payload to study energetic particles. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
ILK. launched Skylark SL-971 sounding rocket from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carrying rotation collimator x-ray telescope to detect x-ray stars in region of Scorpius and Sagittarius. (Spaceflight, 12/12/70,484)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 557-km (346-mi) altitude. Objectives were to observe auroral protons and electrons over energy spectrum from thermal levels to several hundred kilovolts; study electric fields and their relation to particle fluxes; study density, temperature, and motion of ionospheric plasma currents; and study alpha-particle and neutral fluxes in aurora. All experiments performed satisfactorily and excellent data were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
AP said Tass had reported construction of meteorological rocket launch complex at Molodezhnaya, Soviet station in Antarctica. Powerful radio was being constructed to speed information to Moscow and other world weather centers. (C Trib, 6/6/70)
Dozen veterans of 118-member German V-2 rocket team of Dr. Wernher von Braun had received notice of demotion or layoff from nasa at msfc. New York Times reported. At least seven would lose their jobs altogether before Oct. 1 because of manpower reductions. Notices had come as team was planning October reunion to mark 25th anniversary of its arrival in U.S. (Wilford, NYT, 9/3/70, 1)
SAMSO had successfully tested thrust vector control system (tvc), improved steering mechanism for Titan IIIC booster, afsc announced. TVC was lighter and less complicated than present system and would permit orbiting of heavier payloads by Titan IIIC. Mechanism had ring of 24 electrical valves that injected liquid nitrogen tetroxide from pressurized tank into flaming exhaust to deflect hot gases and steer booster. Operational system already in use had hydraulic valves with spaghetti-like collection of hydraulic lines, heavy pumps, and separate tanks for liquid and pressurizing gas. (afsc Release 17.70)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, ejected barium cloud at 900-km (560-mi) altitude in cooperative experiment with Max Planck Institute of Munich, Germany, to study earth’s electric and magnetic fields. Red-tinged green cloud was visible for hundreds of kilometers along East Coast. Similar launches would be conduced Oct. 7 and in spring 1971. (WS Release 70-14)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying arc experiment to collect dust particles. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Cal Tech experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Sert II spacecraft with experimental electric rocket engine (launched Feb. 3) was already setting endurance records and returning valuable technical data, NASA announced. Endurance test begun Feb. 14 was continuing satisfactorily. Only problem was failure of miniature electrostatic accelerometer, one of three instruments for measuring thrust. (NASA Release 70-34)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to conduct auroral studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list) During February: In afsc Newsreview editorial Gen. James Ferguson (USAF), afsc Commander, praised command’s two decades of “distinguished progress” in science and technology: “When the F-15 air-superiority fighter outclasses everything in the air—when the B-l advanced bomber is operational—when a new generation of icbms helps to maintain peace—when a million-pound airplane can remain on station indefinitely because of nuclear power—and when military men maneuver into and out of space orbits, at will, from conventional airfields—all these, and more, will have been possible not only because of what we learn today and tomorrow, but because of all the things we learned in our first two decades.” (afsc News-review, 2/70,2)
NASA launched three Aerobee 150 sounding rockets. Two from wsmr carried mit experiment to study stellar spectra and Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to study uv spectra. One launched from Woom-era Rocket Range, Australia, carried Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to conduct x-ray studies. (SR list)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried GCA Corp. and Univ. of Illinois payload to 142.8-km (88.7-mi) altitude to measure electron concentration, electron collision frequency, electron temperature, and electric field intensity during daytime intense-blanketing sporadic E at altitudes of 100-110 km (62-67 mi). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and usable data were obtained. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried mit payload to 146.2-km (90.9-mi) altitude to obtain precise position of two or more x-ray sources. Instruments functioned satisfactorily, but timer on rocket closed shut-off valves at 46 secs. Good data were collected from first target, but data from second target were not expected to be useful. (NASA Rpt srl)
Marshal Nikolay Krylov, Commander of U.S.S.R.’s strategic rocket forces, said in Pravda that forces had carried out “exceptionally important” military construction “in the last few years.” Equipment in all branches of service was being continuously improved for “final victory in contemporary war.” Strategic rocket troops would become “main shock force” in nuclear war. (Starr, C Trib, 11/20/70,12)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets simultaneously—one from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, and one from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks—carrying GSFC payloads. Primary objective was to make simultaneous measurements of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released from each rocket and were photographed by cameras at six sites in Alaska and one in Canada. (NASA Rpts srl)
nasa launched two sounding rockets. Areas launched from Ft. Sherman, Canal Zone, Panama, carried GSFC payload to 60-km (37.3-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IVsatellite overpass. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Launch was second in two-rocket series; first had been launched Nov. 6. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and irn struments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL; SR list)
Space Business Daily reported dod had confirmed that U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos CCCLXV (launched Sept. 25) had been FOBS test launched by modified SS-9 booster. (SBD, 9/30/70, 129)
Experimental InterAmerican Meteorological Rocket Network (exametnet)—joint project of U.S., Argentina, and Brazil—released Annual Report, 1968 (NASA SP-231), describing 1968 activities with summary of meteorological rockets and data and list of publications, reports, and related handbooks, exametnet provided scientific measurements of upper atmosphere to facilitate research into structure and circulation of atmosphere in Northern and Southern hemispheres. (Text)
dod and aec conducted nonnuclear, high-altitude test with Thor booster at Johnston Island in Pacific. Test vehicle carried test simulator and stellar x-ray package to locate and identify stellar x-ray sources and transmit data to earth. Purpose of launch was to ensure that delivery system could transport test device for detonation at predetermined time and point in space. Test Was part of dod-aec readiness tests conducted since limited test-ban treaty became effective in 1963. (aec-dod Release N-66; dasa Release)
House concurred in S.C.R. 49, providing for congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum. Action cleared measure for President’s approval. (CR, 9/14/70, H8620)
Serf II Space Electric Rocket Test, launched Feb. 3 to accumulate 4383 hrs of electric ion thruster operation, was adjudged unsuccessful by NASA. Thruster No. 1 had operated 3782 hrs and No. 2, 2011 hrs. Both had failed apparently because of electrical shorts in high-voltage system. Although endurance objectives were not met, secondary objectives were met and mission was considered significant contribution to advancement of ion system. (NASA Proj Off)
MSFC announced McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. had received $60 918 000 modification to $97 340 000 NASA contract for conversion of original orbital workshop to be launched by Saturn IB booster to completely outfitted workshop for launch by Saturn V. (msfc Release 70-178)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying nrl experiment for stellar studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements, but instruments on board rocket detected molecular hydrogen in interstellar space for first time. Although much indirect evidence for presence of large amounts of molecular hydrogen in space had been accumulated, detection by Aerobee 150 was first direct measurement. (SR list; Naval Research Reviews, 7/70, 31)
LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin established review board to investigate failure of Atlas-Centaur booster during launch of OAO-B Nov. 30, H. Warren Plohr, Chief of LeRC Advanced Systems Div., was named chairman. (NASA Release 70-208)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from WSMR, carried MSC payload to 56-km (34.8-mi) altitude to measure, simultaneously, hydroxyl airglow and ozone distributions during day and night. Results would be used to calculate atomic hydrogen distributions in 75-90-km (47-56-mi) region. Rocket trajectory was low and clamshell nosecone separated at liftoff. Data were not useable, but payload was recovered in reusable condition. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried Columbia Radiation Laboratories payload to 230.9-km (143.5-mi) altitude to study soft x-ray sources and diffuse background. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket, launched by nasa from Wallops Station, ejected barium cloud at 257.5-km (160-mi) altitude to provide data on electric and magnetic fields in geomagnetosphere. Barium-release payload was first to use liquid fluorine. Fuel tank contained hydrazine mixed with barium salts. Fluorine oxidizer, carried in separate tank under cryogenic conditions, reacted hyperfolically with fuel via valve, manifold, and burner system. Resulting arium cloud was photographed and tracked from several sites along East Coast. Similar launch had been conducted Oct. 5. (WS Release 70-15)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carrying Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets. Rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Pittsburgh experiment to study atmos- , pheric composition. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. Rocket launched from Eglin afb, Fla., carried Univ. of Michigan experiment to study atmospheric structure. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Areas carried Univ. of Houston payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Texas at Dallas payload to study ionosphere, but mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr carrying Lockheed Aircraft Corp. x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Boosted Areas I sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to measure low-altitude x-ray spectrum and electron flux above 30 500 m (100 000 ft). Rocket reached 59.1-km (36.7-mi) altitude and mission was 100% successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
Discovery of polar caps on sun by Dr. Werner M. Neupert and team of GSFC astronomers was announced by NASA. Measurements made by Oso 7 (launched Sept. 29) had shown black areas on sun’s north and south poles with temperature of 1000 000 K (1800 000°F). Hot areas on sun associated with solar flares registered temperatures of 3 000 000 to 4 000 000 K (5 400 000°F to 7 200 000°F). Data from sounding rocket experiments that preceded solar polar cap discovery indicated seasonal variations in cap sizes. If data were accurate, caps were largest during time of least solar activity and might disappear near most active times, (nasa Release 71—237; nasa Special Release 12/6/71)
Launch of Intelsat-IV F-j8 by nasa for ComSatCorp, postponed from Dec. 6 following failure of usaf Atlas-Agena booster, had been rescheduled for Dec. 18, ksc announced, nasa project officials recommended that sensor probe be added to Atlas sustainer system to provide information on engine temperature between gas generator and turbine inlet and that temperature readouts be monitored during Atlas ignition sequence before liftoff, (ksc Release 274-71)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to study stellar uv. Rocket and instru- -ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Churchill Research Range carrying trw Inc., experiment to conduct auroral studies. (SR list)
Harry F. Guggenheim—financier, philanthropist, sportsman, and publisher—died in Sands Point, N.Y., at age 80. His enthusiasm for aviation as pilot in World War I had led him to persuade his father, Daniel Guggenheim, to establish Guggenheim School of Aeronautics at New York Univ., first university school of aeronautics in U.S. Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics, Inc., of which Harry Guggenheim was president, helped establish aeronautical engineering schools at MIT, Georgia Institute of Technology, Cal Tech, Univ. of Washington, Stanford Univ., and Univ. of Michigan. Fund aided Charles A. Lindberg after first transatlantic crossing. Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation, established in 1924, sponsored much of pioneer rocket research by Dr. Robert H. Goddard. (NYT, 1/23/71,1)
NASA launched two sounding rockets to obtain data on ionosphere. NikeApache, launched from Univ. of Michigan’s Keweenaw Rocket Launch Site (icrls), carried gsfc payload to 121.9-km (76.2-mi) altitude to obtain data during magnetic activity in ionosphere while radiofrequency absorption in 2- and 10-mhz region of spectrum was high. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Boosted Areas II, launched from Wallops Station, carried gsfc experiment to 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude to study enhanced ionization of lower ionosphere and its relationship to precipitation of energetic electrons. One telemetry channel with one RF probe was lost; all other instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska, carrying gsfc experiment to study magnetic fields. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying GSFC experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi) by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, reached 110.8-km (68.9-mi) altitude, with all 19 grenades exploding as planned. Rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19 grenades to 124.4-km (77.3-mi) altitude; 17 soundings were recorded. Rocket launched from Wallops Station carried 31 grenades to 114.3-km (71-mi) altitude; all 31 detonated and were recorded on ground, (nasa Rpts srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying MSC experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and Joint Committee on Atomic Energy on NERVA space nuclear propulsion program: “As we prepared our FY 1972 budget request, we were faced with one of three choices for nerva”—to continue with full scale development of flight engine; proceed at reduced rate, emphasizing technology and long-lead time development; or cancel nerva program. “Because there is simply no need to proceed with full scale development now, and in view of fiscal constraints, we decided to . . . continue with the development of long lead items and technology, but to not proceed with the full development effort. This will preserve the technology that has already been gained, and the hard core capability that now exists, without requiring a major expenditure of funds.” nasa and aec support of nerva project was “clear example of sustained support over many years of an advanced development even though we have not yet come to the point of proposing the specific missions on which it would be used.” While best chemical propulsion systems operated at specific impulse of 450 sec, “with nuclear propulsion we have demonstrated . . . equivalent specific impulse of 825 seconds and have every confidence that the technology we are developing . . . can raise this to at least 900 seconds. Thus, our justification for the large and continuing investment in the nerva program is that we have a way of breaking one of the principal limiting constraints on space flight by doubling our propulsion efficiencies for many important classes of large space missions.” Dr. Low, in response to questions, testified that nasa plan to stretch out nerva development program would necessitate immediate employment cutback from 2500 persons to 800. U.S. had invested $1.4 billion in nerva since 1955. (Transcript; W Post, 2/24/71; B Sun, 2/24/71, A7) Milton Klein, Manager, nasa-aec Space Nuclear Systems Office, testified on nerva program status: “Eighteen rocket reactors have been tested, each adding importantly to our knowledge. Two experimental engines, which couple the reactor with the other principal components necessary to form a complete nuclear rocket engine, have been operated. The last of these engines, XE, was started up 28 times and tested over a wide variety of Conditions. We have accumulated over 14 hours of system operating experience, including more than four hours at or near design power.” Specific impulse “of 825 seconds has been demonstrated for extended durations in a flight size reactor. A range of thrust levels, including 75,000 pounds [34,000 kg], has been demonstrated over a wide range of conditions, including the ability to throttle down to about one-half design thrust at full specific impulse. The ability to stop and start at will has been demonstrated. Finally, this system has proved to be quite predictable, an important feature from a development and operational standpoint. All of the technology goals of the program have been met and the potential for performance growth shown.” (Transcript)
Initial results from U.S.S.R.’s Vertikal-2 rocket launched Aug. 20 were reported by Tass. Experiments had been conducted at altitudes between 100 and 463 km (62 and 288 mi). Photos had registered image of sun in several spectral ranges and had indicated that solar flares took place during rocket’s flight. Data had been obtained on temperature, electron density, and other parameters of sun’s corona and on flux of particles causing ionospheric turbulence. (fbis-Sov—174-3, 9/8/71, L2)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Cajun, launched from Kourou, French Guiana, carried GSFC experiment to 125-km (77.7-mi) altitude to measure upper atmospheric pressures, temperatures, densities, and winds near equatorial latitudes and to verify operation of ground instrumentation in preparation for future grenade missions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. All 18 grenades detonated and were recorded on ground. Launch was last of four in Kourou series. Previous launches had been conducted March 5 and March 15-16. Nike-Tomahawk, launched from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska, carried experiment to study electric fields. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL; SR list)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d Grant L. Hansen discussed space shuttle at Air Force Assn, meeting in Bethpage, N.Y. NASA and USAF work on shuttle engine had been helpful to shuttle program in areas of reusability and higher-pressure-engine technology, usaf had supported advanced development efforts on liquid-fuel rocket engines and had concluded hydrogen and oxygen high-performance-engine demonstration program. Work on XLR—129 reusable rocket engine had provided basis for shuttle’s reusable high-pressure-rocket concept. Residual hardware of usaf XLR—129 program had been turned over to nasa for shuttle engine program. Development of shuttle main engine was to be conducted at usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center, usaf would continue in 1972 to develop technology for high-energy orbit-to-orbit stages compatible with a shuttle to accomplish maneuvering missions for late 1970s and early 1980s. (AF Mag, 12/71, 34)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carried gsfc experiment to investigate polar cap absorption event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; payload recovery was delayed until Sept. 3 because of adverse weather. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Mikhail K. Yangel, Soviet scientist and rocket expert, died of heart attack at age 60. Tass later quoted obituary, signed by Soviet leaders, as saying Academician Yangel had “made an inestimable contribution to the cause of development and perfection of rocket-space engineering and exploration of near-earth outer space.” (fbis-Sov-71-207, 10/27/ 71, L3)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
paet Planetary Atmosphere Experiments Test was launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 3:31 pm edt on four-stage Scout booster. Primary objective was to investigate means of determining structure and composition of unknown planetary atmosphere. Secondary objectives were to determine profile of water vapor in earth’s atmosphere, with altitude, from absorption measurements of reflected sunlight in infrared; investigate effect of radio signal attenuation on relay communications when transmitting from aft hemisphere of a blunt entry
NASA announced issuance of RFPs for eight-month study of applications of dual-mode nuclear rocket engine to propel spacecraft and generate electrical power for use on board, (nasa Release 71—157)
Storage lifetime of seals, O-rings, and gaskets in rocket engines and Saturn IB and Saturn V booster stages had been extended from 8 to 10 yrs in program of rocket test firing at MSFC, msfc announced. (msfc Release 71—91)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from terls carrying Indian experiment to study luminescent clouds. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR List)
afsc announced plans to launch 1500-w frusa (flexible rolled-up solar array) in fall 1971. Two panels would roll into cylinder 25 cm (10 in) in diameter for launch and would unroll in space to overall length of 10 m (32 ft), oriented to sun and held rigid by parallel extension arms, frusa would be placed in 740-km (460-mi) polar orbit by Thor-Agena booster for six-month flight to test electrical and dynamic characteristics, (afsc Release 309.70)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr carrying GSFC payload on test and support mission. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Four-stage Javelin rocket, launched by nasa from Wallops Station at 4:44 am edt, carried noaa experiment to 662-km (411-mi) altitude. Objective of mission was to investigate region of ionosphere above maximum electron density, where it could be treated as electron gas. Data was to be compared with data from gsfc Langmuir probe in payload and with measurements taken simultaneously by nbs Ionosphere Sounding Station at Wallops Island, Va. Mission was unsuccessful. ( WS Release 71—12; SR List)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment for auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched three sounding rockets from WSMR. Two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets, one carrying nrl experiment to study stellar spectra and one carrying GSFC experiment to conduct x-ray studies, were unsuccessful. Boosted Areas II carried gsfc experiment to 70-km (43.5mi ) altitude to measure mobility of charged particles in lower D region. Rocket functioned satisfactorily, but some anomalous data were received. Data would be correlated with data from two Nike-Cajun launches scheduled for Aug. 31. (SR list; nasa Rpt srl)
Tass reported death of Soviet rocket designer Aleksey Isayev and identified him for first time as designer of engines for Vostok and Voskhod rockets and Soyuz manned spacecraft. Tass said Soviet unmanned “interplanetary stations” also had been created under Isayev’s direction. Izvestia said in biographical sketch that Isayev was one of main creators of aircraft that had made world’s first jet powered flight on May 5,1942. (AP, W Star, 6/27/71, All)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from terls. One carried India-Japan experiment to study ionosphere. Mission was partial success. Second rocket carried Indian experiment to study luminescent clouds. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Wallops Station carrying Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory payload to study x-ray polarization. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying MSC experiment to study uv spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Michigan experiment to observe airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 7:43 pm est, carried 440.4-kg (971-lb) Columbia Univ. payload to 196.3-km (122-mi) altitude to search for x-ray polarization of Crab Nebula. Rocket and instruments—including two polarimeters sensitive to x-rays at 2.6 kev and 5.25 kev—functioned satisfactorily. Payload recovery would be attempted after daybreak Feb. 22. (WS Release 71—1)
NASA launched series of three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying gsfc grenade experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi) by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19 grenades to 124.9-km (77.6-mi) altitude with 18 grenades detonating as planned and 16 sound arrivals recorded. Rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried 31 grenades to 108.8-km (67.6-mi) altitude with 31 explosions and 30 sound arrivals recorded. Rocket launched from Wallops Station carried 19 grenades to 135.8-km (84.3-mi) altitude, with 19 explosions and sound arrivals recorded, (nasa Rpts srl)
Launch of Intelsat-IV F—3 comsat, scheduled for Dec. 6 by Atlas-Centaur booster, would be postponed indefinitely pending review of Dec. 4 failure of usaf Atlas-Agena mission, NASA announced. (NYT, 12/7/71, 18) ...
U.S.S.R. and France had successfully completed joint program of sounding rocket launches from Soviet ship Professor Zubov off coast of Kourou, French Guiana, Tass announced. Purpose of launches was to study upper atmosphere. (fbis-Sov-71-251, 12/30/71, L2)
Largest influx of immigrant scientists, engineers, and physicians over past 20 yrs was reported by nsf for FY 1970. After sharp decline of 21% between 1968 and 1969, rise of 30% in 1970 had brought number of entries to over 13 000 level, (nsf Highlights, 4/22/71, 1) April 23-25: U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz 10—carrying Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov, Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov—was launched from Baykonur at 4:54 am local time April 23 (6:54 pm est April 22). Orbital parameters: apogee, 224 km (139.2 mi); perigee, 200 km (124.3 mi); period, 88.2 min; and inclination, 51.3°. Tass said spacecraft would conduct joint experiments with Salyut 1 building spacecraft and conducting launch operations. NASA provided Scout booster, two experiments, technical consultations, launch crew training, and spacecraft tracking and data acquisition. (NASA Release 71-63; nasa Proj Off; gsfc SSR, 4/30/71)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 132.5-km (82.3-mi) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily with 14 of 19 grenades confirmed by sound. Launch was part of series of similar experiments from three sites [see Jan. 7], (nasa Rpt SRl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Univ. of Hawaii solar astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying NRL experiment to conduct solar studies. Mission was partial success. (SR list)
Black Brant VC sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station on test and support mission to evaluate flight performance. Vehicle developed aerodynamic instability and payload broke off. (SR list; Proj Scientist)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr carrying MSC experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Joint West German and NASA barium-ion-cloud (bic) probe was launched from Wallops Station by Scout booster at 7:31 pm edt. Objectives of cooperative project were to study behavior of barium ion cloud released at several earth radii and to determine what broad features of earth’s magnetic and electric fields could be deduced. Barium was released into space at 11:05 pm edt above Central America. Cloud was visible over North and South America and observations were made from all prime ground-based optical sites for one to one and one half hours. Parameters of 4th-stage burnout were 31 479-km (19 560-mi) altitude, 6.77° N latitude, and 74.26° W longitude. Barium cloud was visible to naked eye for approximately 10 min. Cloud elongated along its local magnetic field line to length of about 10000-km (6200-mi), nasa provided vehicle support necessary to accomplish mission and to make observations at nasa sites. (nasa Proj Off; WS Release 71—19)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried Gca Corp payload to 176.4-km (109.6-mi) altitude to determine winds from vapor trail using arc CV—990 instrumented aircraft as observing platforms, test narrow-band camera filters on chemical releases with bright sky background, and provide real-time checkout of observational equipment and procedures for bic experiment with low-altitude barium release. Payload contained standard barium and sodium-lithium canisters. Cloud was photographed by both ground and CV—990 aircraft cameras. Flight was first of two; second rocket would be launched Sept. 16. (nasa Rpt srl)
Award to Global Associates of $4-million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide institutional support services at MTF was announced by MSFC. Selection had been made following competitive negotiations during which eight firms had submitted proposals. Contract included maintenance of rocket stage testing facilities in standby status and support services for other Federal agencies using mtf. (msfc Release 71—117)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Michigan experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying GSFC experiment to study stellar spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
LeRC announced award of $4 264 734, fixed-price, supplemental agreement to United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. for 12 RL-10 rocket engines for Centaur boosters. (LeRC Release 71—11)
NASA launched series of Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying gsfc grenade experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi). First rocket, launched from Churchill Research Range, carried 19 grenades to 122.4-km (76.1-mi) altitude, with all 19 grenades exploding as planned. Second rocket was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, with 31 grenades, but electrical power to dovap ground transmitter was lost and no trajectory data were recorded beyond 4.5 sec get. All grenades exploded and were recorded, but data were not useful without trajectory data. Third rocket, launched from Point Barrow as backup, successfully carried 19 grenades to 94.5-km (58.7-mi) altitude, with all grenades detonating and recorded as planned. Fourth rocket, launched from Wallops Station, carried 19 grenades to 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude. All 19 grenades detonated as planned and 14 sound arrivals were recorded, (nasa Rpts SRl)
NASA launched three sounding rockets. Areas launched from Barking Sands, Kauai, Hawaii, carried GSFC experiment to 56.7-km (35.2-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IV overpass. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered successfully. Black Brant VB, launched from Wallops Station at 8:14 pm est, carried 216.8-kg (478-lb) nrl instrumented telescope to 281.6-km (175-mi) altitude for infrared astronomy studies. Telescope was doublewalled with unique helium cooling system that maintained unit’s temperature at 5.4 K (—■450° F) to prevent telescope’s own radiation from interfering with measurements. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; payload would be recovered after daylight Feb. 25. Aerobee 150, launched from wsmr, carried arc experiment to study micrometeorites. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl; WS Release 71-2; SR list)
faa certification of 201 series Guppy cargo aircraft and sale of one aircraft to Airbus Industries of France, European cargo airline, were announced by aircraft’s manufacturer, Aero Spacelines, Inc. New aircraft was sixth in Guppy series, created to airlift space booster components for nasa. With fuselage 7.6 m (25 ft) in diameter, new Guppy could lift 24 500 kg (54 000 lbs) of cargo and fly it for 3200 km (2000 mi) nonstop at 470 km per hr (290 mph). First 201 series Guppy would move wing and fuselage assemblies of Concorde supersonic transport and 300-passenger European airbus from points of manufacture to Toulouse, France, for assembly. (C Trib, 9/2/71)
nasa launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets. Rocket launched from wsmr carried msc experiment to study atmospheric composition. Mission was partial success. Rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC grenade experiment and functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
nasa launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Alaska. Rocket launched from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, carried gsfc experiment to study electric fields. Rocket launched from Fairbanks carried Univ. of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Colorado airglow experiment. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying Univ. of Pennsylvania Ionospherics experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Detection of “possible spinar”—celestial object which could be link between galaxies and quasars in outer space—was described by NRL team headed by Dr. Herbert Friedman in Astrophysical Journal. Spinar, 200 million light years from earth, could be entire galaxy of collapsed and rotating neutron stars or single, massive pulsar. Object had been found by x-ray detector aboard Aerobee sounding rocket. In interview with Washington Evening Star later, Dr. Friedman said new source, classified as a Seyfert Galaxy, emitted “soft x-rays.” Spinar would radiate 1000 times less visible light than quasar and 12 000 times more infrared than visible light energy—approximately what had been found in Seyfert Galaxy. But x-ray emissions perhaps as much as 10 trillion suns indicated it might be powered by same mechanism as pulsar. Dr. Friedman speculated that pulsar such as spinar could be missing link between conventional galaxy like Milky Way and quasars and that spacecraft-mounted x-ray detectors would find “tens of thousands” of such sources. (Astrophysical Journal, 3/15/71, L-81—5; Lannan, W Star, 3/19/71, B5)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying GSFC solar astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Cal Tech soft x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Growing climate in U.S. of “irrational hostility” toward science and technology was scored hy Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in speech before Washington, D.C., chapter of Aviation/Space Writers Assn.: “It is irrational precisely because those most vocal . . . are the very ones professing the greatest concern about poverty, poor housing, hunger, and the quality of the environment. All of these problems of society depend in varying degree upon our technological capabilities, and certainly on increased productivity for their solutions. Some . . . require advanced research into the nature of the environment and ecological interactions.” Anti-science and anti-technology voices were doing U.S. “great disservice. The problems they are rightly anxious and concerned about cannot be solved by a return-to-nature cult.” Resources of knowledge that awaited man in space had “great significance to man, to Earth environment, and to the ecology. We are learning of the relationships between Earth and Sun and their effects on our lives which could be learned in no other way save by means of the rocket and spacecraft.” (Text)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from terls carrying India-GSFC experiment to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 170B sounding rocket was launched by nasa from WSMR to 191.5-km (119-mi) altitude on flight performance mission. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered. (SR list; Proj Scientist)
Fritz von Opel—engineer, pilot, and industrialist—died in St. Moritz, Switzerland, at age 71. Von Opel had flown in rocket-propelled glider in 1929 and had developed rocket car which he drove at more than 3 km (2 mi) per minute in 1928. (upi, NYT, 4/12/71, 38)
NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from Wallops Station to measure diurnal oxygen, density, pressure, and temperature and to obtain comparisons of pitot and active-sphere density measurements. Rockets were launched during daylight hours and data would be compared with data from similar series to be launched during darkness Aug. 20. Viper Dart carried WSMR experiment to 135-km (83.9-mi) altitude to provide density, temperature, pressure, and wind data from 40 to 130 km (25 to 80 mi). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with Robinette sphere ejecting and inflating as programmed. Nike-Cajun carried Univ. of Michigan and NOAA experiment to 126-km (78.3-mi) altitude to measure diurnal variation of atomic oxygen in 80- to 120-km (50- to 75-mi) region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan and gsfc experiment to 171-km (106.3-mi) altitude to obtain diurnal measurements of density, pressure, and temperature and obtain comparisons of pitot and active-sphere density measurements. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts SRL)
U.S.S.R. latmched Vertikal-2 cooperative geophysical research rocket to 463-km (287.7-mi) altitude to study solar UV and x-ray emissions, ionospheric parameters, and meteor particles. Nose section of rocket consisted of instrument compartment and recoverable container carrying scientific equipment for heliophysical research and Hungarian-Czechoslovakian-Soviet instruments to study micrometeors. Instrument compartment carried equipment for heliophysical and ionospheric research designed by Bulgarian, East German, Czechoslovakian, and Soviet scientists. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered. (Tass, fbis-Sov—163-3, 8/23/71, LI)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Kenya, Africa, carrying gsfc experiment to conduct stellar astronomy studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched series of three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying GSFC experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, reached 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude, with all 19 grenades exploding as planned. Rocket launched from Wallops Station reached 130.9-km (81.3-mi) altitude, with 16 of 19 explosions confirmed by ground. Third rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa issued invitation to scientists to participate in definition phase for Planetary Explorer missions to Venus. Emphasis would be on low-cost approach using spin-stabilized Explorer spacecraft launched by Delta booster. From respondents to invitation NASA would select scientists to play active role in defining typical payload for initial missions in 1976 and 1977 and to make recommendations for subsequent orbiter and probe missions in 1978 and 1980. (Text; nasa Release 71-124)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Univ. of Michigan’s Keweenaw Rocket Launch Site (krls), carried GSFC payload to 184.8km (114.8-mi) altitude to obtain data during magnetic activity in ionosphere while radiofrequency absorption in 2- and 10-mhz region
Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev had been guiding Soviet space research and rocket engineering since 1963, Wall Street Journal reported. Information had been contained in article circulated to Moscow correspondents by a Soviet news agency. (WSJ, 4/14/71, 1)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and gsfc experiment to study solar x-ray emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr carrying MSC experiment to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NR Rocketdyne Div. had been granted $26 228 158 contract modification for continued support on Saturn launch vehicle rocket engines, MSFC announced. Contract—effective July 1, 1971, through Dec. 31, 1972— allowed analysis of F-l, J-2, and H-l engine performance, field engineering, logistics, and retention of Rocketdyne problem-solving group for remainder of Saturn program, (msfc Release 71—97)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gca Corp. experiments. Payloads ejected trail of sodium and lithium during ascent from 80-km (50-mi) to 170-km (105-mi) altitude and then ejected barium at 170-km altitude. Both trails produced glowing, colored clouds over mideastem U.S. coastline. Data on wind conditions were obtained by photographing motion of vapor trails and clouds from cameras aboard arc Convair 990 aircraft. (WS Release 71-18)
Use of laser holography as nondestructive test technique for inspecting case-bonded solid-propellant rocket engines would be evaluated for NASA in program under negotiation with Lockheed Space & Missiles Co., Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Technique consisted of viewing stressed test article through hologram produced when article was in unstressed condition. (Av Wk, 2/14/72, 11)
U.S.S.R. was dismantling huge booster rocket at Tyuratam launch site [Baykonur Cosmodrome] near Aral Sea, unidentified U.S. intelligence sources told New York Times. Ground support equipment also had been removed. Booster had not been used for manned launch, but it was not known whether it had been used for unmanned mission. (Lyons, NYT, 10/1/72, 9)
Tass announced successful completion of Soviet carrier rocket launchings in Pacific and declared restricted area free for sea and air navigation. (fbis-Sov, 12/14/72, A4)
NASA launched Black Brant VC from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Minnesota fields and particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Canadian-built Black Brant VC rocket was launched from Natal, Brazil, carrying West German and Brazilian payload. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (Reuters, W Post, 3/10/72, F3)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Wisconsin x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Strypi 4 sounding rocket from Kauai, Hawaii, carrying National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration artificial aurora experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
nasa-aec Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nev., was “first ghost town of the space age,” New York Times reported. Since announcement (in Administration’s FY 1973 budget request on Jan. 24) of termination of nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) project, 259-sq-km (100-sq-mi) area had been littered with “$200-million worth of deserted engine test stands, enormous assembly bays with birds nesting in the rafters, empty administration buildings, and aluminum and steel chards of pumps, turbines and motors.” Only 200 employees made 290-km (180-mi) round trip between station and Las Vegas each day. “Eight years ago 56 buses provided commuting service for the station’s 3,000 workers; today there are only three.” (Lyons, NYT, 3/26/72, 57) Parade magazine printed letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, from Chairman Raymond L. Bisplinghoff of Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board, National Academy of Engineering: “The board members would like to reaffirm their continuing belief that a shuttle-like vehicle is the key to a forward moving and economical space program beyond 1980.” (Parade, 3/26/72)
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. First carried Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy and soft x-ray experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, but scientific objectives were not met. Second rocket carried Univ. of Wisconsin astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Kiruna, Sweden, carrying Swedish auroral aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian auroral energy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ, of Colorado experiment to measure solar ultraviolet light. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Wisconsin soft x-ray experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Michigan auroral aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
First European Conference on Space and Youth was sponsored in Paris by National Assn, of Aerospace Clubs of France and International Coordinating Committee (cic) for out of school scientific activity. Delegates from aerospace groups in 23 European nations were invited to conference to plan first program of intra-European cooperation for youth in aerospace field. Meeting established conference as annual event and approved resolutions on future cooperation in technical meetings, exchange of materials, establishment of secretariat, and origination of joint youth rocket projects. (Government Executive, 4/72, 28-9)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Colorado astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to measure brightness of sun. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
NASA launched two Booster Areas I sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Houston experiments to investigate auroral zone disturbances and study auroral phenomena at altitudes previously unstudied. Data would supplement data from three Canadian Black Brant sounding rockets launched by Canadian National Research Council during substorm movement. Rockets reached 53.1- and 60-km (33- and 37.3-mi) altitudes and functioned satisfactorily, with each set of instruments providing data for one hour. (NASA RptS SRL)
Spaceflight reported development of high-pressure topping-cycle, liquidoxygen and liquid-hydrogen rocket engine with thrust of 196 to 245 kilonewtons (44 000 to 55 000 lbs) by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm in Ottobrunn, West Germany. Engine was planned for second stage of European Launcher Development Organization’s Europa III launch vehicle. (SF, 8/72, 301)
Super Areas sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried Pennsylvania State Univ. experiment to 66.8-km (41.5-mi) altitude to measure electrical conductivity in upper atmosphere with parachute-borne payload and to flight-certify payload and vehicle for later launches. Although some data were missed because of lower apogee than planned, flight was judged successful. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) and development effort to level “at least equal to that of the Soviet Union.” Convention adopted 1972-1973 Statement of Policy Sept. 19. Statement said new environment created by Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt) “places a high premium on added protection for our current strategic bomber force, on improved ballistic missile technology as an antidote to numerical inferiority, on more accurate and consistent surveillance capabilities, and on more secure and dependable communications.” Nothing in salt agreements impeded size and momentum of U.S.S.R.’s research and development effort. Soviet effort “for the past several years has surpassed that of the United States by a wide margin. Tlje possibility of technological surprise has not diminished under salt, unless the United States undertakes and maintains a military research and development program that is comprehensive, consistent, and competitive.” If U.S. emphasized efforts on qualitative force improvement, enhanced forces survivability, and improved conventional weapon delivery, “risks involved in the SALT agreements can likely be kept within tolerable limits.” AFA awards presented during convention included Theodore von Karman Award to l/c Donald G. Carpenter, Commander of 18th Surveillance Squadron, Air Defense Command, for “advancing the nation’s space defense capability.” David C. Schilling Award was presented to 1st Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron, Beale Air Force Base, Calif., for “pioneering operational long-range flight while performing vital defense missions with the SR—71 aircraft.” Award was accepted by Col. Jerome F. O’Malley, Commander of 9th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing. (AF Mag, 11/72, 809, 54-5, 60-1) September 18:	New York Times published interview with Harris M. Schurmeier, Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s manager of proposed 1977 Jupiter-Saturn mission. Two 680-kg (1500-lb) spacecraft launched by Titan IIIE-Centaur boosters would swing past Jupiter in 1979 and, gaining velocity from pull of Jupiter’s gravity, speed past Saturn by 1981. Mission would cost between $250 million and $350 million— less than half cost of Grand Tour mission proposed earlier. Since mission would provide first close-up observation of Saturn, some 200 scientists had already submitted proposals for experiments. Proposals were being evaluated and spacecraft design would begin by end of 1972. (Wilford, NYT, 9/18/72, 15)
Two sounding rockets were launched by nasa from Wallops Station. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Rlinois payload to 185-km (115-mi) altitude in first of three launches to measure ionospheric properties on three anomalous days: (1) “L,” day with very low electron densities in 70- to 80-km (40- to 50-mi) region with 10-day minimal magnetic storm activity proceeding; (2) “Hi,” day with very high electron densities with same altitude and magnetic storm prerequisites; and (3) “H2,” day with very high electron densities in same region with two or three days of major magnetic disturbance and magnetic storm aftereffects. Nike-Apache was fired on L day and measured electron densities, temperatures, and collision frequencies. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Super Areas launched 44 min after Nike-Apache carried Pennsylvania State Univ. payload to 85-km (52.8-mi) altitude to collect data on positive and negative ion conductivities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. auroral studies experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. was deploying multiple warheads on its intercontinental ballistic missiles, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said in speech before Veterans of Foreign Wars in Washington, D.C. (Text) March 7:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, compared nasa FY 1973 budget program with FY 1972 plans in testimony before opening session of House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans hearings on FY 1973 budget: “We have reconfigured our plans so that a substantially higher level of appropriations will not be required in future years to complete the programs in our FY 1973 budget” and to continue “useful and significant . . . new projects in space science, exploration, and practical applications, in advanced technology, and in aeronautics.” FY 1972 program would have required NASA appropriations in future years to approach $4 billion per year. Run-out costs to complete program as planned would have risen to $3.7 billion in FY 1973 and $3.95 billion in FY 1974. Revised program estimated run-out costs at $3.37 billion in FY 1974, $3.3 billion in FY 1975, $3.2 billion in FY 1976, and $3.1 billion in FY 1977. NASA could “by properly phasing-in the start of needed future new programs . . . hold NASA appropriations in future years to approximately the current total appropriations level in current dollars.” Previous program would have committed U.S. to “higher NASA budget in future years, or to the waste from termination of programs in midstream,” but revised plan would “give the Nation a good, viable, and balanced program in aeronautics and space at a cost it can afford.” Dr. Fletcher believed “realistic long-term plan in which the Nation’s commitment is limited to budgets of approximately the current size is the proper posture for NASA from the standpoint of responsible management” and “should go far in alleviating the concerns that have been expressed that in embarking on the new space programs of the 1970’s we are committing the Nation to a program that it cannot afford. “To achieve this posture, we have had to make some basic changes in our planning and accept yet another stretch-out of the period over which our continuing and long-term objectives in space exploration and space science will be achieved.” Principal change has been in space shuttle program. Shuttle now planned would cost $5.5 billion, about half what configuration envisaged year before would have cost. Second significant change was cutback in planned program for exploration of outer planets, reducing plans to explore all five outer planets on Grand Tour missions in late 1970s to new focus on Jupiter and perhaps Saturn, with less expensive spacecraft. Third significant change was termination of nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program, now including in budget request $8.5 million for defining with Atomic Energy Commission smaller nuclear rocket engine and making trade-off studies of preferred propulsion system for missions to distant planets some time in 1980s. Final major change was increased emphasis on aeronautics, in response to strong urgings of committees of Congress. (Transcript)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Andoeya, Norway, carried National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration experiment to 208-km (129-mi) altitude. Objectives were to obtain information on precipitating charged-particle flux associated with quiet auroral form and measure electric-field strengths in and near auroral form. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of Pittsburgh experiment to 141-km (87.6-mi) altitude. Primary objective was to confirm initial observation of nitric oxide in auroral zone and collect additional information on processes that produced nitric oxide in an auroral arc. Secondary objective was to measure density of major atmospheric constituents in D and E regions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Use of energy in cosmic plasma to launch spacecraft inexpensively was discussed in Science by Dr. Hannes 0. Alfven, Univ. of California at San Diego physicist. Energy for space propulsion was being used in “extremely inefficient” way because of low exhaust velocity of rocket gases. Total start weight of spacecraft “must be two or three orders of magnitude larger than the payload.” By plasma ejection, “one can easily reach exhaust velocities of several tens of kilometers per second” so that “the ejected mass may be of the same order of magnitude as the payload and the efficiency very high.” Energy for launch could be supplied from solar wind, tapping voltage of 1000 v if transfer resistance between ends of conductors and solar wind could be “made small.” Or energy could be supplied by transfer from ground through plasma channel in atmosphere. “When Apollo 12 was launched, there were low clouds but no thunderstorm. When the spacecraft had disappeared in the clouds, lightning was observed . . . where the spacecraft had last been seen. This effect was interpreted as due to the exhaust gases which facilitated a discharge of electrostatic charges in the clouds down to the ground. One cannot avoid thinking that it would be preferable to transfer power up to the spacecraft in this way.” If spacecraft at launch was “accelerated by two plasma guns at a large distance from each other, and electric arcs are produced between each . . . and the corresponding electrodes on the ground, it is possible that these arcs can be maintained during the launch through the atmosphere.” (Science, 4/14/72, 167-8)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range carried Univ. of Colorado payload containing six ultraviolet photometers and telemetry transmitter to 123-km (77-mi) altitude. Flight objective was to measure variation with altitude of atomic oxygen at night and to determine spectral distribution of night-glow continuum in altitude region between 85 and 110 km (53 and 68 mi). Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Physicists were studying possibility that magnetic substorm was created by experiment conducted by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory and Univ. of Alaska Geophysical Institute. Experiment attempted to trace line in earth’s magnetic field from pole to pole by injecting barium ions into upper atmosphere by rocket. Launch of Sandhawk Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat near Fairbanks, Alaska, March 6 had caused unusual one-hour auroral display, accompanied by sudden appearance of very-low-frequency (vlf) radio signals, 17 min after barium injection. (Av Wk, 5/15/72, 11; Los Alamos pio)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. auroral fields and particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. auroral particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. solar physics experiment. Docket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Single-stage Nike rocket, carrying 47.2-kg (104-lb) payload, was launched by nasa from Wallops Station to 11 600-m (38 000-ft) altitude to obtain precise records of vibrations and accelerations caused by small variations in burning process of solid-fueled rocket motor. Flight data would be compared with similar measurements made in ground vibration tests and captive firings and was expected to provide improved knowledge of effects of rocket-motor burning on payload dynamics for more efficient payload design. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned. (WS Release 72-2; WS PAo)
First launch of British Skylark sounding rocket to test techniques for high-altitude photography of earth resources was made from Woomera, Australia. Primary objectives were to test stabilization control system and remote sensing hardware. Advantages over conventional methods of high-altitude photography were that single frame was equivalent to 650 frames photographed from 15 000 m (50 000 ft), making assembly of photographic mosaics easier and more accurate, and that entire area could be photographed under identical conditions. Project was developed by United Kingdom’s Dept, of Trade and Industry to assess mineral, agricultural, and other resources inexpensively. (SF, 8/72, 282-286)
nasa launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Chicago solar physics experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. and India began third phase of cooperative meteorological rocket program with launch of 76th M-100 rocket from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls). Rockets launched during third phase would measure atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure. (Delhi Domestic Service, FBis-India, 6/22/72, 01)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota auroral studies experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
Skylab statistics were released by NASA. Spacecraft, to be launched by two-stage Saturn V rocket in spring 1973, would contain 370 cu m (13 000 cu ft) of working and living space. More than 13 000 individual items weighing total of 5000 kg (11 000 lbs) for long-duration space mission would be stowed, including 910 kg (2000 lbs) of food, more than 2700 kg (6000 lbs) of water, 60 changes of astronaut jackets and shirts and trousers, 210 pairs of shorts, 30 constant-wear garments, 15 pairs of boots and gloves, 55 bars of soap, 96 kg (210 lbs) of towels, 1800 urine and fecal bags, 156 rolls of teleprint paper, 104 film magazines, medical kit, 108 pens and pencils, and vacuum cleaner. (nasa Special Release)
European Sounding Rocket Range (esrange) in Kiruna, Sweden, was handed over officially by European Space Research Organization to Swedish authorities. Ownership had been transferred to Sweden following December decision by esro Council to abandon sounding rocket activities. (SR, 9/72)
Soviet newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya had published article on “curious stories” from Cape Kennedy, Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin reported. Article had said angry alligator had tripped alarm system protecting rocket at launch site few seconds before launch; Polaris rocket had exploded about 0.8 km (0.5 mi) from launch site causing bush fire that frightened poisonous snakes into buildings; and woodpecker near electronic equipment had caused launch delay. (P Bull, 6/25/72)	'
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian particles and fields experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N.Mex., carrying Univ. of Colorado solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Univ. of Colorado solar ultraviolet spectrometer. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not satisfied. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to measure composition of neutral atmosphere between 95 and 125 km (59 and 78 mi). Structural failure of undetermined origin caused vehicle to break up three seconds after launch, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Thumba, India, carrying Indian langmuir probe experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. announced appointment of Gen. Vladimir F. Tolubko, rocket specialist serving near Chinese border, as commander of Soviet strategic missile forces. (Shabad, NYT, 5/10/72)
Philippines successfully launched Bong Bong II, its first liquid-propellant rocket. Rocket was successfully retrieved from South China Sea. {SBD, 3/22/72, 121)
Boosted Areas I launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Houston payload to 57-km (35.4-mi) altitude. Primary objective was to supplement comprehensive investigation of auroral zone disturbances conducted by Black Brant carrying Univ. of Texas payload and launched 60 sec later. Secondary objective was to study auroral phenomena in region above altitude already investigated, using balloons, and below altitude investigated, using rockets. Rocket and instrumentation performed nominally although one of two telemetry receivers provided marginal response. Recovery could not be effected because winds blew payload over Hudson Bay. NASA Black Brant, launched from Churchill Research Range 60 sec after Boosted Areas, reached 240-km (149.1-mi) altitude. Primary objective of Univ. of Texas payload was to provide complete data on auroral precipitation events, analyze particle spectrum over wide energy range and observe spectrum in and above aurora, and observe optical emissions and ionospheric parameters. Rocket performed nominally but only one of nine experiments was successful because of faulty nosecone ejection mechanism. Nosecone did not deploy until descent portion of trajectory. Payload was recovered. (NASA Rpt SRL; NASA proj off)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying National Center for Atmospheric Research aeronomy experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not satisfied. (SR list)
Collection of sketches and notes on rockets and spacecraft and original manuscript on astronomy by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA. Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, were placed on permanent exhibition at Alabama Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. Display opening coincided with rocket pioneer’s 60th birthday. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 3/24/72)
Four sounding rockets in a series of six [see Jan. 30 and Feb. 8] were launched in Canada to investigate growth and decay of aurora phenomena. NASA launched two Super Areas sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range carrying a Univ. of Houston payload to supplement investigation of auroral zone disturbances, with emphasis on the explosive phase of auroral substorms, and to study auroral phenomena in the region of atmosphere above that investigated by balloons and below the altitude investigated by rockets. The first rocket reached 84-km	(52.2-mi) altitude. Probable parachute-system malfunction caused rapid descent and rendered most data unusable. The second reached 81.2-km (50.5-mi) altitude; rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The Canadian National Research Council launched two Black Brants. A Black Brant IIIB launched from Gillam, Manitoba, carried a 63.5-kg (140.0-lb) payload to 191.7 km (119.1 mi) to investigate plasma properties of upper-atmosphere radio aurora plasma. Black Brant VB launched from Churchill Research Range carried a 175-kg (386-lb) Univ. of Belgium payload to 325 km (202 mi) to investigate the expansive phase of an aurora storm. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The third Black Brant was postponed because of dissipation of the aurora substorm into which it was to be launched [see Feb. 8]. (nasa Rpts srl; nrc prog off)
NASA launched an Aerobee 170A sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a California Institute of Technology payload to a 199.6-km (124-mi) altitude to map extended x-ray sources using multiwire proportional counters. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying a Norwegian Defense Research Establishment magnetospheric physics experiment to a 254.3-km (158-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island carrying a Univ. of Illinois payload to a 184.3-km (114.5-mi) altitude. The objective was to measure electron temperature and electron density profile of intense blanketing of the sporadic E-region at 100- to 120-km (60- to 75-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. All experimental objectives appeared to have been achieved, (nasa Rpt srl)
The Canadian National Research Council launched the sixth and final sounding rocket in a series to investigate growth and decay of auroras [see Jan. 30 and Feb. 2], The series had included two NASA launches. A Black Brant IVB carried a 84-kg (185-lb) payload from Churchill Research Range to 729-km (453-mi) altitude to investigate the quiet pre-breakup of the early evening aurora. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nrc prog off)
NASA launched a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska, carrying a Univ. of Alaska aeronomy and barium-cloud-release experiment to a 552.0-km (343-mi) altitude. The cloud release was observed and tracked by ground camera sites and the Skylab 4 crew, launched Nov. 16 to man the Orbital Workshop. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
The Atomic Energy Commission announced it would propose issuance of a construction permit and operating license to the Univ. of Utah for a research reactor on its Salt Lake City campus, (aec release R-101) March 13:	nasa Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson testified on the shuttle technology programs before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during FY 1974 authorization hearings: With the shuttle under development, the program had been converted from preparing technology to assisting in development. With this transition, “we have reduced in fiscal year 1973, and will further reduce in fiscal year 1974, our rate of Shuttle-oriented resource investments,” but wind tunnels and arc jets would play a key Tole in shuttle development. Aerodynamic and heat-transfer investigations at subsonic through hypersonic speeds in simulated shuttle ascent would focus on effects of the rocket plume and separation of rocket engines. Wind-tunnel and structural laboratory vibration tests of scale models would provide vehicle dynamic-response characteristics. Additional tests in high-temperature wind tunnels would determine structural behavior and integrity of thermal protection systems and supporting structure for simulated earth-atmosphere-entry environments. About 14 wind tunnels would be used in the program. Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology in OAST, testified on power production for long-distance space communications: “For future spacecraft requiring 500-2000 electrical watts, our work is focused on the Brayton dynamic conversion system. This system uses thermal energy from the isotopic sources to heat a working gas which expands through a turbogenerator to produce electricity at four to five times the approximately 6 percent efficiency of current rtg’s [radioisotope thermoelectric generators]. Work in fiscal 1974 will be focused on the design and fabrication of the components of an experimental conversion system. Our technology goal is to demonstrate 50,000 hours of operation.” (Transcript)
A new low-cost high-performance sounding rocket was being developed by Bristol Aerojet Ltd. and Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial of Spain, Spaceflight announced. The two-stage rocket, INTA 300, would lift a 50-kg (110-lb) payload to 320 km (200 mi) with low dispersion. First test flights would be held in 1974. (SF, 2/73, 69—70)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a National Center for Atmospheric Research aeron-omy payload to a 111.4-km (69.2-mi) altitude. The rocket and strumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched three sounding rockets, two from Wallops Island and one from Andoeya, Norway. A Nike-Apache launched from Wallops carried a Univ. of Illinois payload to a 157-km (97.5-mi) altitude. The launch was the second of three to measure ionospheric properties on three kinds of anomalous days: (1) “L,” a day with very low electron densities in the 70- to 80-km (40- to 50-mi) region and a 10-day minimal storm activity preceding; (2) “Hi,” a day with very high electron densities and the same altitude and magnetic storm prerequisites; and (3) “H2,” a day with very high electron densities in the same region with two or three days of major magnetic disturbance and magnetic storm aftereffects. The Nike-Apache was launched on an Hi day and measured electron densities, temperatures, and collision frequencies. The rocket underperformed but the scientific objectives were satisfied. The first launch in the series had been Dec. 5, 1972. A Super Areas, launched from Wallops Island 34 min after the NikeApache, carried a Pennsylvania State Univ. payload to a 95.1-km (59.1-mi) altitude to collect data on positive and negative ion conductivities. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. A Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Andoeya, Norway, carrying a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration experiment to a 280.0-km (174-mi) altitude to collect data on energetic fields and particles and to study the aurora. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl; gsfc proj off)
nasa launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Pittsburgh payload to a 117.1-km (72.8-mi) altitude. The experiment studied mesopheric composition with an optical mass spectrometer measuring both the minor atomic and the molecular species in the presence of major atmosphere constituents. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt Srl)
nasa launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island carrying a Univ. of Illinois payload to a 187.8-km (116.7-mi) altitude. The objective was to measure electron temperature and electron density profile of intense blanketing of the sporadic E-region at 100 to 120 km (60 to 75 mi). Data would be compared with data from a Nike-Apache launched Aug. 3. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. All experimental objectives appeared to have been achieved. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Columbia Univ. x-ray astronomy experiment to a 175.9-km (109.3-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily but the telemetry data were severely compromised by radio frequency interference. (gsfc proj off)
The Canadian National Research Council launched the first in a series of six sounding rockets, including two to be launched by NASA Feb. 2, to investigate growth and decay of auroras. A Black Brant IVB launched from Churchill Research Range carried a 84-kg (185-lb) payload to 714-km (443.7-mi) altitude to investigate the quiet prebreakup of the early evening aurora. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nrc prog off)
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying a Univ. of Pittsburgh aeronomy experiment to a 724.2-km (450-mi) altitude. The rocket and experiment performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched two sounding rockets, one from Sweden and one from White Sands Missile Range. A Nike-Tomahawk launched from Kiruna, Sweden, carried a Swedish Space Corp. aeronomy experiment to a 180.2-km (112-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. A Black Brant VC was launched from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of California astronomy experiment to a 212.4-km (132-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily but the payload was damaged in recovery, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched an Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. solar physics experiment to a 245.3-km (152.4-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying a Univ. of Michigan aeronomy experiment to a 179.9-km (111.8-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (gsfc proj off)
NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flats. Alaska, carrying a Univ. of Minnesota and Univ. of New Hampshire auroral studies experiment. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily but the tracking radar lost the signal at 55 sec. (gsfc proj off) March 17:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, reported on NASA’s contribution toward environmental improvement, in a speech before the 37th Annual Meeting of the National Wildlife Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “No part of the changing, moving face of the globe we inhabit is free of human influence or removed from human interest. We therefore can afford to leave no part unmonitored. From forest fires to hurricanes, from the slow erosion of granite hills to the short-lived volcanic eruption or avalanche, from the atmospheric particulates to crop diseases to oil spills—we need to know the condition of our environment, minute by minute.” From this knowledge would flow the interrelated set of local, national, and international measures “that will make our planet what we want it to be.” The key was “to know how they will be deployed and how they will be used. I personally believe that the greatest lag today is in the development of mature social and political institutions to collect, manage, and act on the whole new level of environmental information we are able to generate.” The major impact of current activities, largely data collection by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by NASA July 23, 1972), would be “to force the development of a new level of maturity on society.” NASA’s jobs were to extract, display, and use the information its tools could provide. “We must develop and expand natural and predictive models of the new environment ... to provide . . . real assessments so necessary in real-world decision making.” The larger job was the “development of competent local, regional, national, and global institutions that will build and operate such systems.” (Text)
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Natal, Brazil, carrying a Univ. of California and Max Planck Institute ionospheric physics experiment. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 23:	Recent discoveries had brought the number of kinds of molecules detected in the Milky Way galaxy to 23, the New York Times reported. Many were precursors to the chemistry of life and almost all were termed “organic” compounds because it had long been thought that they could be produced only by living organisms. While it had later been shown that they could be synthesized, scientists had been surprised that the simpler molecules, at least, had been formed in deep-space vacuum. Univ. of Minnesota scientist Dr. Philip M. Solomon had said, “The question of how far chemical evolution in the interstellar medium has proceeded toward biochemistry is not yet answered, but it has clearly gone much further than anyone would have estimated five years ago.” (Sullivan, NYT, 11/23/73, 1)
NASA announced plans for a joint mission with Great Britain in June 1975 to launch an x-ray telescope on a British Skylark sounding rocket to study the Puppis A supernova remnant. NASA would design, fabricate, and assemble the flight telescope; the British would integrate the payload into the sounding rocket and provide the high-resolution position-sensitive detector, launch facilities, and operations. The combination of the Wolter Type I glancing incidence telescope and the detector would permit the structural details of the regions responsible for the supernova’s soft x-ray emission to be studied with unprecedented resolution, (nasa Release 74-179)
Lockheed Propulsion Co. asked the General Accounting Office to set aside NASA’s 20 Nov. 1973 selection of Thiokol Chemical Corp. for negotiation of a $106-million contract to design and develop the space shuttle’s solid-fueled rocket motor. Lockheed charged that it had an edge in technical evaluation of the engine and that it had been the low bidder before NASA had made “improper adjustments” in its bid. Lockheed also maintained Thiokol’s transportation costs from Utah to Florida would be higher and that Thiokol’s proposed design would not meet program objectives without major revision, (latns, Today, 10 Jan 74; NASA Release 74r-130)
France reluctantly decided to cut back construction of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner and to scrap production of the Mercure short-range twin-jet airliner, at a special meeting of Premier Pierre Messmer and five ministers. France had been demanding production of eight Concorde aircraft but would now accept as few as six in the knowledge that, with a Labor Party victory in the 28 Feb. British elections, the U.K. might be willing to scrap the entire project. The press said the French decision came after a report from France’s rocket testing center suggesting a $90-million fuel-tank modification to boost range at the expense of reduced transatlantic loads. A suggested 10% increase in engine thrust, requiring 8% more wing area at a cost of as much as $400 million, was believed rejected at the meeting. The decision to scrap the 120-seat, 1200-km range Mercure was taken after an initial production run of 10 aircraft and writeoff costs reported by the press at $120 million. Competition from the already established DC-9s and Boeing 727s and 737s was too great for the Mercure, whose one buyer was Air Inter, the internal French airline. (Randal, W Post, 17 Feb 74, Al)
Soviet scientists told U.S. scientists and journalists touring Soviet scientific facilities that they had successfully used) a rocket engine and gigantic magnets to produce large amounts of less expensive electricity with less pollution than other methods. Called magnetohydrodynamics and first proved feasible in the U;S. in the early 1960s, the new system was one of the cooperative programs between the two countries. j A recent test that produced 12.4 mw of power for 1.5 hr wa£ the first time the system had achieved that power and duration. Based on the knowledge-that electricity could be generated by passing a charged gas through a magnetic field, the Soviet experiment burned 55 kg per sec of natural gas with oxygen-enriched air into which a potassium compound was injected to create a plasma of positive and negative particles; when passed between the poles of a great magnet, the charges separated onto electrodes and created large voltages. The Washington Post later reported that the Soviets were committed to budding, by 1981, a 1000-mw magnetohydrodynamic plant with expected conversion efficiency of 50%. Conventional steam-turbine plants using oil or coal for fuel operate at 40% efficiency, those using nuclear fuel at 33%. (Toth, LA Times News Service, WPost, 28 March 75, A3)
After spending some $1.5 billion over more than 10 years, the United States, through the loss of its will to go forward in space, gave up on this next generation of rockets even though the nuclear technology worked,” Gary L. Bennett said in a letter to the editor of the Washington Star. Noting that U.S. basic rocket technology was close to 40 yrs old, Bennett wrote, “We have shown no inclination to develop new rocket concepts despite the fact that these concepts have definite terrestrial advantages in terms of energy and employment. It’s sad to think that we came so close to realizing our destiny in space and then we gave it all up for a senseless enervating policy of introspection.” (W Star, 30 June 75)
NASA was conducting design studies and component testing for an experimental laser-energy system using a nuclear-fission reactor fueled with gaseous uranium or a gaseous uranium compound such as hexafluoride, Dr. Karl Thom said in an article released by NASA. Whereas conventional laser power used various processes of energy conversion that required costly equipment and resulted in net loss of energy, a nuclear system could produce large amounts of high-grade power very cheaply and efficiently. Some scientists were using various nuclear-powered lasers for experiments, but most used systems that transferred energy from external reactors to the laser gas within the laser tube. NASA with its interest in gaseous fuel reactors as high-performance space power and propulsion systems, was looking at a more efficient system in which the fission fragments that energize laser gas were energized within the laser tube itself creating, at fission, a powerful chain reaction. Dr. Thom said that, in combination with the research on nuclear-pumped lasers, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientists were testing gaseous fuel reactors using components, reflectors, and controls salvaged from the nuclear rocket program. If the system proved practical “a new era of nuclear energy utilization will begin, in space and on Earth.” Space engineers could create a nuclear-powered laser station in earth orbit to beam power via lasers to various customers in space, to other space probes for propulsion, to lunar bases for their power needs, and to earth for clean and abundant energy. (NASA Release 75—169)
High-temperature core reactors, fueled by fissioning uranium plasmas, could be used to “burn up” or eliminate radioactive wastes produced in the fission process, NASA announced. In a NASA-sponsored program to develop advanced nuclear-powered rocket propulsion, scientists had found that long-lived radioactive wastes could be transformed into harmless materials by bombarding them with neutrons. The uranium-compound fuel could be circulated and returned to the reactor to burn up the materials produced in the fuel. Computer analyses showed that a gaseous fuel reactor could establish a balance in rates of production and elimination of the waste produced after 3 yr of operation; once this equilibrium was established, no additional long-lived radioactive wastes would be produced. The gaseous fuel reactor also could be designed to burn wastes from conventional nuclear-fission reactors. (NASA Release 75—44; Schneider et al., Nuclear Technology, Sept 75, 34—50)
NASA launched a two-stage solid-propellant Nike-Hawk sounding rocket from Wallops Island, carrying an 84-kg payload to a 164-km altitude. The flight, to demonstrate successful mating of a surplus Hawk engine with the Nike M—88 first stage, also tested a newly developed recovery system for both the single-stage Hawk and the Nike-Hawk vehicle. The system, designed for both land or air recovery, could return up to 136 kg of payload by parachute. The sounding rocket carried a Univ. of Pittsburgh high-resolution photoelectron spectrometer to measure daytime photoelectron energy distribution with a very high-energy resolution. The payload impacted 178 km downrange and was retrieved by the research vessel Annan-dale. (WSC Release 75—10)
Soviet and French scientists had completed the “Araks” study of the earth’s magnetically interlinked points, Izvestiya reported, by observing what happened when a bundle of electrons was artificially injected into the magnetosphere. French Eridan sounding rockets— equipped with electron accelerators, plasma generators, and instruments for measuring and recording wave radiation and particle streams—were launched on 26 Jan. and 15 Feb. 1975 from Kerguelen Island. During the ascent the accelerator emitted electron impluses at various angles to the line of magnetic force while the plasma generator emitted a stream of cesium plasma to compensate for the positive charge of the rocket. At the same time Soviet and French specialists in Arkhangelsk Oblast made optical observations using supersensitive TV installations, photometers, and electron optical-image intensifiers. Radar and radio spectrographs in Kostroma and Vologda Oblasts observed the dispersal of radio waves and radio emission in the area where the electrons penetrated the dense strata of the atmosphere. From the Araks data, scientists hoped to determine the true position of the magnetically interlinked spot and to learn more of the interaction between the electron bundle and its medium. (Izvestiya, FBIS— Sov., 13 March 75, E2) ’
Japan’s N booster launched, from Tanegashima launch site, its first payload—Kiku, an 83-kg spacecraft designed to measure launch vibrations and spacecraft temperatures in space. Kiku entered orbit with a 1104-km apogee, 977-km perigee, 106-min period, and 47° inclination. The launch vehicle consisted of a Rocketdyne MB— 3 first-stage engine, modified from the U.S. Thor program, with three Thiokol Corp. Castor 2 solid-rocket strap-ons. The second stage, designated LE—3, had been designed by Japan’s National Space Development Agency with Rocketdyne assistance. The third stage was a Thiokol TE—364— 4 solid-rbcket motor. (GSFC WklySSR, 4—10 Sept 75; Av Wk, 22 Sept 75, 50)
Arnold Engineering Development Center was studying the feasibility of the secondary burning—called external burning—of fuel-rich exhaust to increase the efficiency of solid rocket motors. The concept called for the diversion of the exhaust of burning propellant through ports that ring the rear end of the motor casing, and its injection at right angles into the airstream. Miniature nozzles in each port would accelerate the exhaust gas to sonic speed. Turbulent mixing of the fuel-rich sonic gas and the supersonic airflow would cause a secondary combustion, increasing pressure at the base of the motor and overall thrust of the propulsion system. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 12)
A 3-yr International Magnetospheric Study that began 1 Jan., sponsored by the International Council of Scientific Unions, would be coordinated by a steering committee set up by the Special Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics, chaired by Juan G. Roederer, professor and senior research physicist at the University of Denver. The 20 or more countries participating in the study had already submitted more than 1000 individual research programs, including ground-based, balloon, rocket, aircraft, and spacecraft experiments as well as networks of magnetic, auroral, and other geophysical observatories. Among major spacecraft projects planned by the European Space Agency, Japan, the Soviet Union, and the U.S. would be use of ESA’s Geos spacecraft in geostationary orbit. ESA and NASA would join in an International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE) program to measure properties of different parts of the magnetosphere simultaneously. About 40 other spacecraft launched before and during the study period were expected to contribute sun-earth physics data to the study. Roederer told the National Academy of Sciences that the international coordination differed from that used in the International Geophysical Year, relying on interlocking spacecraft missions and quick and active exchange of information and scheduling. (NAS News Report, Mar 76, 1) April 1976
Gerald A. Mossinghoff, NASA’s Assistant General Counsel for general law since Jan. 1974, was appointed Deputy General Counsel effective this date. He joined NASA in 1963 as a patent attorney in the Office of General Counsel; in 1966 he was named director of the Office of Legislative Planning at the U.S. Patent Office, and returned to NASA in Dec. 1967 as Director of Legislative Liaison. He received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1971. A registered patent attorney, Mossinghoff had received a B.S. in electrical engineering from St. Louis University and a J.D. with honors from George Washington University. (Admr.’s announcement, 31 Mar 76) During March: Launch of RCA’s Satcom 2 this month was the second launch of a Delta vehicle using 9 large Castor IV solid rocket boosters instead of the standard 9 Castor IIs. (First to use the larger rockets was the Delta that launched Satcom 1 on 12 Dec. 75.) RCA had underwritten development expenses of adapting the NASA “workhorse” Delta to use the larger rockets, in a unique NASA-customer-launch vehicle contractor arrangement that had enabled RCA to design its domestic comsat to be the heaviest to date without having to use a larger and more expensive launch vehicle. The Castor IV boosters would permit a Delta to put into synchronous orbit a payload weighing about 900 kg, compared to about 700 kg for a vehicle equipped with the Castor IIs. NASA was thinking of the more powerful Delta as a standard launch vehicle for other customers who could use the increase in permissible weight of about 29% in many areas of spacecraft design: weather forecasting, scientific exploration, and communications. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 1)
According to a story in the Chicago Tribune, the USSR on an undisclosed date had fired a submarine-launched missile farther than ever before. An SSN-8 missile had landed in mid-Pacific slightly more than 9000 km from its launching point, presumably a submarine in the Barents Sea. (The longest-range U.S. submarine-launched missile could reach just under 4700 km.) U.S. intelligence sources were reported unsure whether the additional range of the SSN-8 resulted from extra rocket power or a lighter warhead; SSN-8 had previously been identified as a single-warhead weapon used in the USSR’s 17 new Delta-class missile submarines. Commenting on the report, the New York Times said the Soviets’ test shot was “good news paradoxically” for the U.S. and the whole world: in contrast to large land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles, the submarine-based missiles were neither large enough nor accurate enough for effective first-strike counter-silo use, and their concealment and mobility would make them ideal second-strike weapons useful only as deterrents. As long as the USSR had no submarine-launched missile, there was little possibility of lowering the ceilings set in a previous agreement to a level that would head off a Soviet first-strike capability. The ceilings had allowed each side to have 2400 strategic bombers and missiles, of which 1320 could carry multiple warheads; if the USSR should agree to deploy half its multiple-warhead missiles at sea as the U.S. did, such an agreement could eliminate the possibility of either side’s constructing a high-confidence first-strike force and would help ensure stability of the nuclear balance for a long time. The NYT favored such an agreement, which would call a halt to ongoing missile programs. (C Trib, 4 Dec 76, 2-5; NYT, 6 Dec 76, 32)
A British Aircraft Corp. team had successfully launched the second of a series of Skylark 12 high-altitude research rockets from the Andoya Range in arctic Norway to investigate auroral activity for the U.K. Science Research Council and other groups investigating the intense phenomena above the Arctic Circle, the London Press Assn, reported in a broadcast. The rocket reached an altitude of more than 680 km, sending scientific data to ground receivers for 14 min of the flight. First launch of the new three-stage Skylark, capable of carrying payloads to three times the altitude of earlier versions, took place 21 Nov. (FBIS, London Press Assn., 17 Dec 76)
Astronomers at the University of Massachusetts had clocked pulsars— superdense remnants of collapsed stars—at speeds over 2 million kmh, making them the fastest movers in earth’s galaxy, the National Science Foundation reported. Some of the objects exceeded galactic escape velocity, meaning they could pull free from the Milky Way and spin off into intergalactic space. First discovered in 1968, pulsars were defined as dense bodies in which a sun-size mass had been compressed into a sphere 16 km in diameter. The material was said to be so dense that a teaspoonful would weigh a billion tons. With its collapse, the body would spin increasingly faster and its magnetic field would increase in intensity; the newly formed pulsar would send out electromagnetic signals that pulsed like a radio beacon with each turn (hence the name pulsar). The high velocities were thought to be caused by the intense magnetic fields, up to a trillion times that of earth’s magnetic field: a slight displacement of the pulsar’s magnetic field could release large amounts of electromagnetic energy in one direction, upon which the pulsar would move in the opposite direction as would a rocket. (Pasadena Star-News, 9 Apr 76, 5)
The 2000th major missile launch from Cape Canaveral took place at 4:30 pm EDT when an Army Pershing missile was launched by troops of Battery C, 3d Battalion, 84th Field Artillery, of the U.S. 7th Army from Europe. First launch from “the Cape” had occurred 26 yr previously on 24 July 1950, when Bumper 8, a captured German V-2 rocket capped by a WAC Corporal second stage, lifted off the then sparsely settled area. (KSC Spaceport News, 12 Nov 76, 1)
Tass announced that the USSR expedition Polar Experiment North-76 had begun work in the high latitudes of the Arctic. Using 10 scientific ships, as well as planes, radar, and installations for rocket probing of upper atmosphere layers, a team of scientists would observe ice floes in the polar basin, including the geographic North Pole. The expedition, said to be the largest in the history of Arctic exploration, would simultaneously determine the heat balance deep in the ocean, in the atmosphere, and in floating ice in the North Pole area. Ice floes in the polar basin had been found to forecast climate changes in the densely populated and economically developed areas of the northern hemisphere. From the beginning of the century to the 1940s, the floes had receded from continental coastlines, indicating a relative rise in global temperature; they had begun to appear further south again, indicating a cold phase, and the appearance had been correlated with difficulties in northern navigation and fisheries and unusually snowy winters in western Europe, droughts in Asia, and unexpected cyclones and hurricanes. (FBIS, Tass in English, 7 Apr 76)
NASA announced that the Soviet ship expected to participate in comparisons of atmosphere-measuring instruments [see July 1] would arrive off the Virginia coast about Aug. 7 to serve as the platform for USSR rocket launches. The tests would consist of paired launches of about 22 U.S. Super Lokis and about 33 USSR M-lOOBs, plus 6 Super Loki sphere systems to be launched by Wallops; statistical evaluation would require from 14 to 22 successful paired launches. (WFC Release 77-8; NASA Release 77-151)
NASA announced it would conduct sounding-rocket tests with the USSR Hydromet Service for 2wk in Aug. to compare U.S. and Soviet measurements of upper-air temperatures and detect discrepancies in their meteorological instruments. NASA would launch a series of rockets from Wallops Flight Center and the Hydromet representatives would launch rockets from the research ship Akademik Korolev off the U.S. east coast. Under a 1971 agreement on space sciences and applications, the two nations in 1972 had begun exchange of data that had shown the temperature field in the eastern hemisphere to be consistently colder than that of the western hemisphere. Both sides had evaluated their rocket systems for sources of error; direct comparisons made in 1973 at Kourou, French Guiana, had again shown discrepancies in temperature and wind data. Improvements in instruments and techniques since 1973 had made further comparisons necessary, NASA said. (NASA Release 77-133)
MSFC announced it would conduct on Dec. 1 at the Natl. Parachute Test Range in Calif, the third airdrop test of a parachute system designed to recover the Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters. Royce Mitchell of MSFC said the test article, a 48 0001b (21 773kg) dummy booster carried under the wing of a B-52 aircraft, would encounter 30% more dynamic pressure than the system should experience during a real deployment. To test the durability of the drogue chute that would open first to pull out the main chutes, fins added to the test article would increase its speed and reduce drag. The drogue would deploy at a speed of about 420mph (676kph) 20sec after the plane released the dummy booster at an estimated speed of 230mph (370kph) and an altitude of about 19 400ft (5913m). The 2 boosters to be used on each Shuttle launch would separate after burnout at an altitude of about 27mi (43.5km), descending slowly by parachute into the ocean for recovery and reuse. (MSFC Release 77-221)
MSFC announced it had successfully tested the recovery system for the Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters June 15 at the Natl. Parachute Test Range. Engineers had used an SRB simulator, a drop-test vehicle weighing more them 21 773kg (48 0001b) released from beneath the wing of a B-52 aircraft at a speed of about 85 meters per sec (190mph) and an altitude of about 5500m (18 000ft). Primary purpose of this test was to measure the maximum load on the drogue chute that would open first to stabilize the vehicle and pull out the other chutes. The measured load, about 114 000kg (a quarter of a million lb), was about that expected. The next test, scheduled for late July or early Aug., would measure loads on the other parachutes. Each Shuttle launch would use two SRBs, jettisoned at about 43km (27mi) altitude to descend by parachute into the ocean and be towed to shore for reuse. (MSFC Release 77-115)
KSC reported successful conclusion of the first open-sea tests on Shuttle retrieval equipment staged Dec. 5-16 from Port Everglades, in strong winds and seas from 3 to 6ft that had hampered operations both wks. Test manager Bob Everette said the hugh waves created conditions vital to the test although “it was hard even to stand up on the boat” and the aft section of the 158-ft offshore-support vessel was often under a ft of water. The first group of tests simulated parachute recovery; retrieval of the 6 main parachutes and 2 drogues would use 2 support vessels, each responsible for recovering 3 main chutes and a drogue. The second series of tests was to verify performance of the nozzle plug in open waters. The plug was designed to “swim out” from the ship to a booster casing floating vertically, dive to the bottom of the casing, secure itself to the aft portion and pump out the water. The booster, rotating to a horizontal position, would be ready for tow to the Spaceport for refurbishing. The tests were also to confirm the deck layout of the support vessels and how they kept position while the plug was docking with the booster. Everette said retrieval gear would be modified according to the test results. More ocean tests would follow about lmo before the first launch of the Shuttle, pre-mission exercises to train personnel who would work on the recovery. Everette praised the teamwork of the support agencies taking part in the test: staff from KSC and MSFC; Tracor Marine, operator of the support vessel; Everglades Towing Co.; the Naval Ocean Systems Center; U.S. Booster, Inc.; Battelle Memorial Institute; Pioneer Parachute Co.; the U.S. Navy supervisor of salvage; and Martin Marietta. (Spaceport News, Dec 23/77, 4) •
Wallops Flight Center announced it would welcome visitors to the rocket launching facilities on Wallops Island Apr. 23-24 as part of a special observance by federal activities in the area. Assateague Natl. Seashore Park, Chincoteague Coast Guard Base, Chincoteague Natl. Wildlife Refuge, the Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Wallops Flight Center had all planned special exhibits or tours. Visitors to Wallops Island could drive their own cars to see launch pads, rocket storage structures, long-range tracking radars, weather towers, blockhouses, rocket assembly shops, actual launch vehicles, and related range facilities. Cameras would be welcome. The main NASA base would not be included in the visit. (WFC Release 77-2)
MSFC reported it had purchased 5 large solar collectors to heat an exhibit at the Ala. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The collectors would provide 70% of the heat for the Lunar Odyssey, a space voyage simulation in a modified Saturn launch vehicle. (MSFC Release 77-65)
MSFC announced receipt from Bendix Corp., Teterboro, N.J., of the first two integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle’s solid fuel rocket boosters. Each SRB would contain 2 electronic assemblies to control communications and internal power distribution. (NASA Release 77-68)
Analysis of telemetry data and flight films from the SPAR III mission launched Dec. 14 at White Sands Missile Range indicated successful performance of the electromagnetic levitation device designed to provide the first “containerless” way to process materials in space, MSFC announced. Containerless processing, in which materials could be suspended, melted, and resolidified without touching a container, was thought to permit a degree of purity never before achieved in high-temperature processing, as the material in a conventional container would always exhibit contamination in some degree from the container itself. Apparatus used on SPAR III to process beryllium satisfied all operational requirements, like two other items in the payload: thermal migration of bubbles, and liquid mixing. An apparatus anomaly resulted in only “probable” success of an experiment on epitaxial growth; a fifth experiment, on coalescing of viscous bodies, apparently failed but would be carried again on a later flight. SPAR III rocket flights could offer 5min of nearweightlessness in suborbital coast. (MSFC Release 77-23)
Today newspaper reported that two launch failures in Sept, at Cape Canaveral (explosions of an Altas Centaur and a Delta rocket) had altered the schedule to include launch of a Meteosat Nov. 17 on a Delta; an Intelsat Dec. 8 on an Altas Centaur; and the Japanese comsat (originally scheduled for launch Dec. 8) Dec. 14 on another Delta. ESA’s Meteosat, originally scheduled to go on Nov. 15, had been put off 2 days for further checkout of the Delta; the Intelsat was put off from Nov. 10 to Dec. 8 for further checkout of the Atlas Centaur. The 15 missions scheduled for launch from the Cape next yr had risen to 17: a FltSatCom launch for the Navy originally scheduled for Dec. 15 had been pushed forward to 1978, and a launch of ESA’s OTS backup had been added to replace the one that failed. (Today, Nov 5/77, 1A)
The USAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory had successfully test-fired small solid-fuel rocket motors having nozzles molded into the end of the propellant grain instead of externally mounted, AvWk reported. Use of integral nozzles would reduce costs of manufacture and would allow more propellant per rocket. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
MSFC announced it had begun the first of a series of tests on the external propellant tank of the Shuttle to verify its ability to stand the structural stresses of launch. The proportions of the tank required conduct of the test in phases; the first tests would check out the intertank structure joining the two main segments of the external tank and containing the forward attach points for the two solid-fuel rocket boosters carried by the Shuttle. The heaviest loading would occur at these points, both while the Shuttle was on its pad and while the boosters were thrusting during flight. The tests would apply upward loads as great as 4.35 million lb to the intertank cylinder subjected to opposing downward forces. The loads would come from computer-actuated hydraulic jacks, 28 on the forward end of the test article and as many as 10 in the center section. Chuck Verschoore, MSFC test engineer, said the forces exerted by the jacks could simulate bending and twisting effects as well as straight up-and-down loading, and could go as high as 140% of the tank’s design limits. Test engineers would receive data from as many as 2800 measurement channels. Follow-on tests would check the external tank segments containing the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen propellants. (MSFC Release 77-149)
MSFC reported that parachutes to recover the Space Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRB) were undergoing dynamic testing at Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, Colo. Scheduled for completion Mar. 31, the tests simulated in-flight parachute deployment from the SRB. (MSFC Release 77-44)
The Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science at the Univ. of Tokyo announced postponement (until Feb. 15 or later) of the launch of a satellite-carrying MU-3H rocket, because of mechanical trouble. An inspection had revealed problems with the rocket’s attitude-control system, the announcement said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 1/77)
MSFC reported that a new pattern of painting Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters for orbital flight tests in 1979 and 1980 could save the agency an estimated $300 000. The center’s system dynamics laboratory had changed the 6 black stripes running the length of the giant motors to 4 large rectangles in a spiral pattern that would let engineers measure roll and pitch rates of the boosters on reentry. (MSFC Release 77-150)
MSFC announced completion of pressure and structural-load tests on the liquid hydrogen tank that would be part of the Shuttle external tank being built at the Michoud assembly facility by Martin Marietta Aerospace. The tests to certify that the tank met design and manufacturing standards included filling the tank with nitrogen at 42psi for 14hr and applying hydraulic loads as high as 600tons where the orbiter and solid-fuel rocket boosters would be attached. Largest of 3 major elements of the external tank, the hydrogen container about 30m (97ft) long and 8.3m (27.6ft) in diameter would now go for cleaning, corrosion protection, and insulating. (MSFC Release 77-83)
Researchers from the Soviet ship Akademik Korolev, anchored off the coast of Virginia near Wallops Flight Center for joint U.S.-USSR rocket launches, had discovered the charms of the Eastern Shore and were enjoying their contacts with the natives, according to reports in the Washington Star and Washington Post. The meteorological soundings had been completed by the last week of August, the newspapers said, and the 134 Russians waiting on the ship for results to be correlated had time to visit the mainland on trips planned by local officials in cooperation with NASA. Coming ashore in groups of about 50, the visitors (mostly young) had seen Pocomoke City, Md., a small U.S. city; the village of Chincoteague, Va.; the Assateague wildlife refuge; and a tour of Accomack county that included a visit to a private home, a farm, and a chicken-processing plant. Through NASA interpreters, the visitors asked scores of questions on topics from labor relations at the plant to the history of local buildings. They had joined in a Frisbee game with local youngsters, eaten largely of the local seafood, and bought out the entire beer supply of a local general store. Capt. Oleg Rostovsev, commanding officer of the 409ft research ship, said he had found the visit “a very interesting experience.” His assistant for scientific affairs, Evgeny Nelepov, said that many of the researchers had visited U.S. cities before, but that major cities everywhere had become more and more alike, “losing the individual characteristics and cultural tradition ... To find these national characteristics one must go to the small villages and rural areas where traditions and local culture endures. That is why this visit here has meant so much to us.” The Russians had held a press tour and reception on the Akademik Korolev as a thank you before the ship departed for Baltimore. (WStar, Aug 28/77, D-1; W Post, Sept 1/77, A-l)
LeRC announced it had awarded a $2 895 750 contract to Teledyne Industries, Inc., of Northridge, Calif., for management, engineering, and repair services to Centaur digital computers and remote multiplexers. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract would run for lyr beginning Nov. 1. The digital computer would work with the Centaur inertial guidance system to compute and adjust flight without ground command, permitting the Centaur to deliver its payload to a preselected orbit; the remote multiplexer would work with the digital computer to supply inflight data during launch. Centaur, first U.S. liquid hydrogen/liquid oxygen high-energy rocket, had been a second stage on both Atlas and Titan III. Recently it had assisted the launch of the Voyagers, and was scheduled during the coming yr to launch several commercial comsats and the Pioneer mission to Venus. LeRC would manage the Atlas-Centaur and Titan-Centaur through all phases of manufacturing, testing, and launch. Teledyne would perform its job as contractor both at Northridge and at KSC in Fla. (Lewis News, Dec 9/77, 2)
The Marshall Star reported on a unique suspension system that would use air bags and cables to hang the Space Shuttle’s orbiter Enterprise and its external tank in the test tower, for the first phase of 1978 ground tests scheduled to begin in Apr. The system would consist of a large overhead truss fitted with air bags and cables, installed like a crossbeam at the 65.8m (216ft) level between two walls of the tall test stand. Although the orbiter and external tank would weigh about 544 320kg (1.2 million lb), the suspension system would allow the freedom of movement needed to obtain test data. Suspension of the orbiter and tank in this first phase of testing would duplicate as nearly as possible the flight conditions of the Shuttle at high altitudes, after the solid rocket boosters drop off at 43.5km (27mi) 2min into the mission. Later tests of the entire Shuttle assembly would use a different suspension system. The first Shuttle test phase would begin with the external tank temporarily fastened by knee braces to the stand, the orbiter lowered into place and mated as it would be for an actual flight. With the orbiter in place, engineers would install the suspension system overhead, attach cables from the air bags to the external tank, and remove the knee braces so that the cables would take the weight of the orbiter and external tank; lateral restraints would prevent sideways movement. The design of the truss, 25.3m (83ft) long and weighing 63 504kg (70 tons), would permit less than 2.5c (lin) deflection when fully loaded. Supporting members were of high-strength steel. (Marshall Star, Mar 29/78, 4)
On Dec. 12, the U.S. Coast Guard would receive its first lightweight portable firefighting module, developed under direction of MSFC’s Technology Utilization Office, the Marshall Star reported. The manufacturer, Northern Research and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., would deliver it to NASA representatives in Boston for transfer to the Coast Guard on completion of an acceptance test. Since MSFC had developed technology for lightweight highly efficient pumps in rocket engines, the Coast Guard had requested help in designing a unit small enough to be lowered onto the deck of small craft but capable of pumping hundreds of gallons of water per min. The module was 4ft wide, 5ft high, and 6ft long, and weighed 2500 lb, including fuel for 3hr of operation, and all equipment stored internally. Two people could set it up rapidly without tools, and it could deliver full output flow within lOmin.; a special feature was a pair of fiberglass water cannons, or monitors, weighing 401b. The module could draw water from the sea through a lift up to 20ft long and pump at least lOOOgal per min through each monitor. Commercial applications included use on light trucks by local fire departments, on docks and ships for harbor fires, and for forest, offshore oil rig, and high-rise building fires, as well as an emergency booster pump for municipal water and for flood control and military operations. Aubrey Smith, head of TU activities at MSFC, said the firefighting module showed “how NASA-developed technology and expertise can be adapted for down-to-earth uses.” (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 1)
MSFC reported that the final airdrop test of a system to retrieve Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters by parachute had demonstrated that the system could save the boosters for reuse. The sixth and final airdrop Sept. 12 had successfully tested a main parachute under forces exceeding those expected during flight. A test vehicle released at about 6100m (20 000ft) altitude from beneath the right wing of a B-52 aircraft had deployed a test parachute when vehicle speed reached about 660km per hr (410mph). Although actual booster recoveries would use three main parachutes each, the test had used only one because the test vehicle weighed only about a third as much as a booster would during recovery, and the B-52 aircraft could lift only 22 700kg (50 0001b). Use of only one parachute had sufficed for the main parachute structural test, however, as it had sustained' the necessary load. Actual weight of the boosters to be recovered after Shuttle launches would be about three times the present world-record weight of 24 948kg (55 0001b) for parachute recovery; each empty booster would weigh about 78 000kg (172 0001b) during descent. MSFC engineers had conducted all six drop tests at the National Parachute Test Range, El Centro, Calif. (Marshall Star, Sept 19/78, 1)
NASA announced that mission controllers at ARC had completed final course adjustments for the Pioneer 11 encounter with Saturn Sept. 1, 1978. Controllers reported Pioneer 11 had locked on a trajectory that would bring it within 30 000km (18 OOOmi) of the edge of Saturn’s outer ring; any approach closer to the ring edge would risk impact with fragments in the ring. Pioneer 11 would then swing under the plane of the rings to a point 25 000km (15 OOOmi) from the planet’s surface. Without the course correction, Pioneer 11 would have flown by Saturn at a much greater distance (100 000km or 60 OOOmi). Pioneer data transmitted to NASA tracking stations indicated the spacecraft had responded perfectly to a day-long series of commands calling for timed rocket thrusts to alter its trajectory. (NASA Release 78-113)
Av Wk reported that the Soviet Union had launched its 15th killer-satellite test since 1968, less than a mo before the scheduled start of antisatellite-limitation talks with the U.S. The USSR had launched on May 19 an interceptor, Cosmos 1009, toward a target, Cosmos 967, launched Dec. 13, 1977, which had also been target for the USSR’s 14th unsuccessful killer-satellite test Dec. 21, 1977. (AvWk, May 29/78, 23) May 30-June 1: NASA launched Pioneer Venus 1 from Cape Canaveral at 9:13am EDT May 20 atop an Atlas Centaur rocket. It would launch a Venus lander toward the planet 3mo later, about Aug. 7. Pioneer Venus 1,	an orbiter, should reach its destination by Dec. 7, 1978; Pioneer Venus 2,	a multiprobe spacecraft, would arrive 5days later after splitting into a bus and 4 atmospheric-entry probes 13 million km (8 million miles) and 20days out from the planet. Most engineering systems and the interplanetary experiments had signaled normal operation. “Performance so far has been extremely good,” said Marshall Johnson, Venus-orbiter flight director at ARC. “Of course, we have 300 million miles and 6mo to go,” he added. At 9am PDT June 1 the spacecraft was 4 800 000km (2 890 OOOmi) from earth and had traveled toward Venus at 16 580kph (10 296mph). Controllers would make the first midcourse correction June 8, changing velocity to 12.6kph (7.8mph) to aim the Pioneer at the exact point for Venus orbit insertion. Pioneer Venus 1, a spin-stabilized spacecraft with its spin axis perpendicular to the ecliptic plane, consisted of a cylindrical thrust tube serving to transmit acceleration loads into the spacecraft; a 97.5in-diameter circular equipment shelf for mounting electronic units and scientific instruments; a lOOin-diameter cylindrical substrate 48in long for mounting the solar-cell array; and a despun mast assembly supporting three antennas, including a high-gain antenna. A single-piece fitting that would remain on the Centaur at spacecraft separation would be the mechanical/ structural interface with the launch vehicle. Payload was 12 scientific instruments with a total weight of 1001b, using average power of 58watts and peak power of 85watts. The instruments could handle 75 redundant discrete commands and 6 redundant quantitative commands, as well as 17 serial-digital, 24 bilevel, and 31 analog telemetry channels. Three of the instruments would use pyrotechnic firing pulses for various functions. The magnetometer had been put at the tip of a 15.7ft beam to isolate it from spacecraft magnetic fields. The Pioneer Venus 1 launch vehicle was an Atlas SLV-3D Centaur D-14 131ft tall, weighing about 328 6401b at liftoff. The nosecover protecting the spacecraft, a conical/ cylindrical fiberglass fairing about 29ft high attached to a 56in-high aluminum split barrel, had been designed for jettison early in the Centaur burn. NASA had launched Pioneer Venus 1 into an ascent trajectory varying from 3° to 18° south of due east during the first 15days; the 7mo flight to Venus would take the spacecraft more than halfway around the sun (through about 200°), covering about 480 million km (300 million mi). The orbiter would take 3mo longer for the trip than the multiprobe, and would have a slower speed upon arrival at Venus, requiring less power from the orbit-insertion motor. For the first 82 days after launch, Pioneer Venus 1 would fly outside the earth’s orbit. In Aug. it would return inside earth’s orbit and, during the last 4mo of the journey, would cross 42 million km (26 million mi) on a long curving trajectory between the orbits of the earth and Venus. The orbiter’s flight path would resemble that of the Venus multiprobe, to be launched a few days after the orbiter crossed back inside earth’s orbit. NASA had designed the flights to answer questions such as: Why had two planets with about the same mass, formed of similar materials and situated at comparable distances from the sun, evolved different atmospheres? Why had the surface of Venus baked in searing heat, while earth had climate friendly to life? Answers would aid in understanding the evolution of Venus and earth atmospheres and the forces affecting earth’s weather. The Pioneer Venus flights, first devoted to studying another planet’s atmosphere and weather on a global scale, would use the largest number of vehicles devoted to such studies and would make measurements at the greatest number of locations. The flights would record characteristics of Venus’s upper atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as of the lower atmosphere, and interactions of these regions with the solar wind (the continuous stream of ions and electrons flowing outward from the sun) and with the solar magnetic and electric fields. Circling the planet for at least 80mo, the Pioneer Venus orbiter would make the longest observations of Venus to date and would be the first U.S. spacecraft to orbit the planet. A NASA-contractor team under KSC’s expendable vehicles directorate had been responsible for preparing and launching Pioneer Venus I. Hughes Aircraft Co. had built the spacecraft and radar mapper. (Ames Release 78-21; MOR S-825-78-01 [prelaunch] May 15/78; [prelaunch summary] May 11/78; NASA Release 78-68; NASA press brief May 9/78; Marshall Star, May 17/78, 1; May 24/78, 1; Lewis News, May 26/78, 1; JSC Roundup. May 26/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, May 19/78, 2; C Trib, May 21/78, 1-3; W Post, May 21/78, A6; NYT, May 22/78, A10; W Star, May 21/78, A-2)
MSFC reported the first-time assembly of all elements of a Space Shuttle—two solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRBs), an external tank, and an or-biter—in the dynamic-test stand at MSFC. Next step would be resumption of mated vertical ground-vibration testing, with the upcoming series of tests being in launch configuration, the Marshall Star reported. National and regional press representatives were present to film and report on the historic first assembly of the entire vehicle. The SRBs would undergo launch-configuration tests filled with inert propellant, replaced by empty units for configuration tests representing the vehicle just before SRB separation. (Marshall Star, Oct 11/78, 1)
NASA reported that about 7da after a Delta rocket was scheduled to launch Nimbus-G into polar orbit from WTR, the second stage of the Delta would separately release two chemicals. Project Cameo (chemically active materials ejected in orbit) would consist of a single 90sec release of lithium over northern Scandinavia and a separate release of barium over northern Alaska, to study solar energy and plasma flows and electric fields in Arctic regions. Release of the lithium would create a huge bright-red cloud visible from Greenland, Scandinavia, and other parts of Europe for a maximum of 5min. Release of the barium would create a bluish white cloud visible from the Soviet Union, Canada, and northwestern parts of the U.S. for a maximum of a half hr. NASA had timed the releases during Arctic twilight or early morning, to ensure best lighting for ground-based and aircraft photography to pinpoint the position and configuration of each cloud as a function of time. Primary objective of (he barium experiment was to trace the flow of plasma (ionized particles) in and above the earth’s ionosphere, with particular emphasis on the transition in earth’s electric field between the polar ice cap and the auroral zone over Alaska and Canada. Primary objective of the lithium experiment was to detect electric fields oriented parallel to the earth’s magnetic field. (NASA Release 78-142)
MSFC announced plans for two runs by a high-speed sled in Feb. at the Sandia sled track, Albuquerque, N.M., to test the “broadside deployment phase” of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster parachute-recovery system. The sled tests would deploy only the pilot chute to determine if the nosecap when ejected would clear the vehicle without becoming entangled, as boosters would come in flat, not sideways like an arrow, and air would flow across the nose cone at right angles. MSFC had developed the SRB and its recovery system. (Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 4)
NASA announced it would participate in a joint American-Soviet particle-intercalibration (JASPIC) project to compare techniques used by both countries to measure intensity of energetic electrons and protons entering the lower ionosphere. At a 1975 meeting of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics in Grenoble, France, U.S. and Soviet scientists had agreed that the first question to be resolved was instrument credibility. Joint measurement of energetic electron and proton intensity at the same time and same place would be a first step in reconciling the conflicting results reported in the scientific literature. A Soviet research ship, the Professor Vize, off the Va. coast near Wallops Flight Center would serve as the Soviet launch platform. The researchers would study the role of the particles in creating ionization in the lower ionosphere at night at mid-altitudes. They would compare data from 4 sounding-rocket launches from Wallops Island and 5 Soviet MR-12 rocket launches from the ship. One of the Wallops-launched rockets would release a chemical cloud possibly visible to east coast residents. Each organization would be responsible for its own countdown and launch operations. (NASA Release 78-71)
A space processing applications rocket, SPAR V, was launched at 11am CDT September 11, from White Sands, N.M., the Marshall Star reported. The SPAR V science payload contained 4 experiments to be processed during about 4min of near-zero gravity achieved by the suborbital flight. The flight appeared, from limited data, to have gone extremely well, lasting about 15min and reaching a height of around 102.5 statute mi. The payload was recovered about 55 to 60mi down range in a low mountain area. The payload had no external damage and had been returned to the missile range. Two of the experiments studied resolidification of molten materials in low gravity, from photographs made at 1-sec intervals during the process. Another experiment verified results of a SPAR II experiment during which an immiscible liquid processed in an electric furnace exhibited unexpected massive separation. The fourth experiment both melted and crystallized several samples of materials during the low-gravity processing period, while a camera recorded particle behavior. (Marshall Star, Sept 13/78, 1; 6/78, 1)
FBIS reported the USSR announced it had fired a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 7, to a height of 1500km for research on the ionosphere and on shortwave radiation. The instrument package, which separated at 175km on the ascent trajectory, contained equipment prepared by scientists from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and the Soviet Union. Launch apparently took place from the facilities at Kapustin Yar, site of previous Vertikal launches. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 3/78)
JPL announced that more than 100 scientists from universities and corporations in the U.S. and Europe had attended its solar-probe science workshop at CalTech May 22-23 to discuss the proposed closest encounter with the sun. The proposed mission, being studied at JPL under NASA’s Office of Space Sciences, would launch a uniquely designed spacecraft in 1985 into an orbit 2 100 000km (1.3 million mi) above the sun’s surface, arriving in 1989. Scientists had theorized that the sun probe would yield valuable new insights into solar physics, providing data on solar wind, solar particles, the solar magnetic field, and interplanetary dust. The workshop had reviewed new technologies needed for a spacecraft orbiting so close to the sun. JPL had begun studies of a new heat shield design, a high-powered telecommunications system with dual X- and X-band frequencies, new selenide-isotope power generators, and a drag-free spacecraft whose small rocket motors could counteract opposing external forces to keep the craft in correct solar orbit. (JPL Universe, May 26/78, 1)
NASA reported it had launched a 2-stage Nike-Apache sounding rocket at 1:30 am EDT Sept. 27 from Wallops Island to investigate ionization sources in the upper atmosphere during geomagnetic activity. The experiment had been postponed day to day since June 2, awaiting an intense magnetic storm that usually followed solar flares. The rocket payload had reached a peak altitude of 183km (114 statute mi), and preliminary results indicated that all instrumentation performed satisfactorily and obtained good data. The launch was the last in a series for the Joint American-Soviet Particle Intercalibration (JASPIC) Project to compare U.S. and Soviet particle-measuring instrumentation [see May 15]. The two nations had jointly conducted eight rocket-borne experiments in June from the Wallops range and the Soviet research ship, Professor Vize, located off Va.’s eastern shore. (WFC Release 78-1)
NASA announced it would launch on or about Aug. 7 from Cape Canaveral the second of two Pioneer spacecraft designed for direct measurement of Venus’s dense searing atmosphere, making the 354 million km (220 million mi) flight to Venus on an Atlas Centaur rocket. Pioneer/Venus 2, 20da out from Venus, would separate into five atmospheric-entry craft. Four would enter Venus’s atmosphere at points over the earth-facing hemisphere, two on the day side and two on the night side, and the fifth (the transporter bus) would enter on the day side. The Pioneer/Venus 2 entry probe would arrive five days after the Pioneer/Venus 1 orbiter. The 30 experiments aboard the two Pioneers, a coordinated observational system, would employ the most spacecraft (6) ever devoted to one planet. NASA has designed the flights to study atmosphere and weather on another planet on a global scale as an aid to understanding the forces driving earth weather, and had issued a fact sheet (NASA Release 78-100) giving details on the surface, atmosphere, and stratosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 78-101)
FBIS reported a Tass announcement that the Soviet Union had launched a geophysical rocket for shortwave solar-radiation research. Vertikal 8 was launched at 6:20 a.m. Moscow time from an unspecified point in European Soviet Union to an altitude of 505 kilometers. At 100 kilometers on the upward trajectory, a high-altitude astrophysical probe carrying instruments from Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union separated from the rocket; a recoverable package containing measurement results separated from the probe at 95 kilometers on the downward flight path and launched by parachute. Tass said the participating countries would process the information obtained from the probe. In an interview on Moscow domestic service, a Vertikal experimenter, Academician S.L. Mandelshtam, said some of the equipment was unique and could obtain a television image of the Sun in the shortwave band, which they had never done before. Evaluation of the magnetic tapes had been “a weak point with us,” he said, sometimes requiring a year or two, but must be dealt with in five to seven months because “it is the active year of the sun.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 26/79; Moscow Dom Svc, Sept 26/79) September 26-October 3: After a two-month delay, a 100-foot high balloon with a crew of four took off Wednesday, September 26, from Tillamook, Oreg., to try a nonstop balloon crossing of the United States. The planned six-day 229-mile trip of the DaVinci TransAmerica carrying 8,488 pounds of gear under 216,000 cubit feet of helium had lasted out continuous westbound instead of eastbound winds, court battles between two major television networks, and investigation by a federal agency, said the Washington Post. The crew consisted of Vera Simons, German-born artist and balloon pilot from McLean, Va., who had been planning the flight since 1971; Dr. Rudolf J.	Engelmann, director of the DaVinci project and an employee of NOAA at Boulder, Colo.; Dr. Fred Hyde, an eye surgeon from Prairie Village, Kans.; and Randy Burch, a cameraman for NBC television. In August ABC television had sued the group to prevent NBC from having exclusive coverage of the flight; the suit was thrown out of court, but Simons said it had upset her and delayed flight preparations. The flight, originally called a blend of science and art, had lost its science aspect two weeks previously when NOAA reclaimed $28,000 of equipment for measuring air pollutants, ozone levels, and radiation on the cross-country flight. NOAA said it had acted because “an agency employee” might have sought “personal gain,” and agency lawyers were investigating any illegal conflict of interest. Englemann said he knew of no conflict of interest, calling charges against him “a helluva thing,” according to the Washington Post. The 7-Up Company, which put 100 empty containers on board for distribution after the flight, would cover most of the $250,000 cost. Other sponsors included NBC; Louisiana Pacific, a wood and paper combine whose small balloons DaVinci would drop for finders to exchange for free trees; and camera manufacturer Nikon Inc. The transparent plastic balloon “larger than the Goodyear blimp” had lifted off at 8:16 a.m. September 26 into strong westerly winds, rising 300 feet per minute and drifting at about 50 mph toward the western slope of the Rockies. Over the Teton mountains of Wyoming the crew had to don oxygen masks and stay 4,000 feet above the peaks, to escape downdrafts that could put the balloon into an irreversible drop. In this “most dangerous” part of the flight, the crew found that its 9-radio system was not working and they could communicate only on a radiotelephone with meteorologists in Massachusetts; they guessed that an antenna on the balloon had snagged in the rigging during launch. The private meteorologists in New England reported that crew members, frequently on oxygen, sounded “strange.. .not as sharp, like having a couple of drinks”; they had postponed discussing plans until the craft descended to lower altitudes. Traveling at between 17,000 and 18,000 feet, DaVinci had gone down to about 10,000 feet over Denver, Colo., but dropped ballast to regain altitude east of that city. More than 500 miles south of their planned route, the crew on Saturday was flying at 1,000 feet over Kansas, having covered more than 1,380 miles in 4 days. Governor John Carlin tried to radio thanks for DaVinci’s visit “even if they didn’t intend to come.” DaVinci stayed over Kansas for 2 days, about 24 hours behind schedule for an arrival at Norfolk, Va., or Kitty Hawk, N.C. The crew complained of small planes flying close to the balloon: the FAA told them to note the registration numbers so that the agency could “deal with” the offending pilots. (Under federal rules, balloons—lighter-than-air craft—had right of way over all other aircraft.) The balloon had unexpectedly crossed the Mississippi River at St. Louis, Mo., world headquarters of the 7-Up Company that was major sponsor of the flight; officials had thought the route would be 50 miles north. Air traffic controllers at St. Louis’s Lambert Field (11th busiest in the United States) had diverted airline flights because of the balloon, which had right of way over all other aircraft. On its stray southward, DaVinci set a new long-distance record for balloon flight over the United States: 1,084 miles at Denver, breaking a 1,058-mile record set in 1924. As it sailed over Kansas and Iowa in a more northerly direction toward its original course, it also passed the 100-hour mark to approach the 137-hour endurance record set by Double Eagle II in August 1978 on its transatlantic crossing. While the crew ate its Sunday dinner over Nebraska wheatfields, waiting for good winds, they got a call from Boston: Maxie Anderson, the Albuquerque balloonist who had been aboard Double Eagle II on the first transatlantic balloon trip, said “We’re pulling for you.” Nearly six days after takeoff, at 11:56 p.m. Monday, October 2, DaVinci was forced down in a northwest Ohio bean field after a thunderstorm chased it across Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana, caught it in the dark (after 11 p.m.), and dumped snow and heavy rain into the gondola. Three of the crew came down safely, but Vera Simons fractured her left leg. DaVinci had not broken Double Eagle II’s endurance record (which would have occurred at 4:23 a.m.), but it had achieved the longest overload wind-borne balloon flight, 2,003 miles, surpassing the nearly 1,897 miles flown 65 years ago by a European balloon. (W Post, Sept 26/79, B-l; Sept 27/79, A-l; Sept 30/79, A-l; Oct 1/79, A-22; Oct 2/79, A-l; Oct 3/79, A-l; W Star Sept 28/79; Oct 1/79, A-3; Oct 2/79, A-l; NY Times, Oct 3/79, A-16)
Continuing flight tests of the orbiter Columbia were halted December 18 after two technical failures. Simulated liftoff occurred at 4:30 p.m. EDT with backup crew members Joe Engle and Richard Truly in the cockpit, but two minutes later they failed to receive signals of the simulated separation of the solid-fuel rocket boosters; 8 minutes 50 seconds into the flight, they foiled to receive a signal showing successful separation of the external tank. (W Star, Dec 19/79, A-4)
NASA launched UK 6 from WFC at 7:26 p.m. EDT on a Scout into an orbit with 656 kilometer apogee, 607-kilometer perigee, 55° inclination, and 97.5-minute period. Under the terms of a contract of March 16, 1976, between NASA and the U.K. Science Research Council, the launch was the second on a fully reimbursable basis, at an estimated cost to the United Kingdom of $4,956,733, including booster, support services, tracking and data acquisition, and use of U.S. facilities. The British-built spacecraft, weighing 340.6 pounds carried an experiment to measure the charge and energy spectra of galactic cosmic rays, and two X-ray astronomy experiments on structure and position of low-energy sources and on fluctuations in X-ray emission from low galactic latitude sources. UK 6 would carry two experiments for the Royal Aircraft Establishment to study performance in orbit of new types of solar cell and the susceptibility of metal-oxide semiconductor devices to radiation in a space environment. NASA judged the mission successful as of October 1979. (NASA Release 79-61, 79-78; NASA MOR M-490-301-79-02 [prelaunch] May 14/79, [postlaunch] Oct 18/79)
FBIS carried a story from Tokyo Kyodo in English that a Japanese fact-finding mission to the People’s Republic of China cited as evidence of the PRC’s “superior space technology” its CSSX-4 rocket fueled by liquefied oxygen and hydrogen, able to carry up to 700 kilograms; Japan’s latest could carry only about 130 kilograms. As vehicle for an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), the CSSX-4 could take a 3-megaton nuclear warhead more than 10,000 kilometers (6,000 miles), in range of both the United States and the Soviet Union. The three-stage rocket, 43 meters long, and 3.3 meters in diameter, reportedly weighed about 200 tons. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Nov 11/79)
MSFC said the propellant tank for Columbia’s engines was ready for flight and would leave the Michoud Assembly Facility June 29 for KSC, where it would be fitted to the orbiter and two solid-fuel rocket boosters. The Martin Marietta-built 154-foot tank with 140,000 gallons olTiquid oxygen and 380,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen was the only part of the Shuttle assembly that was expendable; like the boosters, it would separate from the Shuttle at about 75 miles altitude and drop into the ocean but would not be recovered. (MSFC Release 79-66)
The People’s Republic of China launched a long-range missile May 18 capable of delivering a nuclear warhead as far as Moscow or the west coast of the United States, Xinhua press agency announced. Australian navy ships reported the rocket’s splashdown in the ocean about 750 miles northwest of Fiji. Diplomatic sources in Beijing said the rocket may have been fired from a complex about 1,000 miles west of there, or from the Lop Nor nuclear-arms test area in northwest China. If so, the rocket made a flight of 5,000 miles or more. (W Star, May 19/80, A-6; FBIS, Xinhua in English, May 23/80; Hong Kong AFP in English, May 18/80; Moscow World Svc in English; Tass in English, May 16-25/80)
LaRC, manager of the Scout program, announced that NASA had awarded Hampton Technical Center (a division of Kentron International, Inc., of Dallas) a $2.2 million,contract modification calling for ten Algol 111A Scout rocket motors by March 31, 1981. Prime contractor for Scout was formerly Vought Corporation, also of Dallas; the modification was made with the same parent firm, Ling Temco Vought. Name changes and other corporate restructurings would streamline the work done for NASA, with estimated savings of about $1 million to be gained by contracting with a subsidiary already qualified to build and load the motors. To be qualified, a firm must have fired two or three launch vehicles, a process costing about $1 million. Scout, NASA’s smallest vehicle, was a four-stage solid-propellant rocket that had launched payloads for NASA, DOD, and several foreign countries. (LaRC Release 80-15)
WFC reported the successful launch July 31 or a two-stage sounding rocket to test both the vehicle system and a “mother-daughter” two-part payload, an electrodynamics package to be used in a series of three launches from Norway later in 1980. Launched at 8:18 a.m. on an Honest John-Orion rocket, the 216-kilogram (476-pound) instrumented payload was programmed to separate at about 95 kilometers (59 miles) altitude and measure the electric field and profiles of ion density and conductivity in the atmosphere. (The three experiments to be launched in Norway would measure energetic-particle and X-ray fluxes and ultraviolet light from the aurora in addition to the electric field and ion density and conductivity.) Telemetry showed that the payloads separated as planned and both the sections reached peak altitude of 111 kilometers (69 miles). The “daughter” payload, a sphere with six 1-meter booms extending from it, performed well and exhibited good stability until descent. At 73 kilometers (45 miles) on the way down, a 65-foot-diameter mylar parachute deployed from the “mother” section; this was a lower altitude that planned, resulting in a faster fall than planned, but the section’s stability allowed it to acquire usable data. This section also contained a movie camera to film parachute deployment; recovery of the section from the Atlantic was in progress. (WFC Release 80-9)
WFC reported that it had made nighttime electric-field measurements in the “middle atmosphere” from balloon ceiling to the ionosphere (30 to 100 kilometers), to extend measurement capability into this region, and to compare techniques simultaneously on a worldwide basis. During the past decade scientists had become able to obtain reliable data elsewhere in the atmosphere (troposphere, stratosphere, ionosphere, magnetosphere, and even in deep space) but not in the middle region. WFC used rockets and a balloon for its local experiments; radars in Massachusetts, Alaska, Peru, Puerto Rico, France, and Scandinavia made supporting ground measurements. At 8:35 p.m. EDT August 13, WFC launched a hundred-thousand cubic-foot balloon inflated with helium, carrying a 21-kilogram (46-pound) payload to measure AC and DC electric fields from to 10 kHz in the middle atmosphere. The mission ended 10 hours, and a chase plane located the payload near Roanoke, Va. At 10:40 p.m. EDT, WFC launched a two-stage Nike-Orion rocket carrying a 232-kilogram (510-pound) payload that reached peak altitude of 90.2. kilometers (56 miles) and recorded data during both ascent and descent. The payload included a water-recovery system; it was recovered at 11:58 p.m. and returned to WFC. At 11:11 p.m. EDT, WFC launched a single-stage Super Areas to reach 90 kilometer (58-mile) altitude, carrying an experiment called Blunt Probe to measure electric fields as well as positive and negative conductivity in the middle region, for comparison with balloon and Nike-Orion measurement. (WFC Release 80-11)
The Washington Post reported that NORAD in Colorado Springs, Colo., had identified a flaming object that streaked across the sky and plunged into the Gulf of Mexico earlier in the week. The object was apparently the remains of a Soviet rocket, probably Cosmos 549, that had been in orbit for seven years. (W Post, Sept 19/80 A-5)
NASA said that the Shuttle orbiter Columbia would move out of the orbiter-processing facility at KSC no earlier than November 23 for tow to the VAB and mating with the external fuel tank and solid-fuel rocket booster. Actual date would depend on results of final inspections now in process; NASA would issue an update November 22. (NASA Release 80-173)
NASA launched an eighth space-processing applications rocket, SPAR 8, November 18 from the White Sands missile range in New Mexico. Its payload, developed and tested by MSFC, was three experiments processed in about five minutes of zero gravity in the coast phase of the suborbital flight, using a three-axis room-temperature acoustic levitator; a single-axis acoustic-levitator furnace to produce 1,575 °C; and a specialized processing furnace. All experiments had apparently performed as expected: two were on acoustic levitation (use of soundwaves to keep liquids from contamination in touching the walls of a container), one of them to produce a high-temperature glass; the third experiment studied movement of bubbles in molten glass. The payload, damaged at impact on Earth, was recovered for damage assessment and study by the investigators of the results. (MSEC Release 80-148)
The British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight announced that Skylark 12, a rocket launched from Natal, Brazil, by British Aerospace, reached a record altitude of 834 kilometers (SF, Apr 4/80, 177) Spaceflight reported a discovery by USSR scientists that the lunar regolith (the dust covering the Moon’s surface) contained nonoxidized iron. Lunar samples proved to be corrosion resistant when exposed to terrestrial atmosphere. The finding, registered at the USSR Committee for Inventions and Discoveries, was confirmed at other USSR and U.S. laboratories. This unusual form of element resulted from the action of the solar wind on the Moon’s surface, said Dr. Valery Barsukov, director of the Institute of Geochemistry. Particles from the solar wind “seize the oxygen of the lunar matter and carry it away into space,” leaving pure metal on the lunar surface. The iron had not oxidized during the eight years since the Luna 16 expedition. (SF, Apr 4/80, 164)
WFC reported the launch of a coordinated balloon, plane, and rocket experiment to study electric fields in thunderstorms. Five vehicles simultaneously measured the fields from troposphere to ionosphere for a number of firsts: first multiple flight of electric-field devices, first simultaneous direct observations of ionosphere lightning, and first measures of lightning waveforms in the stratosphere. (WFC Release 81-11)
MSFC announced the choice of two firms, Hercules Inc. and Votaw Precision Tool Inc., to negotiate a contract for development of a filament-wound case for the solid-fuel rocket motor used in the Shuttle boosters. The contract to produce the filament-wound item [see March 2] would cover design, manufacture, test, and delivery of four flight cases at an estimated cost of $33 million. The new case segments would replace portions made of steel, improving performance by reducing Shuttle-liftoff weight about 66,000 pounds (29,937 kilograms). First use would be in late 1985. (NASA Release 82-80; MSFC Release 82-52)
NASA announced that it would try to salvage the two solid-fuel rocket boosters that sank in the Atlantic June 27. Underwater cameras carried by the Scarab 2, a remotely controlled submersible vehicle operated by technicians from Ocean Search, Inc., Lanham, Md., from the deck of the United Space Boosters recovery ship UTC Freedom, showed the boosters on the ocean floor, broken up by the impact. The debris had no built-in lifting points, but PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED the Scarab could attach recovery lines to the sunken objects for hydraulic lift by the salvage ships. Vessels used for recovery would include, besides the Scarab, the UTC Freedom and UTC Liberty (the designated boos ter-recovery ships). A remote station on a recovery ship would navigate Scarab, using bridge displays to show range and bearing, heading, depth, and pitch-roll of the submersible. Radar had located the boosters at about 3,500 feet, too deep for humans in hardshell diving suits to inspect; Scarab could operate in underwater currents up to 0.5 knots at 6,000 feet using three television cameras and one still camera with six quartz-diode floodlights to illuminate the ocean-floor. The solid-fuel rocket boosters’ parachutes failed to open properly because explosive bolts on half the parachute risers fired prematurely. Premature firing separated half of the risers from each main parachute, allowing the parachutes to stream instead of filling with air. NASA did not know why the explosive bolts fired prematurely. {AvWk, Aug. 9/82, 20; Spaceport News, Aug 19/82, 1 & 2; W Post, Aug 2/82, 3)
A panel investigating the loss of two solid-fuel rocket boosters after the launch of STS-4 said that a switch in the booster decelerators was at fault. Premature separation of one of two riser attachments on each main chute occurred about 365-seconds after liftoff, when the frustrums were exploded away from the booster, instead of at impact with the water. A switch designed to release the chutes when the boosters hit the water had freed the parachutes from the boosters before impact, probably because of severe shock when the explosion separated the frustrum from the boosters. Before STS-5, NASA modified the decelerating system to fix both risers firmly to each booster, to eliminate switch separation, and to prevent shock from affecting other subsystems. The booster deceleration worked perfectly during STS-5. (NASA Release 83-19)
President Reagan issued a directive for the government to rent launch pads and sell rocket parts and plans to private firms as “a domestic backup for the shuttle at essentially no cost to the U.S. government. . . .the private sector would assume all costs of [expendable launch vehicle] production now borne by the U.S. government.” U.S. government facilities and equipment that would otherwise be underutilized or no longer required would find a market. The government began 10 years ago to phase out expendable rockets like Delta, Atlas, and Titan in favor of reusable Space Shuttles. Contracts with rocket firms were ending, and launch pads at the Cape were closing down. Gilbert Rye of the National Security Council said that the costs of keeping the U.S. facilities open and operating would be borne by the private companies. The president’s directive would allow the firms to buy parts and government-owned plans for the rockets at cost and to pay for the use of launch pads, equipment, and engineers. (Text, PresDoc, May 16/83; W Post, May 17/83, A-l)
NASA announced that LeRC awarded a $161 million contract to General Dynamics Corporation, Convair Division, San Diego, Calif., for two Shuttle/Centaur G vehicles tor the DOD. A previous contract included two NASA-unique Shuttle Centaur G-Prime vehicles for the Galileo (Jupiter) mission and the International Solar/Polar Mission (ISPM), scheduled for launch in 1986. The two contracts together totaled $414 million. Centaur was a high-energy upper-stage booster expected to add substantially to the Space Shuttle’s ability to deliver heavier payloads from low-Earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release
USA Today reported that Miss Baker, the squirrel monkey that joined another monkey, Able, in the U.S.’s first spaceflight May 28, 1959, died November 27 of kidney failure. She was buried in the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Ala. (USA Today, Nov 31/84, 3A)
NASA today released a statement on the proposed action to develop a second source for the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket motor (SRM). Since November 1984, NASA had assessed the desirability of a second source, and four firms—Aerojet Strategic Propulsion Co., Atlantic Research Corp., Hercules, Inc., and Chemical Systems Div. of United Technologies Corp.—had expressed interest in becoming the SRM second source. As a result, NASA believed the development of an SRM second source would serve the national interest. The statement read in part: ". . . Because of the continued strong interest of the four contractors and our belief that a second source would be in the national interest, it is our intent to provide the contractors the opportunity to respond through a formal request for proposal (RFP). "Industry must, however, be willing to respond with the full knowledge that NASA will provide no firm guarantee of recovery of their qualification costs. If industry is so willing, and where competition remains available with the incumbent excluded, NASA intends to proceed with establishing a second source. "Should the winner of a second source competition for SRMs become qualified to produce flight-quality motors in time to support our next production buy, NASA would plan to buy contingent on overall cost considerations, 20 flight sets of motors at the rate of not less than four flight sets a year. In addition, NASA would compete the balance of the buy and subsequent buys to determine the split in production between the incumbent and the qualified second source. A decision to dual source any quantity beyond the planned minimum buy of 20 flight sets would be based on the cost of the dual source in comparison to the cost of contracting the balance with the incumbent (Morton Thiokol, Inc.) only. "Based on the above, NASA intends to notify the four interested firms by letter in early January 1986 of our willingness to proceed with an RFP and the specific conditions that would apply. Their comments and views would be requested. A positive response would provide the basis for NASA to issue an RFP. Should industry not support the RFP under these conditions, NASA would cancel any initiative of establishing a dual source for the SRM." (NASA Release 85-178) Student Involvement Program
Sometime in 1986 or shortly thereafter a Conestoga rocket might launch a capsule carrying the cremated remains of 15,000 human beings into an orbit 1,900 miles above the earth, Malcom Brown wrote in the NY Times, and a few critics had deplored the idea that the U.S.'s first private venture into space should haul so seemingly useless a payload. However, Browne pointed out, the day might come when the space undertakers would orbit human relics of genuine value to future historians, archeologists, scientists, and doctors. As the living world became more crowded, he wrote, cremation seemed increasingly attractive as a space-saving alternative. However, if the trend continued, scientists in the distant future might encounter a troublesome shortage of human remains representing today's society. Space burial of at least a few representatives of our society would serve future science admirably, he wrote. Safe from grave robbers, souvenir hunters, land developers, and other terrestrial menaces, an orbiting body would remain in the most pristine frozen storage imaginable. Short of orbiting whole bodies, he added, even the storing of samples of human tissue in space would give future scientists useful time capsules. A system patented by a U.S. inventor, Philip Backman, reduced a human body to 5% of its natural weight by freezing, pulverizing, and vacuum drying it. "A few grams of the resulting powder, taking up no more space in an orbiting mausoleum than cremated remains, would bequeath to future scientists important clues about the deceased person's identity, genetic makeup, pathology, and even style of life," he wrote. "Space may be the arena of our future wars. It seems fitting that space should also serve as a graveyard, from which our distant descendants could mine the treasure of knowledge," Browne concluded. [NYT, Aug 6/85, C3)
Japan's first deep-space probe had escaped earth's gravity on its way to a rendezvous with Halley's Comet early in 1986, the Washington Post reported. A domestically developed rocket had launched Sakigake (Pioneer) January 8 from the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science's launch site at Uchinoura in southwestern Japan. Dr. Tamiya Nomura, director of the institute's office of project coordination, said the probe was 580,000 miles from earth the morning of January 12 and was "entering a sphere where the sun's gravity is dominant." (W Post, Jan 12/ 85, A17)
Finnish army divers had recovered the main section of a stray Soviet rocket that had crashed December 28, 1984, through a frozen lake, and military officials said it was not a cruise missile, the Washington Post reported. A helicopter recovered the missile's main frame and engine after divers had brought up the nose cone and other debris. Finnish authorities said the debris showed it was "an old-type missile dating from 1971 or 72 and without military capacity." U.S. officials, contradicting an earlier statement by Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger that it was an "air cruise missile," agreed with the Finnish that the missile was an older-generation drone and unarmed. The Soviet Embassy in Helsinki, which said the missile had gone off course while in use for target practice over the Barents Sea, had requested return of the remnants. The Finnish later announced they would return the fragments, but asked Moscow to pay for the recovery. (W Post, Feb 3/85, A17, Feb 6/85, A15)
French President Francois Mitterrand opened today the Paris Air Show, stating that the French-led European high-technology program known as Eureka was "off to a good start" after gaining approval from West Germany and other European partners, FBIS Paris AFP in English reported. France and W. Germany had previously disagreed over a U.S. invitation to participate in the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) defense research project. West Germany had endorsed the project, but France had rejected it, fearing it would render France's independent nuclear deterrent impotent and give the U.S. an unassailable lead in advanced technology. In speaking of Eureka, a space research program primarily for civilian uses and the development of ultramodern technology in such fields as lasers and high-speed computers, Mitterrand repeated his contention that the Eureka and SDI projects were not competing for the same goals, but added that Bonn's participation in both would necessitate choices in its budget and assignment of scientists. Fie also said France was determined to develop a European fighter plane by the 1990s and that the European Flermes space plane project was of major importance and could tie in with the European Ariane-5 rocket program. (FBIS Paris AFP in English, May 31/85) Hermes Program
study the solidification of alloys for lead-antimony and an aluminum-copper combination, study the comparative morphology and anatomy of the primary root system of radish seeds, study crystal growth of metallic appearing needle crystals in an aqueous solution of potassium tetracyanoplatinate, and provide information on the "project-explorer-payload-elapsed-time" and the operational status of experiments during flight to all amateur radio stations and short-wave listeners around the world (Alabama Space and Rocket Center);
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Island, VA, facility in cooperation with the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory (AFGL) at Hanscom AFB, Massachusetts, and the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI), Copenhagen, Denmark, would carry out that winter the 1985 Cooperative Observations of Polar Electrodynamics (COPE) project of sounding rocket research in Greenland to gather knowledge about the solar-earth relationship. The project would include studies of polar-cap turbulence and electrodynamics, auroral-zone electrodynamics, auroral-electrojet turbulence, neutral-atmosphere coupling, and polar-ionospheric irregularities. Researchers selected Greenland for the investigations because of its access to the auroral oval, polar cap, and polar cusp; an existing rocket range; support from the Sondre Stromfjord incoherent-scatter radar, the Hi Lat Spacecraft, and the extensive array of scientific ground-observing stations in Greenland, Scandanavia, and North America; and a broad choice of launch azimuths. GSFCAVallops Flight Facility personnel had spent several weeks during the previous summer at the Greenland Sondre Stromfjord facility installing additional launchers and related ground-support equipment, radar, telemetry, and communications systems and erecting vehicle and payload assembly structures. Project experimenters scheduled nine suborbital rocket launches of which two would release chemicals creating artificial vapor clouds 250 km high. NASA scheduled seven flights: two Black Brant Xs, two Terrier-Malemutes, a Taurus-Orion, a Nike-Tomahawk, and a Taurus-Tomahawk; AFGL scheduled two missions: a Black Brant VIII and a Black Brant IX. (GSFC Release 85-5)
NASA scheduled two scientific experiment rocket launchings for early May, a Black Brant X and a TaurusNikeTomahawk, to create artificial clouds along the East Coast that would be visible from Canada to Florida and as far west as Ohio. The objective of the experiment was to investigate Nobel prize winner Dr. Hannes Alfven's proposed Critical Velocity Effect Theory, which has been used to explain details in the early formation of the solar system. In 1954, Alfven proposed that if an element in a nearly neutral plasma became ionized when it attained a flow velocity that matched its ionization potential, several facets of the structure of the solar system could be explained, including differing chemical compositions of the planets and the regularity of their orbits. Although Alfven's critical velocity effect has been studied in the laboratory, the phenomena required investigation in a space plasma. The experiment was scheduled for dawn, when the Earth's surface would still be dark but when there would be sunlight at the experiment's altitude so ionized cloud chemicals could be visible to the naked eye. The threestage, solidpropellant rockets would release barium and strontium at the apogee altitude of 267 miles. When the releases occurred, ground observers could see, if the experiment was successful, a cloud split into two0*welldelineated jets of gas in the first few minutes. The experiments were part of NASA's sounding rocket program, which included launching approximately 40 to 45 sounding rockets a year from various worldwide locations. (NASA Release 8651)
A 3,500pound piece of debris that was determined to be a rocket booster, but not identified as from the left or right side, was recovered 28 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 400 feet of water. The massive operation was resumed after a twoday halt from storms and rough seas. Other salvage teams also continued their efforts to recover the rest of the crew's compartment and remains. (W Post, Mar 17/86; P Inq, Mar 17/86; NY Times, Mar 18/86)
Preliminary investigation into the Titan rocket lost on
NASA chose a new design for its solid rocket motors, a major step for returning the Shuttle fleet to flight. Each joint would be sealed by three orings constructed from a more resilient material than that used originally, and would seal at all times, not just from pressure produced by expanding gas inside the rocket. Other changes included a metal clip meant to force the joint to remain sealed, interlocking insulation to prevent hot gases from directly contacting the orings, and a bolt assembly between the rocket nozzle and the engine for providing an additional seal at the nozzle joint. Hundreds of (#tests for the new design were scheduled for the coming fall. (NY Times, Aug 12/86; Aug 13/86; W Times, Aug 12/86; W Post, Aug 13/86; C Trib Aug 13/86)
NASA and the Nuclear Safety Review Panel differed in their estimates of the reliability of booster rockets before the
NASA's chief engineer said that cutbacks in the safety program over the previous three years had put the Agency "in a dangerous situation." Loss of personnel and transfer of safety responsibility to field offices and contractors contributed to NASA's inability to catch the seal problem. He reasoned that "there are only so many problems [one person] can look at, and in my opinion the solid rocket booster was a relatively easy thing to do. But it really wasn't getting the amount of attention from here it should have." (W Times, Mar 5/86)
Salvage crews reported that they might have located a key part of the booster rocket, suspected in the January 28 accident, 32 miles offshore at a depth of 650 feet. Embedded firmly into the ocean's floor, the estimated 400500 pound debris located near other wreckage was positively identified as parts from the right booster rocket. As engineers examined their most recent discovery, other teams recovered still more of the crew's cabin as well as additional remains and personal affects. (W Times, Mar 13/86; NY Times, Mar 13/86; B Sun, Mar 13/86)
NASA released footage of the Challenger just seconds after ignition, showing a puff of black smoke coming from the right solid rocket booster near a joint between two segments. The tape lent more weight to the theory that the accident had resulted from a faulty seal in the motor. (W Post, Feb 14/86; WSJ, Feb 14/86; W Times, Feb 14/86; NY Times, Feb 14/86; B Sun, Feb 14/86; USA Today, Feb 14/86)
Forty miles off the Florida coast and at a depth of 1,200 feet, a fourman submarine recovered debris and took photographs of what engineers hoped was Challenger's right booster rocket. As the investigation moved further ahead, the Presidential Commission looking into the accident asked NASA to remove from its own investigation any officials involved in the H&decision to launch the Shuttle. (B Sun, Feb 18/86; NY Times, Feb 18/86; W Post, Feb 18/86; P Inq, Feb 18/86; W Times Feb 17/86) 0** NASA Requested $45 million for fiscal year 1987 to accelerate research for its next generation spacecraft, a hypersonic transatmospheric vehicle, or "space plane", capable of Mach 25 (about 17,000 mph). Able to fly into orbit, reenter the atmosphere and achieve orbit again while being completely reusable, the craft would have both commercial and military applications. (W Times, Feb 17/86)
Investigation into the Delta rocket crash May 3 indicated that the accident could have been a result of a faulty hardwareassembly program in the engine compartment. A short circuit was most likely the cause, said Lawrence Ross, Chairman of the Delta review board, but sabotage was not ruled out. (B Sun, Jun 6/86)
Western European officials announced that the grounded Ariane rocket would not be ready to fly in February as was earlier hoped, adding to the strains fed by the West's inability to launch. Modifications were recently approved for the rocket's faulty third stage; no new flight date was given. (NY Times, Dec
Several engineers at NASA recently questioned the proposal to add 100 bolts to a critical joint between the exhaust nozzle and the solid fuel segments in the Shuttle booster rockets. The purpose of the fasteners was to prevent further leakage of hot gases. Many engineers, however, saw these holes as another way for the gasses to escape because they were to be placed between inner and outer orings. (B Sun, Nov 3/86; 'A0*Times, Nov 3/86)
Allan McDonald, in charge of the booster rocket redesign task force, told members of Congress that the new booster joints would fall into the "criticality1R" category, meaning that they'(0*would have a backup. No specific design had yet been chosen, and the engineer stated, "We're looking at some designs with orings and some without. We're looking at various seating concepts." McDonald was taken off Morton Thiokol's solid rocket team after testifying before the Rogers Commission concerning his objection to launching the Challenger in cold weather, but was reassigned to head the task force after complaints from Congress. (USA Today, Jun 19/86; W Times, Jun 19/86; NY Times, Jun 19/86)
NASA announced that it would allow private contracts for McDonnell Douglas, builders of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, builders of the Atlas Centaur, to market their products. The two companies were also granted the use of NASA launch facilities, with the agreement to reimburse for any costs incurred. Talks with Transpace, a competitor who had hoped to market the Delta rocket, were ended. (W Post, Oct 15/86; W Times, Oct 15/86; WSJ Oct 15/86)
A decision was reached by NASA to test the new booster rocket design for the Shuttle fleet by firing the rockets horizontally, and not vertically as the Rogers Commission had suggested. A NASA spokesman called this method of testing "the most demanding" and the one that "best satisfies the Commission's intent." (NY Times, Oct 3/86; W Post, Oct 3/86; P Inq, Oct 3/86)
manufacturers for solid rocket boosters. The House also voted to authorize spending whatever money would be needed to begin construction of a new orbiter in fiscal year 1987. (P Inq, Sep 26/86; WSJ, Sep 26/86; W Post, Sep 26/86; W Times, Sep 26/86; NY Times, Sep 26/86)
NASA announced that it had located both the Shuttle's0*crew compartment and the remains of some crew members, in 100 feet of water, about 25 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida. Sonar first detected the object on the night of March 7 and subsequent dives confirmed it to be the module. About 10 percent of the wreckage had been recovered to this date, but the suspected right solid rocket booster still lay on the ocean's floor. Although little insight into the cause of the accident was expected, recovery of the data tapes, officials speculated, could shed some light. (USA Today, Mar 10/86; P Inq, Mar 10/86; B Sun, Mar 10/86; NY Times, Mar 10/86; W Post, Mar 10/86; W Times, Mar
The National Research Council recommended, in its fifth interim report to NASA, additional testing of NASA's new solid rocket motor before resuming Shuttle launches, raising fears that the scheduled June 1988 launch could be postponed. The Council maintained, however, that the planned June 1988 launch date could still be met by concentrating on the more extensive tests and deferring some less critical ones. (B Sun, Nov 24/87; NY Times, Nov 24/87; W Post, Nov 24/87)
A solid rocket motor intended for use in NASA's Delta launch vehicle failed during a test at the Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama. The Castor IVA booster rocket escaped from the test stand five seconds into the test. A review team was established to determine the cause of the failure and to assess the impact on the Delta flight program. (NASA Release 87128)
Two teams of NASA specialists began an inquiry as to why the testfiring of the reconstructed Shuttle booster rocket on
The motor section of an MX missile containing nearly 100,000 pounds of rocket propellent exploded at a Morton Thiokol, Inc. plant killing five workers. The explosion at the company's Wasatch Operations plant, 25 miles west of Brigham City, Utah, was the fourth major accident at the plant. The cause of the explosion was not immediately known. Morton Thiokol also was the manufacturer of (#the Space Shuttle's booster rocket. (NY Times, Dec 30/87, 31/87; P Inq, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87)
Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans, Louisiana; Rockwell International Space Transportation Systems Division, Downey, California; and United Technologies Corporation, USBI Booster Production Company, Inc., Huntsville, Alabama; were selected for contracts to perform definition studies for a proposed untended launch vehicle. The new vehicle, called ShuttleC, would supplement the orbiter with an untended cargo element. (NASA Release 87159)
A number of senators expressed reservations that Morton Thiokol, Inc. remained the sole maker of NASA's Shuttle booster rocket. Members of the Senate Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space complained during the hearing that, despite the fact that Congress had instructed NASA to employ other industries to redesign Shuttle rockets, the Agency appeared locked into using rockets designed by Morton Thiokol, Inc. (NY Times, Jan 23/87; WSJ, Jan 23/87)
New Mexico urged NASA to find a second company, in addition to Morton Thiokol, Inc., to build the booster rocket. (B Sun, Dec h)31/87; H Post, Dec 31/87; USA Today, Dec 31/87; W Post, Dec 31/87;h))0*0*0*W Times, Dec 31/87)
NASA announced that lightning had destroyed an Orion rocket scheduled for launch. The intense storm at the Wallops Flight Center, Wallops Island, Virginia, also destroyed the scientific experiment payload. (NASA Release 8797; NY Times, June 11/87; W Post, June 11/87; H Chron, June 11/87
A spokesman for Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) stated that research and an experiment conducted by SDIO demonstrated for the first time that lasers and other highpowered electrical devices can be operated in space without heavy insulation to prevent short circuits. The experiment involved the launching of a 60foot rocket from Wallops Island, Virginia, on December 13, 1987. Extending from the nose cone of the rocket were two probes about 39 inches apart. These probes were alternatively charged with high amounts of electrical power,h)'0*0*0*up to 44,000 volts. Although there was no insulation between them, no arcing of the electrical charge between the two probes occurred, as it would commonly occur on Earth. The experiment confirmed that space is a good insulator in and of itself. (NY Times, Dec 17/87)
An AtlasCentaur rocket, launched during a driving thunderstorm from Cape Canaveral, Florida, veered out of control 52 second after liftoff and was blown up by NASA safety officials. The launch was NASA's third major mission in 1987. Investigators trying to determine the cause of the accident said that data radioed to the ground from the rocket seconds before it careened off course indicated a major electrical disturbance aboard. Investigators speculated that lightning, prevalent in the area at the time, may have caused the failure. (W Post, Mar 27/87; W Post, Mar 31/87; W Times, Mar 31/87)
NASA successfully launched the first of three suborbital rocket experiments to study Supernova 1987A. The rocket, launched from the Woomera, Australia Range, carried an Xray spectrometer that observed Xray emissions in the 0.37 keV band. Two additional rocket experiments were scheduled for launch during a window lasting until March 20. An earlier series of sounding rocket observations of Supernova 1987A were conducted from Woomera during November and December 1987. Both campaigns used Black Brant IX twostage, solidfuel rockets. (LRC Release 887)
NASA and the Missiles Division of LTV Missiles and Electronic Group, Dallas, Texas, announced the signing of an agreement that would grant the firm exclusive rights to commercially produce and market the Scout launch vehicle. NASA considered the negotiation of the agreement as another important advance in establishing a strong U.S. commercial launch vehicle industry through the privatization of Government expendable rocket programs. (NASA Release 88167)
The first commercial launch of a licensed private rocket was successfully carried out at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico. A twostage Starfire suborbital rocket built by Space Services, Inc. carried a canister of experiments on a 198mile ballistic trajectory. The experiment canister, which carried several microgravity materials processing experiments, was retrieved intact at the conclusion of the 15minute suborbital flight. Space Systems, Inc. had previously launched a test rocket carrying a dummy payload in 1982. (NY Times, Mar 30/89; W Post, Mar 30/89; WSJ, Mar 30/89; W Times, Mar 30/89; B Sun, Mar 30/89; P Inq, Mar 30/89; C Trib, Mar 30/89)
The Soviet weekly magazine Ogonyok revealed additional details on the circumstances surrounding a mysterious launch pad explosion of a Soviet rocket in 1960 that killed dozens of workers and the commander of the Soviet Union's rocket forces. Ogonyok attributed the accident, which took place at a secret launch facility at TuraTam, near the Aral Sea, to a flouting of safety rules during a crash program to catch up with the United States in the development of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs). The head of the Soviet Rocket Forces, Chief Artillery Marshal Mitrofan I. Nedelin, was killed along with dozens of workers and soldiers who were situated near the pad when the rocket exploded. AP, Apr 17/89; B Sun, Apr 17/89; W Times, Apr 17/89; C Trib, Apr
A Soviet rocket carrying a TM11 space capsule was launched into orbit from Kazakhstan Republic in Central Asia on this date. Accompanying the two cosmonauts on board was a Japanese television reporter, making him the first journalist in space. Japan's biggest private television company, TBS, as well as other Japanese companies, had their slogans emblazoned on the rocket. B Sun, Dec 3/90; LA Times, Dec 3/90)
The media covered the destruction after launch of Orbital Sciences Corporation's Aries rocket carrying secret Pentagon experiments for Star Wars. The rocket went out of control soon after liftoff and had to be destroyed. (AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91; NY Times, Aug 21/91; WSJ, Aug 21/91; W Post, Aug 21/91; USA Today, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; W Times, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; C Trin, Aug 21/91; LA Times, Aug 21/91)
The press quoted the official Notimex news agency as reporting that the rocket that was to provide data about the sun during the total eclipse on July 11 failed to send back any data. The project was jointly sponsored by the Florida Institute of Technology and the National Autonomous University of Mexico. (AP, Jul 11/91; B Sun, Jul 12/91)
NASA announced November 13 as the launch date for Consort 4, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments. The experiments was to be launched from the Naval Ordnance Missile Test Station at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, with material from the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. (NASA Release 91-173)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax County, Virginia was issued its first license for commercial space launches. The Department of Transportation licensed three launches to be used for experiments on the impact of weightlessness on payloads for the Center for the Commercial Development of Space at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. Orbital, which launched an experimental winged Pegasus rocket from a NASA B-52 bomber last year, was to use a different technology for the DOT-licensed flights. It would launch Prospector rockets developed by the company from a Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch pad refurbished by Orbit. The first launch was scheduled for March 1991, followed by launches in December 1991 and December 1992. (W Post, Jan 3/91)
Peenemunde, Germany was the place where the first self-propelled rocket left the Earth's atmosphere. This occurred on October 3, 1942 when the Nazis launched a 5 1/2 ton V-2 rocket to a height of more than 50 miles. A museum was scheduled to open on the site. (LA Times, Apr 9/91)
The Washington Post carried a lengthy article describing the need for a new cheaper, dependable space launch system and work being done to develop a new family of rockets. The proposed new National Launch System was to be a hybrid of old and new technology to reduce costs. The booster shell would derive from the Shuttle's external fuel tank, topped by a Titan 4 cargo housing. The core would be a newly developed oxygen-hydrogen engine. The rockets would use from one to several engines and for heavy payloads could strap on advanced solid fuel boosters being developed. (W Post, May 13/91)
NASA announced that the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had selected EER Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, to provide vehicle, launch, and recovery services for the next series of Consort suborbital rocket missions. (NASA Release 91-194)
Gregg Easterbrook, contributing editor for Newsweek and Atlantic Monthly, wrote a lengthy article criticizing NASA's slow response to the need for various reforms. He particularly faulted the formation of commissions as being easier than correcting errors and discussed the U.S. lack of a "throwaway space booster." (W Post, Aug 18/91)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket, would be launched from Cape Canaveral on June 7. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
NASA selected the 49-foot Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, for seven launches worth about $56 million, with an option for three more. This contract was additional to one for about $43.5 million for ocean observation. (W Post, Mar 5/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, rescheduled its launch of the Joust 1 rocket at Cape Canaveral for June 5, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, May 21/91)
The media reported on the failure of Orbital Science Corporation's Prospector rocket to take off from the NASA launch pad at Cape Canaveral. The rocket, produced by the Fairfax, Virginia firm, contained 500 pounds of scientific experiments. The flight was sponsored by NASA's Commercial Space Development Center at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. (W Post, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91)
The Council on Competitiveness in its report found the United States leading the world or holding its own in 61 of 94 technologies considered crucial to future economic progress, including rocket engines, computer software, biotechnology, and advanced welding techniques. However, it deemed the United States trailing in 33 other fields including laser technology and semiconductor chips. International competition and joint efforts to develop a supersonic plane with a new "hypersonic engine" are discussed. Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget Project, commented that although most such research would be global, many US firms still did not see themselves as part of a global industry. (W Post, Mar 21/97; P Inq, Mar 21/97)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying 10 materials and biotechnology experiments, would be launched on March 29 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The mission was sponsored by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for Commercial Development of Space. Space Data Division of Orbital Sciences Corporation would provide rocket and launch services to lift the payload approximately 400 miles into space. In addition to UAH CMDS, four other NASA commercial development centers and two industrial firms were involved. (NASA Release 91-33)
The media reported the launch from Cape Canaveral by Orbital Sciences Corporation of a small Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments for the Defense Department. The experiments were intended to help in designing sensors to measure heat-emitting "signatures" of ballistic missiles in flight. (AP, Oct 14/91; W Times, Oct 15/91)
AP reported that after a delay caused by a battery failure in one of the experiments, a three-ton Starfire 1 rocket blasted off from the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico. After its 15-minute flight peaking at 185 miles above Earth, researchers recovered the rocket's payload in the missile range 50 miles from the launch pad. The rocket spent seven minutes in microgravity, an area of little gravity on the edge of space, where nine experiments were conducted. (AP, Nov 16/91)
The Washington Times also dealt with space law and the risks involved in such matters as rocket launches. In the latter connection, it cited Orbital Sciences Corporation and its difficulties. Because most commercial space companies had NASA or the U.S. government as a customer, changes in government had an impact on the legal aspects. (W Times, Sep 29/91)
A University of Alabama, Huntsville-managed sounding rocket launch was canceled on November 12 when an electrical problem occurred with one experiment. The launch of the Consort 4 from the White Sands New Mexico Missile Range was reset for November 16. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; AP, Nov 13/91)
NASA launched a rocket from Puerto Rico's north coast at 7:55 p.m. EDT to study radio waves in the ionosphere. The launch, originally set for May 18 but delayed due to bad weather, was the first time NASA had launched from the Caribbean island since 1967. (USA Today, May 26/92; AP, May 26/92)
Reacting to a wave of international protest and some severe domestic criticism, Germany canceled a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the first successful V-2 rocket launch at the Peenemunde range on the north German coast. The first V-2 rocket was fired on October 3, 1942, under the direction of Werner von Braun, then a young scientist. The date is generally recognized as the birth of the space age. (LA Times, Sept 29/92; W Post, Sept 29/92)
The first student managed and built payload flown on a NASA sounding rocket was launched successfully from the NASA flight facility on Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 92-156)
Germany announced that it would go ahead with a celebration to mark the 50th anniversary of the first launch of the V-2 rocket despite British protests. The organizers said the event would celebrate the "first step into space" and did not represent a glorification of a Nazi weapon. (W Post, Sept 28/92;  The Sun, Sept 26/92)
The launch of Consort 5, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments, was scheduled for September 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. A two-stage Starfire solid fuel rocket would carry the payload to an altitude of 200 miles and provide the experiments with seven to eight minutes of microgravity exposure or weightlessness. The rocket and launch services were funded by a grant from NASA's Office of Commercial Programs.(NASA Release 92-133)
The "Brilliant Pebbles" missile-defense system suffered a new setback when the test of an experimental rocket was aborted 55 seconds after launch. It was the second failure in three experimental launches. (W Post, Oct 25/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, suffered another failure of one of its rockets. Ground controllers blew up the rocket about seven minutes into its flight at Wake Island in the Pacific Ocean, conducted as part of the Pentagon's "Brillinat Pebbles" program. (W Post, Nov 4/92)
Launch of the Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET), which was scheduled to lift off March 31, was postponed for at least two months. NASA contributed $85 million toward three launches of the COMET; the spacecraft was to carry ll experiments from NASA's commercial space development centers. COMET was also serving as the first space billboard. Columbia Pictures paid $500,000 to advertize an upcoming Arnold Schwarzenegger movie on the rocket. (Space News, Mar 8-14; AP, 9/93, Mar 10/93)
Washington Technology reported that Rich Fleet, president of Herndon/Virginia-based PacAstro, planned to build an inexpensive launch rocket. Using technology from Apollo-era liquid rocket boosters and other reliable time-tested components, Fleeter intended to offer 750-pound, low-earth-orbit access for $5 million a shot. This amount was half of what other mainline smallsat launch firms such as Orbital Sciences and EER were asking. FLeeter also runs PacAstro's sister company AeroAstro, a manufacturer of low-cost smallsats. (Washington Technology, Jan 28/93)
The French National Space Agency announced that Western Europe's first Ariane-5 solid-fuel rocket booster had undergone successful tests at a launch center in French Guiana. (RTw, Mar 6/93)
NASA took action to limit expenditures on the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program.  NASA informed its field installations involved with the ASRM that if the pending appropriations bill becomes law, it would require termination of the ASRM program. (NASA Release 93-189)
The Washington Post reported that two separate investigations of a failed Atlas rocket launch last March had concluded that the mishap was caused by the loosening of a tiny screw that helps regulate the flow of liquid oxygen propellent. The completion of the investigations allowed General Dynamics Corporation, the company that built the rocket, to resume launches. (W Post, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; H Chron, June 9/93)
Orbital Science Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, announced that it was again planning to launch its Pegasus orbital rocket after scrubbing launches three times in the past two months because of technical problems.
Western Europe's second Ariane-5 booster was tested in a jungle clearing in French Guiana, space officials announced. The first Ariane-5 rocket was scheduled for launch in 1996. (RTw, June 25/93)
The Delta Clipper-Experimental (DC-X) rocket's first flight was scheduled for August 18 at White Sands Missile Range in Southern New Mexico. The 42-foot-tall, bullet-shaped DC-X is a one-third scale prototype of single-stage, reusable rocket that would be light enough to reach orbit and return without needing expensive lower stages or boosters that get thrown away on every flight.  It would fire its engines to land vertically. The DC-0X was developed by McDonnell Douglas with funding by the federal Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. (AP, Aug 17/93)
Loral Corporation's Loral Vought Systems unit announced that Japan had agreed to buy a multiple-launch rocket system. The four-year contract was for $250 million. The agreement included 1,300 tactical and practice rockets, 47 launcher trainer pods, and 36 launchers for the ground-to-ground defense system. (WSJ, Jan 26/93)
A New York Times article reported that a debate is going on over the degree of danger posed by the Space Shuttle's solid-fueled rocket boosters.  Repeatedly this year, the boosters have shown alarming variations in their thrust, prompting a number of quiet NASA investigations and accusations by critics that the problem is a time bomb waiting to go off.  (NY Times, Dec 4/93; Fl Today, Dec 7/93
The three main commercial sponsors of the 52-foot Conestoga 1620 rocket scheduled to be launched this spring from Wallops Island, Virginia, were selling ad space on the shell of the rocket. The price: $500,000 for 58 feet of space. The Conestoga launch was part of NASA's Commercial Experiment Transport program. (P Inq, Jan 14/93; USA Today, Jan 13/93; Advertising Age, Jan 11/93; W Post, Jan 26/93)
Plans called for the Topaz 2 reactor to be put into an orbit 1,000 feet high; over the span of a year, the spacecraft housing the reactor would be lifted to 19,000 feet by an electric propulsion system powered by the reactor. The mission was projected to cost $l50 million. To stay within this budget, the Pentagon would need to use the planned Delta rocket rather than a more expensive Atlas rocket. (NY Times, Jan 12/93)
The Wall Street Journal reported that technical problems had delayed until August the launch of the unmanned Comet space rocket on which Columbia Pictures had a giant outer-space billboard advertising its major summer movie, "Last Action Hero." (WSJ, May 6/93; W Times, May 7/93; NY Times, May 11/93)
NASA announced that when the first U.S. commercial rocket lift off in May, its main fuselage and booster rocket were scheduled to carry the logo, "Last Action Hero," the title of a Columbia Pictures summer movie release starring Arnold Schwarzenegger. Columbia paid $50,000 for the ad, which was to be orbiting earth for more than two years. (WSJ, Mar 3/93; B Sun, Mar 3/93; W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93)
A commercial suborbital rocket carrying seven experiments was scheduled to be launched on February 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space. The Consort rocket and launch services are funded by a grant from the space agency's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-22)
Some 20 students in the Student Rocket Program at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, built a rocket from scratch over the preceding year and a half. The rocket was to be launched when NASA radar technicians came to Poker Flat for other planned launches. NASA and other U.S. government agencies invested millions of dollars to upgrade 25-year-old Poker Flat, the world's only university-owned rocket range, which had an excellent far northern location. The objective of the rocket flight was technical performance: to get the $20,000 rocket into the Earth's stratosphere and to keep in contact with it during its brief flight by satellite-relayed signals. (AP, Apr 25/94)
The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) ordered NASA in 1991 to conduct a sitewide investigation of longstanding environmental problems across its 352-acre complex on the western border of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport. The problems included dumps containing spent rocket fuel and contamination of soil and water by mercury. To date there was little evidence of progress apart from much discussion of how the eventual cleanup would be done. (Plain Dealer, Oct 16/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced it would eliminate 1,800 of its 2,100 jobs at its recently acquired space launch business in San Diego. The company planned to move the production of Atlas and Centaur launch systems to its Titan rocket plant in Denver. (LA Times, Jun 17/94)
An unmanned DC-X (Delta Clipper Experimental) rocket made an emergency landing at the White Sands Missile Range following a mysterious explosion soon after its engines started. The Ballistic Missile Defense Organization developed the missile, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation manufactured it. The flight was the fifth for the unusual rocket, which was made to take off and land vertically. The DC-X was grounded in the fall of 1993 when the project ran out of money. However, NASA came up with enough funds to keep the program going until Congress appropriated $5 million to complete its flight test program. Ultimately the rocket was to be turned over to NASA. (NY Times, Jun 28/94)
NASA announced that it had selected the science team for the first spacecraft designed to rendezvous with an asteroid, the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mission. The NEAR spacecraft was scheduled for launch in February 1996 aboard a Delta 2 rocket and should arrive in orbit around asteroid 433 Eros in early January 1999. It would survey Eros for a minimum of one year, at altitudes as close as 15 miles. The NEAR Science Payload would consist of six instruments: a multispectral imager system, a near-infrared spectrograph, an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a magnetometer, a laser altimeter, and the spacecraft's radio, which was sued also for gravity measurements. Members of the science team were assigned to each of these instruments. (NASA Release 94-159)
Japan scheduled the launch of the H-2, its first rocket built without U.S. technology, whose development has taken ten years and $2.4 billion. A consortium of 74 Japanese companies built it and formed the Rocket Systems Corporation to market it. (C Trib, Jan 23/94, NY Times, Jan 26/94, WSJ, Jan 31/94, Reuters, Jan 30/94, Reuters, Jan 31/94, Reuters, Jan 30/94; CSM, Feb 3/94)
India signed a new agreement to buy seven rocket engines from Russia's commercial space organization, according to U.R. Rao, outgoing head of the Indian Space Research Organisation. The first engine was to be delivered in 1996 and the remainder over a three-year period. (Reuters, Mar 30/94)
NASA announced the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the Commission for Space Activities of the Federative Republic of Brazil (COBAE). The two parties were to conduct a sounding rocket campaign in Brazil from July through October 1994 to investigate the electrodynamics and irregularities in the ionosphere and mesosphere along the Earth's magnetic equator and study their relationship with the neutral atmosphere and winds. NASA was to launch, with the support of COBAE, 33 rockets from the new Brazilian launch range, Centro de Lan�amentos de Alc�ntara in Maranh�o. Brazilian scientific participation was to be coordinated by the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE) and was to be named the Guara Campaign after a lovely bird native to the equatorial region of Brazil. (NASA Release 94-51)
NASA reportedly transferred $990,000 to the Defense Department's Ballistic Missile Defense Organization to maintain the Delta Clipper program. McDonnell Douglas Aerospace had developed a rocket that takes off and lands vertically, which is covered by this program. NASA wished to keep the option of using the DC-X as a flight demonstrator of single-stage-to-orbit technologies in support of NASA's advanced launch technology effort. The program was operated from the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. (RTw, Jan 31/94; H Post, Feb 3/94)
The launch of the H-II (also seen as H-2) rocket created by the Japanese consortium Rocket Systems Corporation was scheduled for February 4. The rocket, large enough to lift a two-ton payload into geostationary orbit, cost $2.5 billion to develop and was two years behind schedule. (CSM, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 4/94; UP, Feb 4/94; LA Times, Feb 7/94)
Norman Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, said the company would not buy General Dynamics Corporation's space-launch business for $208.5 million as planned unless the government agreed to pay more for those services. Martin Marietta wanted a part of the more than $400 million in savings it anticipated that the government could realize over 10 years as a result of Martin Marietta merging its Titan IV heavy-launch rocket business with General Dynamics' medium-lift Atlas-Centaur system. (WSJ, Feb 22/94)
A Conestoga rocket exploded 45 seconds after liftoff from NASA�s Wallops Island, Virginia. Built by EER Systems Corp., the rocket was ending its first stage when it blew up. (NY Times, Oct 24/95; W Post, Oct 25/95; W Times, Oct 25/95; USA Today, Oct 24/95; Space News, Oct 9/95, Oct 30/95 & Dec 11/95; AvWk, Oct 30/95)
The Delta 3 launch vehicle has a new second stage rocket engine planned for use in 1998. The new engine will be capable of generating 24,000 pounds of thrust. In combination with the larger solid-fueled boosters, the McDonnell Douglas Delta 3 will be able to carry twice the weight of the Delta into an orbit 22,300 miles above the surface of the Earth�s equator. (Fla Today, Jul 7/95; AvWk, Sep 25/95)
Lockheed Martin�s new rocket malfunctioned as it was launched from Vandenburg AFB, California. The Lockheed Launch Vehicle (LLV-1) was designed to place payloads weighing up to one ton into low Earth orbit. (USA Today, Aug 16/95; Fla Today, Sep 3/95; Space News, Oct 2/95; AP, Aug 16/95; AvWk, Aug 14/95, Aug 21/95; Aug 28/95, Sep 4/95 & Dec 18/95)
NASA is working with industry to develop an air-launched, fly-back booster called the X-34. The U.S. hopes that a financially viable X-34 will return it to leadership in commercial space transportation. (Fla Today, Mar 31/95; AvWk, Apr 3/95)
NASA agreed to restructure and extend its contract with USBI Company, which had previously assembled and refurbished the Shuttle’s solid rocket boosters. The new contract extended the partnership for 45 months, paying US$500 million to USBI to support the Shuttle program. Based on the terms of the agreement and on USBI’s production schedule, NASA estimated that the partnership would cover approximately seven Shuttle missions annually for the duration of the contract.(NASA, “NASA Restructures/Extends USBI Contract for Solid Rocket Booster Elements,” news release C96-c, 8 March 1996.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) experienced a setback when one of its prototypes for a small, robotic spacecraft landed in the ocean and sank. The Japanese officials had anticipated the ocean landing immediately after the launch of the Hyflex shuttle, the Hope-X, from an island in southern Japan. In spite of the loss of its shuttle, NASDA did not consider the exercise an entire failure. The Hope-X had launched successfully, separated from its rocket at a height of 70 miles (113 kilometers), and then returned to Earth 19 minutes later, as planned. The problem occurred when the craft splashed into the ocean, and a rope connecting the 1-ton (900- kilogram or 0.9-tonne) shuttle to its flotation device broke, causing it to sink. NASDA reported that it had intended to collect data during the flight to test the shuttle’s fitness for reentry, but had been unable to procure much of the information needed. Japan had manufactured the US$37 million shuttle domestically, planning the exercise as a part of its effort to bolster its fledgling space program.(Associated Press, “Japanese Shuttle Sinks,” 12 February 1996.)
Rocket scientist Albert E. Schuler died of natural causes at the age of 83, the third original member of Wernher von Braun’s rocket team to die in the same week. Schuler had retired from NASA in 1969, after a career overseeing measurement of instrumentation on test stands and rockets during static firings and overseeing flight instrumentation, guidance, and control on rocket flights.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die.”)
One thousand Puerto Ricans protested against NASA’s plans to launch, from a nature preserve in Puerto Rico, suborbital rockets filled with chemicals. The Coqui Dos program planned the launch to measure high-level winds and turbulence in the upper atmosphere. Coqui Dos continued the El Coqui program of 1992, part of NASA’s Suborbital Sounding Rocket program, which launched 25 sounding rockets annually from locations worldwide. Because the rockets would disperse aluminum trimethol before crashing into the sea, the protesters demanded that NASA produce studies proving that the launch would not damage the environment. The mayor of Vega Baja led the protest outside the entrance to the Tortuguero Recreation Area, the section of the nature preserve where the rocket launches would take place, threatening to sue NASA to force it to release environmental impact studies from the 1992 launch.(NASA, “NASA Studying Space Weather from Puerto Rico,” news release 98-23, 6 February 1998; Mario Maldonado for Associated Press, “Puerto Rico-NASA,” 1 February 1998; Lance Oliver, “11 Launches Will Attract Protesters: Many in Puerto Rico Fear Damage by Research Rockets,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 February 1998.)
The Huntsville Alabama L5 Society (HAL5), a chapter of the National Space Society, failed in its second attempt to become the first group of amateurs to launch a rocket into space. The society attempted to use a hot-air balloon from a NASA barge in the Gulf of Mexico to launch its rocket, a launch concept known as a rockoon. According to the rockoon concept, a small rocket may “obtain very high altitude because there is little air to slow it down during launch.” James A. Van Allen had been the first to fly rockoons in the 1950s, as part of a joint U.S. Navy- University of Iowa project. The U.S. Navy had abandoned the technique after large, ground- based, sounding rockets became available. NASA’s MSFC signed a cooperative agreement with HAL5 in 1996, continuing the relationship for the High Altitude Lift-Off mission. MSFC had supplied HAL5 with the barge, helium for the balloon, nitrous oxide for the rocket, and some funds for materials. HAL5 sought to “make space more affordable for students, amateurs, experimenters, and researchers.” NASA was examining alternate launch sites and methods in an effort to find ways of reducing the cost of rocket launches.(HAL5 Project, “Space Group Hopes To Launch First Amateur Rocket into Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 June 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Space Buffs in Alabama Can’t Get Rocket Launched,” 21 June 1998; William R. Corliss, “Chapter 4: Development of the First Sounding Rockets,” in NASA Sounding Rockets, 1958– 1968: A Historical Summary (Washington, DC: NASA Scientific and Technical Information Office, 1971), http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4401/contents.htm (accessed 30 January 2008).)
KSC officials broke ground on a complex for testing a NASA experimental rocket, the X-34. Engineers had designed the vehicle⎯a small, winged rocket⎯to launch into orbit from an airplane and to return to Earth, landing like an airplane. Planning flight tests to begin in 2000, KSC hoped the new facility would attract commercial space enterprises, such as Lockheed’s VentureStarTM, still under development. Facilities anywhere in the country would be able to launch the VentureStarTM, once completed, because it would not use boosters or fuel tanks and, therefore, would not require a coastal launch site.(Robyn Suriano, “NASA Breaks Ground for $8 Million Complex To Serve New Rocket, Attract VentureStar,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 1998.)
Heinrich K. Paetz, an original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, died of natural causes at the age of 88, the second team member to die within the week. Before retiring from NASA in 1970, Paetz had participated in the Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn I, and Saturn V programs as a member of the test branch.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die.”)
The National Research Council Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades released a report cautioning NASA “not to wait too long to choose between keeping the Shuttle until 2020 or scrapping it after 2012 in favor of a new vehicle like Lockheed Martin’s proposed VentureStar.” The committee, led by former astronaut and former head of the Space Shuttle Program Bryan D. O’Connor, advised NASA to make a timely decision to either phase out the Shuttle upgrade program or make the major investments necessary for the Shuttle to carry out reliably its long- term mission. The panel specifically addressed the Liquid Fly Back Booster (LFBB), the most expensive Shuttle upgrade under consideration, with development costs estimated at between US$2 billion and US$7 billion. The panel’s report revealed that NASA had not investigated enough alternatives to the LFBB to ensure that it was “the most appropriate way to meet the needs of the Shuttle and other programs.”(Aerospace Daily, “NRC Panel Worried NASA Hasn’t Studied Alternatives to LFBB,” 13 January 1999.)
NASA’s GRC announced that, for the first time, researchers had suspended particles of frozen hydrogen in liquid helium, the first step toward creating new rocket fuels that could revolutionize rocket-propulsion technology. Researchers had poured small amounts of liquid hydrogen at a temperature of 14 K (-435°F or -259°C), just above freezing point, onto the surface of liquid helium of a temperature just above absolute zero, at 4 K (-452°F or -269°C). The liquid hydrogen had formed small, solid hydrogen particles, which floated on the surface of the helium. Scientists planned to use the suspension to create “futuristic atomic fuels,” making it possible to develop rockets with “liftoff weights one-fifth that of today’s [rockets] or with payloads three to four times more massive.” In addition, the suspension could “reduce or eliminate on-orbit assembly of large space vehicles,” thereby contributing to the exploration of the entire solar system.(NASA Glenn Research Center, “Rocket Fuels Researchers Suspend Frozen Hydrogen Particles in Helium,” news release 99-65, 12 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/news/pressrel/1999/99_65.html (accessed 25 February 2008).)
NASA announced that it had lost contact with the US$159 million comet-exploring spacecraft Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR), launched on 3 July 2002. Ground controllers had lost contact with CONTOUR after a scheduled ignition of its solid-propellant rocket engine, designed to propel the spacecraft out of Earth-orbiting space and into a heliocentric trajectory where it would eventually encounter comets Encke, Schwassmann-Wachmann, and d’Arrest. At the time of its scheduled ignition, the spacecraft was orbiting Earth approximately 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the Indian Ocean.(Warren E. Leary, “Comet-Exploring Spacecraft Has Disappeared, NASA Says,” New York Times, 16 August 2002; NASA National Space Science Data Center, “CONTOUR,” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ nmc/masterCatalog.do?sc=2002-034A (accessed 26 September 2008).)
Alain Bensoussan, president of the French space agency, announced that he was resigning from his post because he no longer had the support he needed to continue his job. Bensoussan had been the “target of increasingly bitter attacks” lodged by frustrated employees who no longer perceived a clear direction in the agency’s mission. Bensoussan had also faced the failure of a new Ariane 5 rocket and an agency budget that had decreased steadily since 1997, despite the addition of new programs. Moreover, the French government had commissioned a report evaluating the space agency’s current status and future direction, and the report had been “lukewarm in its assessment” of Bensoussan. Following the publication of the report, France’s space minister Claudie Haignere had stated that the agency had not yet made a decision about its future management. The commission’s findings and the space minister’s statement had not provided a strong message of support for Bensoussan’s leadership.(Peter B. de Selding, “French Space Agency Chief To Resign,” Space News, 29 January 2003.)
Starchaser Industries Ltd., a British entry for the X Prize competition, successfully tested its Nova 2 rocket capsule, dropping it from a Fairfield C123K aircraft near Kingman, Arizona. Parachute expert Ted Strong piloted the capsule, which the aircraft had released at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,048 meters). Traveling at 100 miles per hour (161 kilometers per hour), the craft deployed a 10-foot (3-meter) drogue parachute to stabilize its descent, and 5 seconds later, the pilot “oriented the capsule into a horizontal position” before deploying the main steerable canopy. The pilot flew the capsule like a glider to a precision landing.(Space.com, “X Prize Entry Starchaser Successfully Test Drops Piloted Capsule,” 24 July 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/starchaser_test_030424.html (accessed 12 January 2009). 486 NASA, “Atlas V Chosen To Launch New Horizons Mission,” contract release C03-y, Space.com (accessed 23 December 2008).)
NASA released its Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) report, which identified four possible causes for the failure of the comet-rendezvous mission. The CONTOUR Missionintended to encounter at least two comets and to perform investigations and analyses of comet materialhad launched on 3 July 2002. NASA had lost contact with the craft on 15 August 2002, following a propulsive maneuver involving the solid rocket motor (SRM), and had been unable to reestablish contact as of 20 December 2002. On that date, NASA and Johns Hopkins University’s Applied Physics Laboratory had concluded that the spacecraft was lost. NASA had established the MIB on 22 August 2002. The CONTOUR MIB’s task was to examine the processes, data, and actions surrounding the events of 15 August; to search for proximate and root causes of the loss of the craft; and to develop recommendations for future missions. In its report, the CONTOUR MIB concluded that the probable cause of the mission’s failure was the structural failure of the spacecraft resulting from plume heating during the embedded SRM burn on 15 August. However, the lack of telemetry and observational data, immediately before and during the burn, as well as the lack of recoverable debris, left open the possibility that one of several other problems might have contributed to the loss of the spacecraft. The MIB report identified as other possible causes the catastrophic failure of the SRM; collision with space debris or meteoroids; and the loss of dynamic control of the spacecraft.(NASA, “Contour Mishap Board Completes Investigation,” news release 03-324, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03324_contour.html (accessed 27 January 2009); NASA, “Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Mishap Investigation Board Report,” 31 May 2003; Associated Press, “Heat from Rocket Likely Broke Up Unmanned Spacecraft―NASA,” 16 October 2003.)
ESA launched the Rosetta comet probe on an Ariane 5 rocket at 7:17 a.m. (UT) from the Guiana Space Centre in French Guiana. ESA had created Rosettathe first spacecraft designed to enter
Brazil successfully launched its first rocket from the Alcântara launch site in the state of Maranhão. The two-stage rocket called the Veículo de Sondagem Booster-30 (VSB- 30)―Spanish for Sounding Booster Vehicle―was 12.6 meters (41.3 feet) long, had a total mass of 2,570 kilograms (5,666 pounds), and was capable of carrying a payload of up to 400 kilograms (882 pounds). According to Brazilian officials, the government expected to sell up to 15 of the rockets to ESA.(Los Angeles Times, “Brazil Succeeds in Sending First Rocket to Space,” 24 October 2004; Agénica Espacial Brasileira [Brazilian Space Agency], “Foguetes de Sondagem [Survey of Rockets],” http://www.aeb.gov.br/indexx.php?secao=lancadores (accessed 14 November 2009).)
The NASA probe known as Deep Impact launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida, on its mission to Comet Tempel One. The craft carried an impactor, intended to collide with the comet to create a crater about 100 meters (328 feet) wide and 28 meters (92 feet) deep, as well as two instruments designed to observe the impact and its aftermath in visible and infrared wavelengths. NASA planned for the craft to launch the impactor into the comet on 4 July 2005. Mission scientists hoped the data collected from the impact would reveal information about the birth of the solar system.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 615, 1 February 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx615.html (accessed 13 August 2009).)
A UP Aerospace–built SpaceLoft SL-2 rocket launched from Spaceport America in New Mexico, carrying small amounts of the cremated remains of approximately 200 people, including Star Trek creator Eugene W. Roddenberry and Star Trek actor James M. Doohan. The event was the first successful launch into space from the commercial spaceport; the company’s first attempt in December 2006 had failed when the SpaceLoft XL rocket corkscrewed out of control seconds after the launch, never reaching space. The SL-2 rocket reached an altitude of almost 73 miles (117 kilometers) before returning to Earth. The payload landed by parachute at WSMR, 33 miles (53 kilometers) east of the launch site. UP Aerospace President Jerry Larson remarked that the launch’s only malfunction was a signal beacon, an equipment failure that prevented WSMR from tracking the launch vehicle during the opening moments of the 13-minute flight.(Jose L. Medina, “Spaceport Launch a Success,” Las Cruces Sun News (NM), 30 April 2007.)
The government of Sweden announced that it had signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the suborbital-space tourism company Virgin Galactic. The agreement established plans for Virgin’s SpaceShipTwo vehicle to launch from a site in Kiruna, Sweden, during the midsummer and midwinter, so that the craft could fly through the aurora borealis. In preparation for future flights, Swedish Space Corporation authorities planned a March 2008 demonstration launch of a small sounding rocket equipped with cameras. SpaceShipTwo designer Burt Rutan would collect data to determine the possible effect of the aurora borealis on passengers or on electronics aboard the spacecraft. The MOU did not call for any exchange of funds, because the Kiruna facility was the site of suborbital sounding rocket and atmospheric balloon launches. Swedish officials stated that the site had sufficient infrastructure to accommodate Virgin Galactic craft without new investment.(Peter B. de Selding, “Virgin Galactic Strikes Deal with Swedish Government,” Space.com, 28 January 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070128_sweden_virgin.html (accessed 9 November 2009).)
A Dnepr rocket carrying Bigelow Aerospace Corporation’s Genesis-2 inflatable spacecraft launched from ISC Kosmotras Yasny Cosmodrome in Russia’s Orenburg region at 15:02 (UT). Bigelow Aerospace had designed and built the 15-foot-long (4.6-meter-long) technology demonstrator, which was part of the vision for an affordable space tourism market. Genesis 2 would deploy eight solar arrays and expand to a diameter of 8 feet (2.44 meters) from its launch width of 6.2 feet (1.9 meters). The craft’s design—involving the use of flexible material,
XCOR Aerospace announced that it had successfully completed six short-duration test fires of the prototype engine 5M15, the new 7,500-pound-thrust (3.75-ton-thrust or 3.4-tonne-thrust) rocket engine, using liquid methane and liquid oxygen as propellants. Spokesperson Aleta Jackson explained that XCOR had designed the test fires to determine the appropriate length of the chamber for a flight-weight version of the engine. XCOR had developed the engine as part of a subcontract with Alliant Techsystems (ATK), which was developing liquid-methane rocket engine technology for NASA’s future space applications.(XCOR Aerospace, “XCOR Aerospace Begins Test Firing of Methane Rocket Engine: Successful Test Completed for NASA,” press release, 16 January 2007, http://www.xcor.com/press-releases/2007/07-01-16_XCOR_begins_ methane_engine_testing.html (accessed 9 November 2009).)
New Mexico Spaceport Authority announced the successful launch of a UP Aerospace flight vehicle. The company had launched the flight vehicle to test proprietary advanced launch technologies. At the request of UP Aerospace, the New Mexico Spaceport Authority had not publicized the launch, which was the Connecticut-based company’s third launch attempt. In the company’s first launch attempt in September 2006, the vehicle had failed to reach space. Although the April 2007 second attempt had succeeded, locating the rocket after launch had required weeks of searching. In this third attempt, the launch vehicle had reached its planned altitude of 2,500 feet (762 meters).(New Mexico Spaceport Authority, “UP Aerospace Reports Successful Launch at Spaceport America,” news release, 19 December 2007, http://www.spaceportamerica.com/news/press-releases/104-up-areo-reports-success- launch.html (accessed 19 November 2010); Las Cruces Sun-News (NM), “Unannounced Launch Lifts Off from Spaceport,” 20 December 2007.)
NASA’s KSC announced that it had awarded a contract for the construction of the Ares-I mobile launcher to Hensel Phelps of Orlando, Florida. The Ares-I rocket, as part of the Constellation Program, would transport the Orion CEV (crew exploration vehicle), with its crew and cargo, into low Earth orbit. The contractor had agreed to construct a mobile launcher that would transport the Ares I to the launchpad and to provide ground support for the launches. The mobile launcher would comprise a main support structure, which would include a base, a tower, and ground-support systems for the facility. Handel Phelps would supply all of the equipment, labor, and materials for the project; separate contracts would provide for ground-support equipment. The firm fixed-price contract, which included an option for an additional Ares-I mobile launcher, could be worth up to US$263,735,000, if NASA exercised all the options.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Ares I Mobile Launcher,” news release C08-025, 8 May 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_C08025_Ares_MLP_contract.html (accessed 16 March 2011).)
NASA announced that LRO had successfully completed its first round of environmental testing. Engineers had performed the tests, which included a spin test and a vibration test, at NASA’s GSFC. The spin test ascertained the craft’s center of gravity and measured its rotation. The vibration test determined the structural integrity of LRO by simulating the shaking the craft would experience during launch. Before the launch, NASA planned for LRO to undergo acoustics testing, thermal-vacuum testing, and a simulation of separation from the rocket during launch. LRO’s launch window would open on 27 February 2009.
NASA’s Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) launched from the Kwajalein Atoll at 17:47 (UT) aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket. The probe was embarking on a two-year mission to create an image of the interstellar boundary region. IBEX carried two large-aperture, single-pixel “cameras” to create an image of the outer solar system. Instead of capturing light, the cameras detected energetic neutral atoms. Energetic neutral atoms are created in the outer solar system when the hot solar wind, moving at 1 million miles per hour (1,609,344 kilometers per hour), collides with the cold gases of interstellar space. The interstellar boundary region shelters Earth from dangerous cosmic rays that otherwise would enter Earth’s orbit and affect human health and spaceflight. NASA’s GSFC was managing IBEX, which was part of the Small Explorers program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, “NASA Launches IBEX Mission to Outer Solar System,” news release 08-262, 19 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08262_IBEX_Launch.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Agence France-Presse, “NASA Launches Probe To Study Edge of Solar System,” 20 October 2008.)
Iran’s state-run media announced that the country had successfully launched a rocket called Kavoshgar 2 into space. A follow-up to the 4 February 2008 launch of the first Kavoshgar rocket, Kavoshgar 2 had reportedly performed its functions, landing 40 minutes later. Iranian media stated that the rocket had consisted of three parts, including a space laboratory. Kavoshgar 2’s mission had been to conduct space experiments on the atmosphere, to test its payload’s retrieval system, and to facilitate academic coordination among scientists.(Agence France-Presse, “Iran Says It Has Sent Another Rocket into Space,” 26 November 2008.)
NASA announced the successful test of a critical piece of the Ares-I rocket, marking a key milestone in the next-generation crew launch vehicle’s (CLV’s) development. ATK had conducted the flight test at its facility in Promontory, Utah. Simulating the separation event that should occur following the first-stage flight of Ares I-X, the test had demonstrated that the linear-shaped charge intended to separate the forward skirt extension would sever cleanly. The test had also measured the shock that the charge created. Built as a single, solid aluminum cylinder, 6 feet long (1.8 meters long) by 12 feet in diameter (3.7 meters in diameter), the forward skirt extension’s design enabled it to withstand the loads of the first stage and to support the weight of the upper stage. Michael A. Kahn, Executive Vice President of ATK Space Systems, remarked that the successful test represented an important milestone for the program, validating key parameters to support the upcoming Ares-I-X flight test.(NASA, “Test in Development of NASA’s New Crew Rocket Is Successful,” news release 09-022, 30 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-022_Ares_1-X_Sep_test.html (accessed 14 January 2010); ATK, “ATK Successfully Conducts NASA Ares 1-X Separation Test,” press release, 30 January 2009, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=892 (accessed 7 March 2011); Todd Halvorson, “NASA Stages Key Test in Advance of Ares 1X,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2009.)
NASA announced the successful demonstration of an inflatable heat shield slowing and protecting itself as it entered the atmosphere at hypersonic speeds—the first time that anyone had successfully flown an inflatable reentry capsule. NASA launched the Inflatable Re-entry Vehicle Experiment (IRVE) on a 50-foot (15.2-meter) Black Brant–9 sounding rocket, from NASA’s WFF on Wallops Island, Virginia, at 8:52 a.m. (EDT). Made of several layers of silicone-coated Kevlar, the heat shield inflated with nitrogen several minutes after launch, from a 15-inch- diameter (38-centimeter-diameter) payload to a 10-foot-diameter (3-meter-diameter) mushroom- shaped aeroshell. The inflation process, which occurred on schedule at an altitude of 124 miles (200 kilometers), required fewer than 90 seconds. Six-and-a-half minutes into flight, at an altitude of 50 miles (80.5 kilometers), the aeroshell entered the key phase of the demonstration, experiencing its peak heating and pressure measurements for approximately 30 seconds. An onboard telemetry system collected data from its instruments, broadcasting that information to engineers in real time. The entire mission lasted approximately 20 minutes, ending with splashdown in the Atlantic Ocean approximately 90 miles (145 kilometers) east of Wallops. NASA did not retrieve either the shield or the rocket. IRVE Project Manager Mary Beth Wusk, based at LaRC, remarked that, with the success of the small-scale demonstrator, NASA’s next step would be to build a more advanced aeroshell, capable of handling higher heat rates—a promising development for future planetary missions.(NASA, “NASA Launches New Technology: An Inflatable Heat Shield,” news release 09-188, 17 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-188_IRVE_launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011); Cory Nealon, “The Newest from NASA: Inflatable Brakes,” Newport News Daily Press (VA), 18 August 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Inflatable Spacecraft Shield Works, Space Test Shows,” Space.com, 17 August 2009, http://www. space.com/7144-inflatable-spacecraft-shield-works-space-test-shows.html (accessed 12 September 2011).)
Commander Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow docked Discovery with the ISS, relying solely on the Shuttle’s powerful primary jet thrusters, marking the first occurrence of this type of docking. All six of the Shuttle’s small nose-and-tail steering thrusters were incapacited when a single forward jet failed, prompting NASA to shut down both of Discovery’s small forward jets, as well as the four small thrusters in the orbiter’s tail. NASA had taken these measures because of concern that toxic rocket propellant could spray onto the ISS solar wings, reducing the wings’ ability to produce power. LeRoy E. Cain, Chair of NASA’s Mission Management Team, explained that, although flying the Shuttle with only the primary jets presented a challenge, NASA had fully certified the alternative docking mode and had trained all crews headed for the ISS for that possibility. NASA commentator Rob Navias described Sturckow’s approach and docking as “textbook,” saying that the “entire rendezvous and docking was smooth as silk.”(Todd Halvorson, “Skipper Nails Tricky Move,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 August 2009. 48)
Amateur rocket enthusiast Steve Eves broke two world records when he successfully launched his 0.1-scale model of a Saturn-V rocket from the Maryland-Delaware Rocketry Association’s home field on Maryland’s Eastern Shore. At 36 feet (10.97 meters) and 1,648 pounds (748 kilograms), the model rocket was the largest and heaviest amateur rocket launched and recovered to date. Eves had powered his Saturn-V model with nine motors—eight of them were 13,000- Newton-second-N-Class motors and one was a 77,000-Newton-second-P-class motor—that lifted the rocket 4,440 feet (1,353.31 meters) straight up into the air. Eves, an auto-body repair specialist by trade, had begun working on his Saturn-V model two years before the launch, after tracking down schematics on the Internet and locating old NASA drawings. Eves had built the skeleton using seven-ply aircraft-grade plywood and the tubular skin using nearly 300 square feet (91.44 square meters) of Luan plywood, which he had coated with fiberglass made out of 14 gallons (53 liters) of resin. The project cost Eves US$25,000, including US$13,000 for the fuel alone. NASA contacted Eves about displaying the model at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama, beneath an original Saturn V. Although Eves had considered launching the rocket a second time, he remarked that he would rather not risk a second launch, preferring instead to retire the model rocket and place it on display for people to enjoy.(Davin Coburn, “Rocket Record: The Largest, Heaviest Amateur Rocket Ever Launched,” Popular Mechanics, 28 April 2009.)
South Korea’s rocket Naro 1, which had launched 25 August, failed to deliver its payload to orbit. South Korean Vice Minister of Education, Science, and Technology Kim Jung Hyun explained to the media that the fairing had failed to separate properly when the satellite reached its target altitude, causing the satellite to overshoot its mark and, probably, to burn up in the atmosphere after falling back toward Earth.(Heejin Koo, “South Korean Satellite Burned Up After Orbit Failure,” Bloomberg News, 26 August 2009.)
