 A Reuters report said that Arabsat1, the Arab world's first communication satellite, built for the Arab League by a Frenchled consortium and launched in February 1985 by a European Aryan rocket, failed to operate in orbit because of technical errors. The report also noted that Iraqi Director General Ali Mashat, the man in charge of the project, was fired last month by a committee of six Arab League communications ministers. (C Trib, Jan 2/86)
 Having examined NASA's 1986 schedule of launches, missions into space, and other space science events, U.S. media predicted that 1986 would "open an extensive new chapter in space exploration," and would rival the era of space exploration "that began with Galileo's first peak through a telescope 400 years ago." Predicting 1986 to be "a banner year," the Christian Science Monitor pictured an expanding role for the United States in space exploration because the year promised to put NASA on the cutting edge. Although theLos Angeles Times predicted "a year of spectaculars," it warned that no new starts for planetary missions beyond 1986 were on the horizon. The Times also noted that the projected $8 billion orbiting Space Station would likely take a big bite out of NASA funds and that increased military applications equated to less sharing of knowledge with the public. (CSM, Jan 2/86; LA Times, Jan 2/8)
 The steering problem that halted the Shuttle Columbia's launch in December of 1985 was traced to a tiny electrical component that led ground computers astray. (W Times, Jan 3/86; NY Times, Jan 3/86)
 The Federal Aviation Administration has become increasingly concerned with the problem of inadequate airline maintenance. Because they maintain a 17hourperday schedule and are involved in repeated takeoffs and landings, commercial jetliners are prone to numerous mechanical breakdowns. Although "modern jets are designed to fly despite even serious defects" and although U.S. carriers employ an army of airline mechanics repairing planes in between scheduled flights, several U.S. carriers were fined by the Federal Aviation Administration last summer for a "series of maintenancerelated transgressions." The National Transportation Safety Board was considering whether a crash of a Midwest Express Airline jet in September 1985, in which 31 people were killed, was caused by poor maintenance. Some airsafety experts expressed fear that airline companies had become too cost conscious about safety; still, maintenance error ranked third behind pilot error and bad weather as a cause of fatal airline crashes. (WSJ, Jan 3/86) 0*January 6: NASA renamed two planetary missions scheduled for flight in 1988 and 1990. The mission to map the planet Venus, previously known as Venus Radar Mapper and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in April 1988 and arrival at Venus in July 1989, was renamed Magellan. The Magellan spacecraft, attached to a CentaurG upper stage, would map the entire surface of the planet Venus for the first time, using a syntheticaperture radar instrument. The spacecraft would orbit the planet about once every three hours, coming as close as 250 kilometers from the The mission to map the planet Mars, previously known as the Mars Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in August 1990 and arrival at Mars in August 1999, was renamed Mars Observer. The Observer spacecraft, adapted from an existing productionline type of Earthorbital spacecraft to reduce costs, would map the planet Mars to determine the global elemental and mineralogical character of its surface and to investigate the Martian climate, both present and past. The Magellan and Mars Observer projects were managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 861)
 NASA announced that the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and the launch of the first Earth Observation Mission have been switched. Under the new schedule, the Space Telescope would be launched on October 27, 1986, and the Earth Observation Mission would lift off on August 18, 1986. The change was made to provide additional time for delivery of the Space Telescope from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The Space Telescope would be deployed into orbit from Space Shuttle Atlantis. It was expected to see 7 times farther and 10 times more clearly than any telescope on Earth. (NASA Release 862)
 USA Today reported that 40yearold Karen Kofoed, a reporter for the Camden CourierPost, was the first journalist to apply to be part of a crew aboard a Space Shuttle into space. As of January 6, only 20 of the 4000 reporters who requested applications had submitted the completed forms, which were due by January 15. The contest for the first journalist in space was administered for NASA by the Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communications at the University of South Carolina. (USA Today, Jan 6/86)
 A number of American space scientists expressed disappointment because no U.S. spacecraft would fly by Halley's Comet as it swings by Earth for the first time since 1910 and for the thirtieth time since 240 B.C. The scientists ascribed U.S. failure to have a mission to the comet to a "combination of over expectations, missed signals, poor planning, a streak of bad luck, and politics and infighting in the science community." In the meantime, the European Space Agency's spacecraft iotto, the Soviet Union's twin Vega spacecraft, and two Japanese0*spacecraft would each probe Halley's Comet. Particularly galling to American space scientists was the knowledge that none of these spacecraft could carry out their mission without U.S. help, as each was guided by U.S. Deep Space Network to reach the comet. The most sophisticated mission would be by the spacecraft Giotto. After a 60,000 voyage through Halley's "dusty tail," it would pass "within 300 miles of the coma, which with the nucleus forms the comet's head." The twin Soviet spacecraft were launched in
 For the third time in 19 days, launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed. This time, a malfunction with Columbia's computer control failed to close an oxygen valve. Engineers were successful in closing the valve under manual control, but the additional time it was open resulted in 1,500 gallons to 3,000 gallons of oxygen entering the fuel lines to the main engine, lowering temperatures to an unacceptable level. With 15 flights slated for 1886, another attempt was immediately planned for January 7. The chief goal of the mission was to carry a $50 million communications satellite, Satcom, for RCA. When an RCA engineer announced that 8:47 PM was the cut off point for a launch that would later deliver the satellite at an optimum time, the mission was canceled. Scheduled to ride into space with NASA's astronauts and engineers was Florida's Democratic Congressman Bill Nelson, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications that oversees NASA's budget. (NY Times, Jan 7/86; W Post, Jan 7/86; P Inq, Jan 7/86; C Trib, Jan 7/86; W Times, Jan 7/86; B Sun, Jan 7/86)
 The scheduled launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed, this time because of inclement weather at landing sights in Spain and the Sahara Desert. The weather situations in these distant areas were of concern to engineers at the Kennedy Space Center because the sites provided emergency landing in the event of an engine failure during the first few minutes of flight. This fifth delay, four in three weeks, raised questions concerning the NASA's ability to launch 15 scheduled Shuttle flights during 1986. (W Post, Jan 8/86; NY Times, Jan 8/86; USA `"Today Jan 8/86; P Inq, Jan 8/86)
 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which operates the Nation's weather satellites, announced that its polar orbiting satellite NOAA8 was apparently lost. NOAA was informed by the Air Force that its tracking instruments detected "what appeared to be pieces of the satellite" in the vicinity of NOAA8 orbit. (NY Times, Jan 7/86) 0** Dr. William R. Graham, who was appointed Acting Administrator of NASA on January 3, 1986, stated in his first interview that he was the "acting administrator in every sense of the word" and that he felt very comfortable in his new position. He apparently made that statement to put to rest suggestions that the Agency would really be run by NASA Associate Administrator Philip E. Culberston while Graham learned the ropes. Graham was promoted to his new position, from the post of Deputy Administrator of NASA, when NASA Administrator James E. Beggs took a leave of absence to prepare his defense for a trial. Beggs had been charged with defrauding the Federal Government when he served as a top executive of General Dynamics NASA's acting administrator received his master's and doctoral degrees in engineering from Stanford University. He began his professional career at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico and then moved to the Rand Corporation in California. In 1971, he founded R&D Associates, a think tank in Marina Del Rey, California. He was a consultant to the Secretary of Defense and had served on an advisory committee on undersea warfare and human assisted strategic Air Force systems and on nuclear weapons panels. Prior to his appointment as Deputy Administrator of NASA in November 1985, Graham headed, for three years, President Reagan's advisory committee on arms control and The then 48yearold native Texan expressed great optimism in his assessment of the future of NASA and of space exploration in general. He said that "the agency in the coming decade would broaden mankind's understanding of Earth's environment, expand the reach of manned exploration, and extend scientific vision to the far edges of the universe." Stating that space exploration was limited only by "imagination," Graham promised to pursue vigorously President Reagan's mandate to make space more accessible to the ordinary citizen and free enterprise. (W Times, Jan 6/86; 7/86)
 For the sixth time, launching of the Shuttle Challenger was scrubbed, this time because of a stuck fuel valve in one of the main engines. (CSM, Jan 9/86; W Times, Jan 9/86; NY Times, Jan 9/86; P Inq, Jan 9/86)
 NASA reported that scientists observed Halley's comet from a University of Arizona telescope aboard NASA's Kuiper Airborne Observatory, a modified C141 aircraft operated by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. It was the first direct confirmation of water in a comet, and the discovery lent new support to astronomers' widely held theory that comets are "dirty snowballs" composed primarily of frozen water. The theory was conceived by Dr. Michael Mumma, head of the Planetary Systems Branch, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, who, together with Dr. Harold Weaver, an associate research scientist at the Center for Astrophysical0*Sciences at Johns Hopkins University, developed a theoretical model leading to this discovery. (NASA Release 864; W Post Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86; NY Times, Jan 10/86)
 The cause of the faulty engine valve that was responsible for Shuttle Columbia's sixth delay was discovered to be a 5inch thermometer that was broken during fuel loading. After engineers removed the thermometer, they were hopeful for a launch later in the day, but feared that overcast weather might cause yet another delay. (W Times, Jan 10/86; W Post, Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86)
 Columbia, flight STS 61C, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a Space Shuttle record of seven postponements. The crew completed their mission of launching RCA's $50 million satellite into orbit, for which NASA received $14.2 million from the corporation. Ironically, after a 25day delay in getting off the ground, the Space Shuttle was told to come down a day early. NASA engineers feared that bad weather might hamper the original landing date. Already behind schedule, NASA wanted extra time to prepare the Shuttle for the next flight in March and its mission of observing Halley's Comet. The needed orbit for studying the comet would leave little room for delays of this launch. Most of Columbia's experiments were completed, but a camera device for photographing Halley's comet failed to work because a light intensifier had been inadvertently left on during the ship's seven launch delays. It was not until January 18, after a twoday delay because of poor weather, that Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California. Engineers had hoped to land the craft at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, from where it was scheduled to be launched on March 6. Therefore, an estimated five days were scheduled to be cut from its preparation time so that the critical date for observing Halley's Comet could be met. (NY Times, Jan 13/86; Jan 14/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 24/86; USA Today, Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86 W Times, Jan 13/86; CSM, Jan 13/86; Jan 21/86 P Inq, Jan 13/86; B Sun Jan 13/86; W Post Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 16/86; C Trib, Jan 13/86)
 NASA and SPACEHAB signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish cooperation for the latter's efforts to develop and market payload bay habitable modules, truncated metal cylinders that would be additions to the orbiter's crew department and connected by tunnel adapters. These modules, designed to increase the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle, would serve as additional living and work space for the astronauts by providing an additional 1,000 cubic feet. Another MOU, signed by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), was intended to give NASA access to Synthetic Aperture Radar data from the first European Remote Sensing Satellite for Government research purposes at the Fairbanks, Alaska, station0*that NASA was developing in connection with its Navy Remote Ocean Sensing Satellite System Scatterometer (NROSS). The data received from the ERS1 satellite, engineers hoped, would enhance NASAsupported polar ice research, NROSS, the Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation and Shuttle Imaging RadarC. NASA was then to exchange its Scatterometer and radar imagery for other ERS1 data of interest. The ERS1 was scheduled for launch in 1989. (NASA Release 866; 867; B Sun, Jan 17/86)
 The Voyager 2 Spacecraft discovered six new moons orbiting the planet Uranus, ranging in diameter from 20 to 30 miles. The moons were named 1986U1 in succession to 1986U6, denoting the year in which they were discovered, the planet they orbit and the order in which they were discovered. The first of these moons was found on January 8, 1986. (NASA Release 868; W Post, Jan 9/86; CSM, Jan 9/86; NY Times Jan 9/86; P Inq, Jan 17/86; B Sun)
 Lasers on board weather satellites (LIDAR), said Wayne Baker of the Goddard Space Flight Center's Laboratory, promised more accurate forecasting. In the past, satellite data offered only marginal improvements over traditional methods and even deteriorations for some predictions. With the addition of a laser, however, scientists would have access to wind measurement throughout the atmosphere, keys to following the weather that were before limited to ground stations and weather balloons. CSM, Jan 16/86)
 The first Soviet Space Shuttle, expected to be launched in 1986, would likely look very similar to U.S. orbiters, said scientists. Photographs of a scale model Soviet space plane that splashed down in the Indian Ocean revealed a miniature American Shuttle. Plans for the plane were easy for scientists to obtain as the program was never top secret and sources noted that the Soviets had often copied Western aircraft in the past. On a similar note, a report concerning the secretive launch from, presumably, the Soviet Union in summer 1985 concluded that an antisatellite weapon had gone up. Radar tracked debris that had orbited the Earth before burning up in the atmosphere, and researchers quickly deduced that the metallic scrap had come from a satellite on which the weapon was tested. The illegal launches were the first such unannounced flights by the Soviet Union since `"testing of orbital thermonuclear weapons. (W Times, Jan 21/86; (#WSJ, Jan 21/86)
 Voyager 2 gathered a variety of technical information and sent back photographs of the planet Uranus, giving scientists their greatest knowledge yet of the distant planet. Among the discoveries were additional moons (bringing the total to 14), wind and clouds in the atmosphere, a brown, smoglike haze0*(probably caused by methane gas), and the existence of a magnetic field. (NASA Release 85165; CSM, Jan 22/86; Jan 23/86; Jan 24/86 P Inq, Jan 22/86; Jan 23/86; Jan 24/86; W Post, Jan 23/86; Jan 24/86; USA Today, Jan 22/86; NY Times, Jan 23/86; Jan 24/86; B Sun, Jan 24/86; C Trib, Jan 24/86)
 For the second time in two days, launch of the Shuttle Challenger at Cape Canaveral, Florida, was postponed because of bad weather. Meanwhile, NASA began conducting tests at Edwards Air Force Base in California to determine the effect of rain on insulating tiles and readied a sophisticated instrument landing system, hoping to minimize the weather factor in launches and landings for future orbiter flights at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (W Times, Jan 27/86; USA Today, Jan 27/86; P Inq, Jan 27/86; C Trib, Jan 27/86; B Sun, Jan 27/86)
 Only 74 seconds after liftoff, the Space Shuttle Challenger, flight STS 51L, exploded at about 10 miles above the Earth, killing all seven crew members. It was the worst accident in the history of space exploration and the first time American fatalities occurred during space flight. Slow motion film of the launch revealed a thin flame between the left booster rocket and the Shuttle's main fuel tank, causing engineers to speculate that hydrogen from a ruptured tank ignited upon contact with air heated by the rocket motors or directly by the motors themselves. It was hoped that investigation of the debris that fell into the Atlantic Ocean could lend a better understanding of the accident. All crew tended spaceflight was halted until a thorough investigation was completed, stunting the ambitious space program that promised to bring the richest lode of scientific data ever imagined. (W Post, Jan 29/86; W Times, Jan 29/86; NY times, Jan 29/86; B Sun, Jan 29/86; P Inq Jan 29/86; C Trib, Jan 29/86)
 Initial investigation, and tape review of the Challenger accident, pointed to the right solid fuel rocket booster and showed a leak near one of its seams. An apparent rupture between two sections of the rocket emitted flames that soon found their way to the external fuel tank, igniting the volatile contents. Meanwhile, salvage operations recovered two large objects believed to be part of the Shuttle from the ocean floor, but most of the craft was still unaccounted for. NASA planned to bring in a recovery vessel equipped with a remotecontrolled robot and (#cameras. (WSJ, Feb 3/86; NY Times, Feb 3/86; W Post, Feb 3/86)
 President Ronald Reagan issued an executive order through his press secretary that established a commission to investigate the Challenger accident. According to the order, the ad hoc commission would review the circumstances surrounding the accident, develop recommendations for corrective or other action0*based on the findings, and submit a final report to the president and to the NASA Administrator. (The White House Executive Order establishing the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 3/86)
 Further investigation into the Challenger accident opened a number of theories into the booster rocket's failure. One pointed to bad fuel segments, perhaps caused by cold temperatures. "Propellants can crack the way you crack a cookie. When they crack...it allows you new sites where gases can be generated," opined Herman Krier from the University of Illinois. Another theory suggested that improper handling had produced hairline cracks while fuel segments were cast or during launch preparation, or that installation of badly joined seams between the fuel segments caused uneven burning. It was noted that workers ignored standard operating procedures. A third theory looked into the possibility that a solidrocket booster nozzle had burned through, as had nearly happened on a previous flight. Still another theory cited cold weather or vibrations resulting from launch as a possible culprit for a failure in the suspected seam that joined two fuel segments. Other theories speculated that the external tank experienced over heating, leading to expansion of its contents and rupture of the tank, or even direct burnthrough from the 5,900 degrees exhaust leaving the rocket booster or that there might have been a preexisting hole in the tank. However the hydrogen came to leak, it was ignited by the heated air surrounding it or by the thin flame from the solid NASA Engineers thought, in that point in the investigation, that cold weather had no adverse affect on either the solid fuel or the seals, but were concerned with the possibility of leakage between segments of the rocket motors because deterioration of these seals had been noted on previous flights. Back up seals, they added, performed adequately. (P Inq, Feb 5/86; Feb 10/86; W Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; CSM, Feb 5/86; C Trib, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; NY Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 7/86; Feb 9/86; B Sun, Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; WSJ, Feb 6/86)
 The President's Space Shuttle Commission gathered in private before beginning its formal investigation into the disaster. Headed by former Secretary of State William P. Rogers, the Commission planned to weigh all of the evidence and make a recommendation, with assistance from NASA, after 120 days. (USA Today, Feb 5/86)
 The President's Commission began probing into the Space Shuttle Challenger accident as it took statements from NASA officials Dr. William R. Graham, Acting Administrator; Jesse Moore, Associate Administrator; Arnold D. Aldrich, Space Shuttle Manager; Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager; and Robert B. Sieck, Director, Shuttle Operations. As several possible reasons into the cause of the accident were explored, Moore emphasized0*that space flight would always be dangerous. (NY Times, Feb 7/86)
 The White House accelerated its search for a permanent head of NASA to replace James M. Beggs, indicted in December on fraud charges unrelated to the agency. Beggs was on an unpaid leave of absence during the time of the Challenger accident; Deputy Administrator William R. Graham was Acting Administrator. Beggs was later acquitted of all wrong doing and the Justice Department apologized for the erroneous charges. (W Post, Feb 7/86; Bus Wk, Feb 17/86)
 NASA reported that the United States and the United Kingdom had recently agreed to cooperate in the development of technology for an advanced short takeoff and vertical landing (ASTOVL) aircraft. The ASTOVL aircraft would have the advantages of an advanced supersonic fighter aircraft, but with the added capability of landing vertically. The cooperative research program would investigate four propulsion concepts: vectored thrust, ejector augmenter, tandem fan, and remote augmented lift system. The memorandum of understanding was signed by William R. Graham, NASA Acting Administrator, and Donald A. Hicks, Under Secretary for Research and Engineering, Department of Defense, for the United States, and by Sir David Perry, Chief of Defense Equipment Collaboration, for the United Kingdom. (NASA Release
 NASA announced that it had postponed three launches: the Ulysses mission to investigate the poles of the sun; the Galileo mission to orbit Jupiter and send a probe into the planet; and the Astro1 mission, an ultraviolet astronomy laboratory mounted in the Shuttle's payload bay that was to examine quasars, "hot" stars, galaxy centers, and Halley's Comet. The Ulysses and Galileo missions were scheduled for launch from a Shuttle in May, but both launches were dependent on certain relative positions of Jupiter and Earth, occurring only once every 13 months. The Astro1 had to be launched in the MarchApril timeframe in order to observe Halley's Comet, and with that opportunity gone no new date was requested. The delays were caused by the January Space Shuttle accident. (NASA Release 8611; NY Times, Feb 11/86)
 Advisors at NASA determined that future dependance on the Shuttle for all space operations would be contradictory to a reliable space transportation program. After several days of interviews, a 13member panel, comprised of aviation and aerospace veterans, concluded that expendable launch vehicles should have greater consideration because the Shuttle was a research vehicle. (W Post, Feb 11/86)
 The Presidential Commission questioned NASA scientists regarding faulty orings as a cause of the Challenger accident. The panel learned that these seals could indeed malfunction in cold weather and also that erosion (not the result of cold0*weather) had occurred in 6 of 171 seals on previous flights. Morton Thiokol, the firm responsible for manufacturing the orings, had raised concerns about launching the Shuttle in cold weather, but NASA engineers concluded that the backup ring would function if the primary seal failed. Released NASA documents also showed concern expressed by engineers, who, three years prior to the accident, concluded that the mechanism for sealing segments of the solid rocket booster could fail and result in "loss of mission, vehicle, and crew." One risk analysis received by NASA from an outside agency estimated the chances for an accident involving the boosters as 1 in 35. NASA's safety advisory board stated in their 1985 annual report that 18 Shuttle flights per year were "very optimistic" because these launches were anything but routine. However, "the requirement to launch has not been a prerequisite," said acting NASA Administrator Dr. William R. Graham, "The prerequisite has been safety." (Official Transcript Proceedings before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 11/86; P Inq, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; B Sun, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; CSM, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; C Trib, Feb 12/86; Feb 14/86; Feb 13/86; WSJ, Feb 12/86; USA Today, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; NY Times, Feb 13/86; W Post, Feb 13/86)
 Dr. William R. Graham, NASA's Acting Administrator, affirmed plans to continue NASA's Teacher in Space Program, administered by NASA's Educational Affairs Division under the direction of Robert Brown. The reason given: NASA's continuing goals were to "increase the prestige of the teaching profession, to increase the awareness in the education community of the impact of technology and science on this country's future, and to use space as a catalyst to enhance all subject areas and grade levels of our education systems." (NASA Release 8612; USA Today, Feb 14/86; NY Times, Feb 14/86; W Post Feb 14/86)
 NASA released footage of the Challenger just seconds after ignition, showing a puff of black smoke coming from the right solid rocket booster near a joint between two segments. The tape lent more weight to the theory that the accident had resulted from a faulty seal in the motor. (W Post, Feb 14/86; WSJ, Feb 14/86; W Times, Feb 14/86; NY Times, Feb 14/86; B Sun, Feb 14/86; USA Today, Feb 14/86)
 Forty miles off the Florida coast and at a depth of 1,200 feet, a fourman submarine recovered debris and took photographs of what engineers hoped was Challenger's right booster rocket. As the investigation moved further ahead, the Presidential Commission looking into the accident asked NASA to remove from its own investigation any officials involved in the H&decision to launch the Shuttle. (B Sun, Feb 18/86; NY Times, Feb 18/86; W Post, Feb 18/86; P Inq, Feb 18/86; W Times Feb 17/86) 0** NASA Requested $45 million for fiscal year 1987 to accelerate research for its next generation spacecraft, a hypersonic transatmospheric vehicle, or "space plane", capable of Mach 25 (about 17,000 mph). Able to fly into orbit, reenter the atmosphere and achieve orbit again while being completely reusable, the craft would have both commercial and military applications. (W Times, Feb 17/86)
 Boeing Aerospace was selected to supply NASA with Shuttle upper stages to place two Tracking and Data Relay Satellites into geosynchronous Earth orbits. Engineering support and integration of the upper stages with the satellites were also to be provided. The contract was expected to run from March 1886 through April 1990 at a price of approximately $93 million. (NASA Release 8614)
 The Presidential Commission's investigation of the Challenger accident, said the Chicago Tribune, had nearly concluded that cold weather led to reduced elasticity of the rubber seal in the rocket booster and the subsequent leak of gasses. Engineers from Morton Thiokol, the rocket booster manufacturer, objected to the cold weather launch, but officials higher up in that company gave NASA the go ahead. (NY Times, Feb 20/86; C Trib, Feb 20/86; W Post Feb 20/86)
 Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command and former NASA astronaut, was appointed Associate Administrator for Space Flight. The new position called for Truly to head the Space Shuttle program and to direct NASA's Design and Data Analysis Task Force, which reviewed the Shuttle Challenger's January accident. He succeeded Jesse W. Moore in both of these roles. (NASA Release 8615; WSJ, Feb 20/86; NY Times, Feb 20/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; B Sun, Feb 21/86)
 The Soviet Union launched what it said was a "third generation" Space Station named Mir, the Russian word for peace. The Mir was larger than their Salyut7 Space Station and had six docking ports for habitable modules. With the addition of Salyut laboratories, Russia would have an orbiting complex large enough for permanent crew habitation. (B Sun, Feb 21/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; W Times, Mar 4/86; CSM Mar 7/86)
 Thomas L. Moser, Director for Engineering at NASA's Johnson Space Center, was appointed as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight to investigate the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8616)
 A NASA study found that the part of the booster rocket that was suspect in the Challenger accident had reached a temperature of only about 29 degrees Fahrenheit at the time of liftoff, 9 degrees cooler than the surrounding air. Both NASA and Morton Thiokol engineers, the study noted, had knowledge of0*the ring's susceptibility to damage in 50degree temperatures. A member of the President's Commission pointed out that NASA officials should have been aware of this as earlier temperatures were in the 20s and the orings would not heat up quickly. (W Post, Feb 24/86)
 James M. Beggs resigned as NASA's Administrator. Candidates President Ronald Reagan was considering for the job included James C. Fletcher, Thomas O. Paine, James A. Abrahamson, Frank Borman, Harrison Schmitt, and Lew Allen. (NY Times, Feb 25/86; WSJ, Feb 26/86)
 Engineers from Morton Thiokol gave testimony before the President's Commission that the decision to launch the illfated Shuttle was a management initiative, and they suggest that those people had ignored oring safety data. The engineers testified that their decisionmaking process was reversed as the burden of proof shifted and was now on them to show that the launch would be unsafe. Contrary to what a number of engineers stated to the Commission, one management official testified that there was no undue pressure from NASA to go ahead with the launch and that management's decision was based solely on available data. (B Sun, Feb 26/86; NY Times, Feb 26/86; W Post, Feb 26/86; W Times, Feb
 NASA's acting administrator Dr. William R. Graham announced that he would not hesitate to make substantial changes wherever they might be warranted in the organization. Graham said, "That goes not only for the [launch] decisionmaking process, but also for engineering, design, vehicle certification and qualification." (W Times, Feb 26/86)
 As further testimony was heard by the President's Commission, NASA manager Larry Mulloy stated that objections made by Morton Thiokol engineers to halt liftoff seemed illogical, but added that had he known that all of the company's engineers held the opinion, he might have changed his mind. Other testimony given by NASA officials conceded that they argued against the idea of cold weather being detrimental to a launch, but had little data to demonstrate this, and insisted that this opposition in no way pressured Morton Thiokol management to reverse the recommendation of its engineers. (Official Transcript Proceedings Before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 26/86; NY Times, Feb 27/86; C Trib, Feb `"27/86; LA Times, Feb 27/86; W Post, Feb 27/86; P Inq, Feb 27/86; (#W Times, Feb 27/86; WSJ Feb 27/86)
 The Challenger accident forced NASA to reconsider expendable launch vehicles as a means for putting satellites into space. Believed to have been rendered obsolete by the Shuttle, these rockets were once again deemed necessary for meeting the growing schedule of launches. The change of position0*notwithstanding, NASA and the Department of Defense appeared ready to request another orbiter. (B Sun, Feb 27/68)
 The United States Space Foundation outlined plans to provide a focal point that would raise funds for a replacement of the Space Shuttle Challenger. The Challenger 7 Fund reached out to individuals and organizations for contributions while hoping that Congress would authorize the replacement. (NASA Release 8618)
 Top officials at Rockwell International, builder of NASA's orbiters and closely tied to the Shuttle program, testified that they believed cold weather had made launch of the Challenger unsafe. The President's panel concluded that NASA's launch decision process was flawed because criteria for approval should not have been changed at the last minute. The New York Times concluded, "The picture emerging from the inquiry into the loss of the Space Shuttle is one of chronic failure in the space agency and its contractors to communicate lifeanddeath problems up the chain of command." (W Post, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Feb 28/86; C Trib, Feb 28/86; WSJ, Feb 28/86;
 The InterAgency Consultative Group (IACG) on Halley's Comet encounter was scheduled to meet March 49 in Moscow and March 1214 in Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Germany. Formed in 1981, the IACG comprised representatives from NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), the Soviet Union's Intercosmos Council, Japan's Institute for Space and Astronautical Studies (ISAS), and the International Halley Watch. ESA's Giotto, the Intercosmos Council's VEGA 1 and 2, and the ISAS Suisei (Comet) and Sakigake (Pioneer) spacecraft were launched in the previous 15 months to observe the Comet's passage around the Sun. NASA's Launching of a Spartan UV telescope and an Astro UV telescope to observe the Comet from Earth orbit was terminated because of the Challenger accident. But NASA's PioneerVenus spacecraft (launched in May 1978) had already completed five of its seven planned weeks of viewing the Comet, and the International Cometary Explorer spacecraft (launched in August 1978) was scheduled to monitor Halley's solar wind upstream. (NASA Release 8619; P Inq, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Mar
 James R. Thompson, of Princeton University's Plasma Physics Lab, nationally recognized propulsion expert, and former NASA propulsion engineer, was named vice chairman of the NASA task force inquiring into the Challenger accident. His appointment was in support of the Commission assigned by President Ronald Reagan to perform the investigation of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8620)' 0*March 3: NASA announced a comprehensive project to evaluate the implications of the Challenger accident on the space program. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions had been postponed, NASA announced that the Shuttle Discovery would be modified so that it could launch spacecraft with a Centaur upper stage rocket. The Challenger accident left only the Shuttle Atlantis with the capability for carrying Centaur payloads. These decisions were made by the Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. William R. Graham, on the recommendation of the Headquarters Replanning Task Force, headed by Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, set up to study program alternatives in the wake of the accident. Other matters considered by the task force included: (1) the requirements for all aspects for an orbiter to replace the Challenger as well as the lost Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) launch vehicle and its support structure attached to a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost with the Shuttle; (2) new launch schedules for the remaining three Shuttles; (3) an additional launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base; (4) the role of expendable launch vehicles for commercial use; (5) the retention of ground communications because only one TDRS, instead of two, was in orbit to link spacecraft to earth because of the accident; (6) and identification of monetary losses other than those from the destroyed equipment. In the meantime, customers who had hoped to launch their satellites from the Space Shuttle were being forced to examine other alternatives. With launch schedules certain to fall far behind and military and scientific communities getting first priority, commercial interests would have either to put their projects on the back burner or use NASA's rival, the European Space Agency's Arianespace company, for more expensive launches. With NASA's announcement that its Shuttle program would be put on hold for 1218 months, Shuttlelinked businesses were searching for other options as well. (NASA Release 8622; C Trib, Mar 3/86; B Sun, Mar 4/86; USA Today, Mar 4/86)
 A lightweight transmitter for sending messages to weather satellites was placed on polar bears and caribou in the spring of 1985, and had so far functioned very well, said biologist Steven Amstrup. Because of the satellite's ability to track these animals, biologists could determine whether the animals were walking, running, sleeping, or foraging for food. (B Sun, Mar
 A device conceived by Donald Young of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for aiding scientists in treating bone loss resulting from extended space flights spawned hope among the medical community. The vibrating analyzer is placed in the center of a limb and the ratio of force applied to the bone and the bone's displacement indicate the stiffness of the bone. The device, it was thought, would offer earlier0*detection of osteoporosis and take guess work out of cast removal. (WSJ, Mar 3/86)
 NASA's chief engineer said that cutbacks in the safety program over the previous three years had put the Agency "in a dangerous situation." Loss of personnel and transfer of safety responsibility to field offices and contractors contributed to NASA's inability to catch the seal problem. He reasoned that "there are only so many problems [one person] can look at, and in my opinion the solid rocket booster was a relatively easy thing to do. But it really wasn't getting the amount of attention from here it should have." (W Times, Mar 5/86)
 NASA and the Nuclear Safety Review Panel differed in their estimates of the reliability of booster rockets before the
 was 1 in 1,000 launches as compared to NASA's 1 in 100,000 firings. The panel was created because 19 missions carrying potentially hazardous plutonium power sources (were an accident to occur within the Earth's atmosphere) involved the Shuttle. Two other nuclear powered satellites were scheduled for launches from the Shuttle later in 1986. (WSJ, Mar 5/86; C Trib, Mar 6/86)
 Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, an unsuccessful bidder on Shuttle boosters, released documents it had sent to NASA some 13 years earlier stating that the multisegment booster that relied on oring seals were "burdened with design features that can detract from safe, efficient, and reliable operation." According to officials involved in the decision to choose the Utah based Thiokol design, the least expensive bid; the fact that Senator Frank Moss, then chairman of the committee that controlled NASA's budget came from Utah; and that then NASA Administrator Dr. James Fletcher was former president of the University of Utah were all salient factors. NASA calculations, however, also pointed out that Thoikol needed minimal up front Government cash and deferred major costs to the latest possible date, and that Aerojet required a good deal more money to get started. All three factors were important to the early days of the program's budget constraints. (B Sun, Mar 5/86)
 Several of the more than 30 U.S. scientists serving as coinvestigators on the European Space Agency's Giotto mission were members of the television team scheduled to analyze and televise images of Halley's Comet from the spacecraft on March 13. Launched in July 1985, the Giotto was one of five spacecraft (others were the Soviet Union's Vega 1 and 2 and Japan's Suisei and Sakigake) headed for an encounter with the comet. In position 300 miles from Comet Halley's nucleus, the Giotto promised to obtain the highest resolution imaging. (NASA Release 8623)
 Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced assignments to the NASA 51L Data and0*Design Analysis Task Force. The task force was to collect and analyze information to support a thorough review of all aspects and potential causes of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release
 NASA announced that U.S. scientists would have the opportunity to participate with the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) of Japan in the High Energy Solar Physics program. The goal of the mission was to better understand high energy phenomena on the Sun through Xray and gamma ray observation instruments carried on a spacecraft. (NASA Release
 NASA officials provided investigators with new evidence challenging the theory that the Challenger accident was triggered by failed rocket seals caused by cold weather. They presented prelaunch photographs showing a flaw in the suspected oring on the right side booster, a possible correlation to the fact that workers assembling the booster were hampered with a misshaped rocket segment. New tests on the orings conducted at Morton Thiokol's plant demonstrated that they sealed properly to temperatures at 10 degrees below zero. Also, the Challenger, according to meteorologist Irving P. Krick, sustained wind shear of 125 to 150 miles per hour just prior to the accident, which would have been similar to "flying into a tornado." (W Post, Mar
 The Soviet Union's Vega I spacecraft sent back pictures of Halley's Comet as it passed within 5,500 miles of its nucleus. The photographs, displayed on screens at a Soviet Space Center, were viewed by scientists from around the world and brought the scientific community together behind the Iron Curtain. A host of new data such as the possibility that the Comet contains two nuclei, that the core is three or four miles across, and evidence bolstering the idea that the Comet is leftover debris from the solar system's creation some 4.6 billion years ago was revealed. The presentation also gave American scientists a chance to study Halley's Comet; the United States launched no spacecraft for that purpose. The Soviet's second probe, Vega II, passed 5,125 miles from the comet's core on March 9. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), Mar 7/86; NY Times, Mar 7/86; W Post, Mar 7/86; W Times, Mar 7/86; B Sun, Mar 7/86; C Trib, Mar 7/86; Mar 10/76; CSM Mar 7/86; March
 The Japanese spacecraft, Suisei, passed within 94,000 miles of Comet Halley's nucleus on this date. Although the pass was far more distant than passes by the Soviet's two Vega spacecraft, or the European Space Agency's Giotto, Japanese scientists were immensely pleased with the data. (NY Times, Mar
 NASA announced that it had located both the Shuttle's0*crew compartment and the remains of some crew members, in 100 feet of water, about 25 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida. Sonar first detected the object on the night of March 7 and subsequent dives confirmed it to be the module. About 10 percent of the wreckage had been recovered to this date, but the suspected right solid rocket booster still lay on the ocean's floor. Although little insight into the cause of the accident was expected, recovery of the data tapes, officials speculated, could shed some light. (USA Today, Mar 10/86; P Inq, Mar 10/86; B Sun, Mar 10/86; NY Times, Mar 10/86; W Post, Mar 10/86; W Times, Mar
 Dr. William R. Graham told a congressional committee that the suspected orings in the Challenger accident should be modified or redesigned. The manufacturer of the rocket boosters had submitted 43 possible modifications to NASA since February, and changes to the fleet, said Graham, would cost about $350 million. This was the first time any official from NASA had indicated a need for improving the seals since the January 28 The acting administrator also noted that recovery from the accident could cost the Nation $3.2 billion and replacing the Challenger would run another $2.8 billion. Not replacing the Shuttle, he warned, would restrict the fleet to military use and service flights. (Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Space Science Applications, Mar 11/90; P Inq, Mar 12/86; W Post, Mar 12/86; USA Today, Mar 12/86; W Times, Mar 12/86)
 Bernard M. Oliver, Chief of the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) program at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, received the National Medal of Science from President Ronald Reagan. The award recognized his accomplishments while working for Bell Telephone Laboratories, where he helped establish standards for television transmission, worked on automatic radar tracking, and advocated pulsecode modulation for the telephone system; and his accomplishments at HewlettPackard, where he developed the first handheld calculator with scientific functions and SETI, a program designed to search the stars for radio signals. (NASA Release 8627)
 The Congressional Budget Office estimated that it would cost $5 billion to both replace the Challenger Shuttle and build more expendable launch vehicles for carrying payloads into space. NASA had planned to make all of its satellite launches from an orbiter, but changed its position after the Challenger accident. The shift was welcome news to the rocket industry, even though the companies would need two years to get ready for launch inasmuch as the rocket program, with no crew assistance, had been all but replaced in the United States by the Shuttle program. (NY Times, Mar 13/86; W Post, Mar 13/86)0** NASA and Morton Thiokol found new evidence suggesting that the putty used in joints of the solid rockets to protect the orings could have stiffened from the cold and prevented the oring from sealing. They also noted that the putty could have cracked and exposed the oring to hot gases. Adequate data measuring the effect of cold on the putty did not exist. Dr. William Graham notified the Presidential Commission of these findings. (WSJ, Mar
 Salvage crews reported that they might have located a key part of the booster rocket, suspected in the January 28 accident, 32 miles offshore at a depth of 650 feet. Embedded firmly into the ocean's floor, the estimated 400500 pound debris located near other wreckage was positively identified as parts from the right booster rocket. As engineers examined their most recent discovery, other teams recovered still more of the crew's cabin as well as additional remains and personal affects. (W Times, Mar 13/86; NY Times, Mar 13/86; B Sun, Mar 13/86)
 The former Soviet Union launched two veteran cosmonauts into orbit, scheduled to arrive at the Mir Space Station after two days. The launch, contrary to former Soviet practice, was both announced and televised. The launch, said James Oberg, author of several books about the Soviet space program, was done "with great propaganda benefit." In an effort to demonstrate their achievements, he stated further, "They have a greater selfconfidence in their program [and] it helps concentrate world attention on the benign part of their space program." U.S. experts acknowledged that Soviet Space Station technology was years ahead of us and that the mission might well begin man's permanent occupation of space. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), Mar 12/86; B Sun, Mar 14/86; P Inq, Mar 14/86; W Times, Mar 14/86; NY Times, Mar 14/86; W Post, Mar 14/86; C Trib, Mar 14/86)
 The European Space Agency's spacecraft Giotto encountered Halley's Comet as it passed within 335 miles of the body's nucleus. The craft transmitted pictures of the comet every four seconds up until two seconds and 930 miles away, when its camera was damaged by dust particles traveling 50 times the speed of a bullet. These were the closest pictures by far taken of the Comet. Multinational scientists at the West German control center were jubilant about data gathered by sophisticated instruments. The mission was the most spectacular taken on by the European Space Agency, and the international cooperation `"among scientists was lauded by the media. (B Sun, Mar 14/86; NY (#Times, Mar 14/86; W Post, Mar 14/86; W Times, Mar 14/86)
 Dr. Albert Boggess was awarded the Herschel Medal, by the Council of the Royal Astronomical Society of the United Kingdom, for his contribution to the success of the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE). The IUE satellite was designated to study Comet Halley's evolution as it approached and receded from0*the Sun. Boggess was named corecipient of the award with University of London Professor R. Wilson. (NASA Release 8628)
 This date marked the 60th anniversary of liquidfueled rocket flight. In 1926 Dr. Robert H. Goddard assembled and launched a gasoline propelled rocket from his aunt's farm in Worcester, Massachusetts. In commemoration of the event, NASA planned to launch a fullscale replica of the rocket from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release
 A 3,500pound piece of debris that was determined to be a rocket booster, but not identified as from the left or right side, was recovered 28 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 400 feet of water. The massive operation was resumed after a twoday halt from storms and rough seas. Other salvage teams also continued their efforts to recover the rest of the crew's compartment and remains. (W Post, Mar 17/86; P Inq, Mar 17/86; NY Times, Mar 18/86)
 NASA's orbiting telescope, International Ultraviolet Explorer, observed Halley's Comet as it encountered European (Giotto), Soviet (Vega 2), and Japanese (Suisei) spacecraft. The
 with hopes of granting scientists a better understanding into its longterm behavior. The telescope measured the Comet's water ejection rate, and its carbon, sulfur, and oxygen content, as well as its variation of visual brightness. The advantage of observations from a telescope as opposed to those from a spacecraft, said IUE telescope operations manager George Sonneborn, was the much wider angle of view it offered. (NASA Release 8629)
 NASA and the Science and Technology Agency of Japan announced an agreement reached on the hardware that Japan will carry into Phase B Space Station definition and preliminary design. According to the agreement, the preliminary design activities were to include: (1) a pressurized module to provide shirtsleeve work space for station crews; (2) an exposed work deck; (3) a scientific/equipment airlock; (4) a local remote manipulator arm; (5) and an experiment logistics model. The multipurpose laboratory called for accommodation of general scientific and technology development research, including microgravity research, as well as control panels for operating the Space Station's mobil remote manipulator system and attached payloads. (NASA Release 8631)
 NASA released a list containing 748 critical parts of the Space Shuttle that could lead to disaster if they did not function properly. All of these components lacked a backup system and were therefore placed in the "Criticality 1" category. Unlike the fuselage or heatshielding tiles, for example, 617 of the0*critical parts could be covered by backup equipment, but engineers waived the measure as they felt confident that failure of them was unlikely. Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation System, said, "We are reviewing in detail all the items on the Critical Items list." (Nat Sp Trans Sys: Critical Items List; W Post, Mar 18/86; W Times, Mar 18/86; B Sun, Mar
 James R. Thompson, vicechairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, announced that the cause of the disaster would be pinpointed within a month. Although the right booster rocket, which would be a tremendous help, was still unrecovered, and tapes from the crew compartment shed no light, Thompson noted that photographic evidence and other data already available would eventually yield the answer. He also stated that
 panel for overall investigation, with whom, he added, NASA investigators were working harmoniously. (USA Today, Mar 19/86; W Post, Mar 19/86; NY Times, Mar 19/86; P Inq, Mar 19/86; C Trib, Mar 20/86)
 East Coast winter storms in the form of cyclones were studied by scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Concentrating their efforts on costal regions of North and South Carolina, where these storms develop and move northward, NASA scientists analyzed the upper atmosphere conditions using moisture and wind sounding balloons and the Nimbus 7 satellite to collect data. Another criterion for understanding these storms was the analysis of the transfer of moisture from the ocean into the atmosphere. NASA flew its fourengine Electra aircraft, outfitted with a combined laser/telescope (Lidar), to detect salt spray and aerosols as it fired a lazar beam that allowed the telescope to measure rising moisture and convection patterns. NASA's ER2 aircraft was used in higher altitudes for the same purpose; it carried microwave radiometers able to detect water vapor and cloud liquid water content. (NASA Release 8630)
 NASA scheduled five expendable launches in 1986 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, employing Delta rockets, used in joint management with the McDonnell Douglas launch team, and Atlas Centaur rockets, jointly managed launches with General Dynamics Convair. Of the five satellites, two were for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The Geosynchronous Operational Environmental Satellites were designed for weather forecasting and collecting data on various environmental effects. The other three were for the Department of Defense. Two Fleet Satellite Communication satellites would provide secure communications between landbased facilities and ships, submarines, and aircraft, and one other was for support of the Strategic Defense Initiative. (NASA Release 8632)0*March 20: The U.S. Government considered plans for replacing the Challenger by allowing private investors to raise the money and lease the new Shuttle to NASA, stretching out payments for perhaps 15 years. The plan called for NASA to order a replacement shuttle from Rockwell, but Willard Rockwell's new firm, Astrotech, would buy it. Furthermore, investors would be reimbursed by NASA for any accident loss, and Astrotech would market the launches to commercial customers. (WSJ, Mar 20/86; W Post; Mar 30/86; B Sun, Apr 1/86)
 Debris brought to shore on March 19 was determined to be part of the right booster rocket from the Challenger accident. The white outer skin of the pieces were discolored from excessive heat, and the suspected oring, officials said, may lie inside of one 4footbyfoot piece of wreckage. (W Times, Mar 21/86; USA Today, Mar 21/86)
 Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney announced Canada's decision to proceed with Space Station participation when he visited with President Ronald Reagan. Canada agreed to perform preliminary design of a Mobile Servicing Center during Phase B of the Space Station definition and preliminary design study that would consist of a base structure with accommodations for payloads, orbital replacement units, utilities and thermal control. It would function as a multipurpose structure equipped with manipulator arms that would be used to help assemble and maintain the Space Station, as well as help keep instruments and experiments mounted on the Station's framework. (NASA Release 8633)
 NASA officials concluded, and reported to the President's Commission, that the orings in Challenger's right solidrocket motor were indeed the cause of the January 28 accident. They were still unable to cite a reason for failure of the seals, but hoped that tests over the next 10 days would give some clue. NASA also noted that the putty used to protect these seals might shed some light. (WSJ, Mar 24/86; CSM, Mar 24/86)
 NASA planned to shift its original plan of carrying a mixture of scientific, military, and commercial payloads and give greater emphasis to the military when Shuttle flights resumed. The military, they added, always had top priority and five to seven of the flights slated for next year were devoted to them. NY Times, Mar 24/86)
 A Presidential panel report was to be released April 11, but details that aimed at mining the Moon and asteroids and establishing human presence on Mars were disclosed in Aviation Week & Space Technology, a trade magazine. The plan, which assumed that the Space Station would be completed by 1994, called for establishing a lunar base after the year 2000 for mining and production of rocket fuel, expanded searches for potentially0*useful asteroids, and a "network of spaceports between Earth, the Moon, and Mars and a Martian colony by the year 2027." (W Post, Mar 24/86; NY Times, Mar 25/86; CSM May 23/86; P Inq, May 23/86)
 NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, selected the RCA Corporation and Orbital Sciences for negotiations leading to the award of contracts to build a spacecraft and upper stage booster for the Mars Observer Mission scheduled for launch in August 1990. The first in a series of proposed planetary observer programs, the Mars Observer would study the climate, atmosphere, and surface, using eight science instruments while in orbit around the planet a full Martian year, 687 Earth days. (NASA Release 8634; WSJ, Mar 26/86)
 Speaking to NASA employees, Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an intense safety program to include reassessment of Shuttle management structure, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for aborting Shuttle flights, and recertification of all critical Shuttle parts. He noted that "the business of flying in space is a bold business," and added, "We cannot print enough money to make it totally riskfree. But we certainly are going to correct any mistakes we have made...and we're going to get going ahead just as soon as we can." When the Shuttle Program resumes, he continued, the first Shuttle would be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards Air Force Base, in California. (USA Today, Mar 26/68; W Post, Mar 26/86; WSJ, Mar 26/86; NY Times, Mar 26/86; W Times, Mar 26/86)
 An official from the Pentagon warned members of Congress that a oneyear delay in the Shuttle launches would create a backlog of 10 military missions and a 2year delay would raise that number to 21. He and others viewed this a "national emergency." The Air Force Undersecretary further pointed out a need for a replacement Shuttle and 10 additional expendable launch vehicles. Congressional committees, however, had not yet decided how the cost, if approved, would be shared by the Air Force and NASA. (B Sun, Mar 27/86; W Times, Mar 27/86)
 James E. Kingsbury, director of the Science and Engineering Directorate at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, was named to manage an ad hoc group formed to requalify the motor of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster for flight. The booster rockets, said NASA, could be ready in one year. Kingsbury said that all of the current hardware could be modified and reused, a comment that surprised outside engineers. (NASA Release 8636; W Post, Mar 28/86; NY Times, Mar 28/86; NY Times, Mar 30/86)0*April
 A student photography experiment, "CAN DO," from the Charleston County School District, South Carolina, scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle Columbia March 6 was rescheduled for April 524. The goal of the experiment was to observe Comet Halley from NASA's highflying Kuiper Airborne Observatory aircraft, a converted C141. The aircraft was scheduled for several highaltitude flights over New Zealand, a part of the southern hemisphere where the Comet would be most visible. Students from other schools, both in the United States and abroad, were to participate in the program by photographing the Comet from the ground and comparing their pictures with those taken in flight. The pictures taken at ground level would assist professional astronomers because most large observatory telescopes are not designed to view large objects, and resolving the fine detail in Comet Halley's tail could be enhanced with the much wider overall view from a standard camera lens. (NASA Release 8635)
 A section of debris recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in March was found to be the part of the right booster rocket suspected as the cause of the Challenger accident. Although the piece was a section opposite the flame seen coming from a joint in the rocket, it contained part of the joint. Recovery of the section could both aid investigators and assist engineers in their redesign. (B Sun, Apr 2/86; W Post, Apr 2/86; NY Times, Apr
 In a data gathering activity in support of the Challenger accident investigation, destacking of solid rocket motors to gather information and assess the preflight conditions in and around the field joints was scheduled for early April. Inspections would focus on the field joint orings, putty used in the joints, rocket motor case ovality or "roundness," with any assembly damage, clevis gapopening resulting from stacking, and the degree of propellant slumping that occurred as a result of vertical stacking. Any relevant data from the destacking inspections that might be useful to the investigation was to be assembled by the NASA 51L Data and Design Analysis Task Force and provided to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8637)
 NASA and the Astronauts Memorial Foundation, Inc. announced plans to build a memorial at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, dedicated to astronauts who lost their lives while flying, training, or awaiting assignment to fly for the space agency. The memorial would honor the 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger crewFrancis Scobee, Michael Smith, Judith Resnik, Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, Christa McAuliffe, and Gregory Jarvis; the 1967 Apollo crewVirgil Grissom, Edward H. White II,0*and Roger Chaffee; Charles Bassett and Elliott See, killed in 1966, Theodore Freeman killed in 1964, and Clifton Williams killed in 1967all killed in T38 trainer aircraft accidents; and Edward Givens, killed in 1967 in an automobile accident. (NASA Release 8638)
 The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
 The Wall Street Journal reported that a Reagan administration interagency group would soon recommend that NASA discontinue commercial and foreign launches. NASA objected to the idea because of the likely permanent loss of the business to foreign competitors. The group also recommended a replacement for the Shuttle Challenger and a greater supply of expendable launch vehicles, but did not suggest how these costs could be met. (WSJ, Apr 3/86)
 Space Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to be ferried atop a modified Boeing 747 and transported to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California where it was expected to remain until early November. Testing would closely parallel that done at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), in Florida, in preparation for the first West Coast Space Shuttle launch. Upon arrival, Columbia would be moved to the launch pad and mated with a set of solid rocket boosters and an external tank for integrated vehicle testing, including the loading of cryogenic propellants in a "wet" countdown demonstration test. Prior to the move, processing at KSC would include installation of the main engine, auxiliary power units, and orbital maneuvering system pods, in parallel with structural inspections, approved modifications, and ferry flight preparation. (NASA Release 8640)
 NASA and the Pentagon announced the award of $5000*million in contracts to seven different defense contractors for research into the development of the aerospace plane, seen by many as a successor to the Shuttle. The craft was envisioned as one that could take off and land like an airplane, but have the added capability of achieving orbit where it could then travel at 25 times the speed of sound. (WSJ, Apr 8/86; USA Today, Apr 8/86; W Post, Apr 8/86)
 The Soviet Union invited foreign correspondents into its mission control center for a conference concerning orbiting cosmonauts and a live television interview with them. The Soviet Union set still another precedent when it allowed coverage of its space program by a large group of foreign press. The invitation followed a pattern of a more open Russian space agency, the televising of the recent liftoff of the cosmonauts on March 13, and the opening of the Soviet Space Research Institute to foreign visitors when the Vega spacecraft approached Halley's Comet were also first time events. (W Post, Apr 8/86; W Times, Apr 8/86)
 James R. Thompson, vice chairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, said that NASA officials could be "walking on the edge of a cliff" if they did not correct flaws in the solid rocket booster. Previous problems, he noted, simply were not taken seriously enough; he then added that NASA could say conclusively that the right solid rocket booster had caused the Shuttle accident. The task force, said Thompson, focused on four factors of the joint in the booster rocket: the tendency of the joints to rotate during liftoff; the impact of subfreezing temperatures on the orings; defects in the putty used to protect them; and slight damage to the orings during assembly. James Kingsbury, director of Science and Engineering Directorate disagreed with Thompson's findings because the rockets had performed well on 24 previous flights. (USA Today, Apr 9/86; W Post, Apr 9/86; P Inq, Apr 9/86)
 NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station, established in March 1984 and chaired by Stanford University Professor Peter M. Banks, released its second major report for planning the scientific utility of the Space Station. The report pointed out that spacebased scientific progress had been slower than planned because of short time in orbit, rigid time lines, long periods between flights, and that the Space Station had the obvious potential of overcoming these Two major conclusions noted that Space Station facilities must be operated with the goal of producing outstanding scientific results; the station would be judged with respect to cost and research capability and the need for wellequipped, permanently habitable laboratories able to support a broad range of fundamental research in space. 0*The task force recommended that the Space Station emulate the adaptive science methodology used in terrestrial laboratories, introduce "telescience" (the ability to conduct research remotely), review safety standards to achieve a reasonable state of personal and system security, work with a crew size of 10, and develop "space mail" for delivering small samples of materials to ground laboratories. Other recommendations: (1) Attached payloads are an important part of the core Space Station, and NASA needs a more productive plan for converting observation experiments developed for Spacelab to Space Station; (2) freeflying platforms are essential for conducting many important scientific endeavors for the Space Station era (i.e. several platforms operating in different orbits); (3) NASA should enhance biological research activities in the preinitial orbit configuration period using Spacelabs and other attached payloads on the Space Shuttle to gain experience for conducting biological science research programs; (4) development of a humantended mode of scientific activity aboard a Space Station would be of little value and a need exists for a truly longterm, human capability; (5) it is essential that NASA look ahead to the activities that are anticipated over the 2530 year life span of the core facility and its associated elements; (6) the Space Station will facilitate development of a new type of research termed "science in space"; (7) the science operations of the Space Station should be separated from the operational management of the overall facilities; (8) and NASA must be prepared to change many of its nationally oriented selection, funding, and management procedures because of the important hardware and scientific contributions that will be made by international partners. (Written Statement to the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Committee on Science and Technology from Peter M. Banks, Apr 9/90; NASA Release 8643)
 Evidence revealed the Challenger crew cabin did not explode with the midair accident, but remained intact until it struck the water. The cabin, said engineers, was seven times stronger than other parts of the Shuttle because it had to maintain an Earthlike atmosphere while in space. All seven astronauts, however, were probably killed instantly by shock from the initial blast, sudden depressurization of the cabin, or the tumbling ninemile descent. (W Post, Apr 10/86; NY Times, Apr 10/86; W Times, Apr 10/86; CSM, Apr 10/86; USA Today, Apr 10/86; C Trib, Apr 10/86)
 The United States planned to resume its efforts to put nuclear reactors into space. The move would renew a program abandoned 10 years previous to this date, but now deemed necessary for President Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), "Star Wars." Even without SDI, said Air Force officials, reactors would be needed for the next generation of spacebased weapons; NASA could use such reactors to power Space0*Stations, lunar bases, interplanetary explorers, and satellite traffic control. The United States has mainly relied on solar energy for its space activities, but SDI would require more power than the panels could give. The Soviet Union never abandoned its plan for space reactors and sent up 20 nuclearpowered satellites, one of which crashed and spread radioactive debris over northwest Canada. (W Post, Apr 14/86)
 NASA officials announced that the redesign of booster rocket seals would render them failsafe. The new design would not use putty to protect the seals from heat; would include an outside cover to protect the seals from rain and ice, with a possible heating element built in; use a clip to prevent rotation; and provide a backup seal for each joint of the booster. (P Inq, Apr 14/86)
 Rocket debris recovered on April 13, 40 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 560 feet of water was determined by the President's Commission to be the part of the right booster thought to be responsible for the Challenger accident. In the area where photographs had shown a plume of flame was a onefoot by twofoot hole, lending concrete evidence to the theory that the oring and/or the putty used to protect it had failed to do its job of sealing two of the rocket's four segments. (C Trib, Apr 15/86; W Post, Apr 15/86; W Times, Apr 15/86; NY Times, Apr 15/86; B Sun, Apr 15/86)
 A House panel, the Science and Technology Committee's subcommittee on space science and applications, approved a $7.6 billion NASA budget request. The authorization bill still needed review by the full Committee before being sent to the House floor. No funds were allotted for a new Shuttle, but supporters in Congress hoped that NASA would request a supplemental $500 million as first payment for "Challenger II." The physics and astronomy portion of NASA's budget, including $27.9 million for the Hubble Space Telescope, had not yet been reviewed. (B Sun, Apr 18/86)
 An advanced reconnaissance satellite, believed to be a KH11 photographic reconnaissance satellite, was lost as the Titan rocket carrying it exploded seconds after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. With only one HK11 in orbit, officials were concerned that verification of arms control treaties would be hampered and that it would be more difficult for the Soviet Union and the United States to sign the treaties. Older satellites dropped film after photographing, but the KH11 beamed pictures to ground stations and could maneuver about while in orbit. An HK11 was lost in August 1985 when another Titan rocket failed. Assistant Secretary of Defense Donald Latham, estimated that it would be six or seven months before the Department of Defense could launch another satellite. Outside experts believed that the government might approve an emergency0*Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base because the only other reconnaissance satellite remaining on the ground was an HK12, believed too big for an expendable rocket. (NY Times, Apr 20/86; Apr 22/86; CSM, Apr 21/86; USA Today, Apr 21/86; W Post, Apr 22/86)
 Recovery operations for the Space Shuttle Challenger crew cabin were completed. Scattered debris and the remains of all seven crew members were located in an effort that was hampered by heavy seas, high winds, and reduced underwater visibility. Final forensic work and future planning in accordance with family requests were expected to finish shortly thereafter. (NASA Release 8646; C Trib, Apr 21/86; NY Times, Apr 21/86)
 Astronaut Robert F. Overmyer announced that he planned to leave NASA, on June 1, and retire from the Marine Corps. His past accomplishments include piloting the November 1982 Columbia mission and serving as commander of the April 1985 Challenger flight. Colonel Overmyer joined NASA in September 1969. (NASA Release 8648)
 NASA announced that 25 industry/university consortiums submitted proposals for high technology research in the microgravity environment of space. Proposed areas included semiconductor crystal growth, remote sensing, communication technology, biotechnology, and space services. The proposals all have commercial potential or could contribute to possible commercial ventures. (NASA Release 8649)
 NASA scheduled two scientific experiment rocket launchings for early May, a Black Brant X and a TaurusNikeTomahawk, to create artificial clouds along the East Coast that would be visible from Canada to Florida and as far west as Ohio. The objective of the experiment was to investigate Nobel prize winner Dr. Hannes Alfven's proposed Critical Velocity Effect Theory, which has been used to explain details in the early formation of the solar system. In 1954, Alfven proposed that if an element in a nearly neutral plasma became ionized when it attained a flow velocity that matched its ionization potential, several facets of the structure of the solar system could be explained, including differing chemical compositions of the planets and the regularity of their orbits. Although Alfven's critical velocity effect has been studied in the laboratory, the phenomena required investigation in a space plasma. The experiment was scheduled for dawn, when the Earth's surface would still be dark but when there would be sunlight at the experiment's altitude so ionized cloud chemicals could be visible to the naked eye. The threestage, solidpropellant rockets would release barium and strontium at the apogee altitude of 267 miles. When the releases occurred, ground observers could see, if the experiment was successful, a cloud split into two0*welldelineated jets of gas in the first few minutes. The experiments were part of NASA's sounding rocket program, which included launching approximately 40 to 45 sounding rockets a year from various worldwide locations. (NASA Release 8651)
 NASA disclaimed an April 2324 twopart article in the New York Times that accused the organization of ignoring audits and safety standards, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle program. According to NASA, some of the examples mentioned in the article "are related to activities of several years ago and have since been corrected or are being corrected." Moreover, "NASA has always considered audits to be a necessary management tool to be used in conjunction with other management processes...during the existence of NASA prior to and since the Inspector General Act, management has used its own internal audits to uncover and correct deficiencies and to strengthen internal controls." In addition, NASA has been responsive to external audit reports through tighter management." Indeed, says NASA, $749.3 million in savings, cost avoidances, and cost recoveries were realized from 19781985 because of internal and external audits. NASA also noted that many of the audit reports dealt with research and development projects into which new technologies had to be figured, making for an uncertain budget Other allegations: Various violations of law and Federal codes have occurred within NASA. The Agency predicted that Shuttle cargo would cost around $100 per pound but actual cost was closer to $5264 per pound; the Shuttle was not equipped with the amount of hardware for test purposes that was available to the Apollo program; in financing a Government guaranteed loan for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System program (TDRSS), NASA wasted $1 billion; NASA lost $2.4 million of equipment in In defense, NASA noted that the original estimate for Shuttle cargo was $160 per pound and the most recent was $615 per poundbesides, cost per pound was only a partial indicator of the Shuttle's utility; the Shuttle program did not parallel the Apollo program in regard to safety test hardware, but introduced longer periods of testing, not substandard safety precautions; the $1 billion said to have been wasted in the TDRSS program was in fact attributable primarily to significant interest cost increases; the lost equipment was a 1950's state of the art computer that by 1983 was so obsolete that no one else would take ithence the machine was dismantled and disposed of; ties to graft at NASA have to do with individual misconduct, such as that by Lewis Research Center and Marshall Space Flight Center officials, who were prosecuted in Federal court, indicating that the internal NASA investigation process was working well. (NASA Release 8652) 0** A statement by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly noted that the remains of the crew of the Space Shuttle Challenger were soon to be transferred, but no positive determination of the cause of the accident had yet been made. The three approaches pursued were the examination of remains, direct examination of the wreckage, and analysis of photography and radar to determine forces imposed on the vehicle. An examination of the remains revealed no new information, and the wreckage examination was hampered by the amount of damage done at water impact. Photo and radar analysis, he hoped, would lead to a determination of the magnitude and the direction of the forces imposed on the cabin during and after breakup. (NASA Release 8653)
 NASA announced the termination of a contract with TRW to design a baseline hybrid power system for the Phase B Space Station electrical power system. TRW expressed their wish not to pursue the project, but remained a major contributor to three other work packages. (NASA Release 8655)
 Unpublished test results done for the Presidential Commission studying the Challenger accident showed that cold weather on the morning of the Challenger launch made failure inevitable. Other findings by the commission concluded that a second joint on the righthand booster rocket ruptured seconds after the Challenger breakup, suggesting that the joint was unduly fragile; reusable booster rockets ballooned about twohundredths of an inch after each previous flight, and segments of the ill fated rocket did not match well; a breach of the bottom of the external tank led to a structural failure but the nose cone of the booster rocket crashing into the fuel tank was not responsible for the final breakup; and the Shuttle did not explode, but rather a hydrogenoxygen flash fire caused it simply to fall apart. (NY Times, Apr 30/86)
 By a vote of 151, a Senate panel approved President Ronald Reagan's nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher to head NASA. The lone negative vote came from Albert Gore, who expressed concerns about Fletcher's judgement because he had drastically underestimated the price of a Shuttle fleet in the 1970s. (B Sun, May 1/86; W Times, May 1/86; W Post, May 1/86; NY Times, May
 Launching of a Delta rocket carrying a weather satellite was postponed because of a quarter cup of leaking rocket fuel. The delay, said officials, would be from 1 to 10 days, depending on the extent of the problem. This was to be the first NASA launch since the Shuttle accident. (NY Times, May 2/86; W Post, H&May 2/86; P Inq, May 2/86; B Sun, May 2/86)
 Another NASA launch ended in failure as a $30 million0*Delta rocket carrying a $55.7 million weather satellite was destroyed shortly after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. An order to destruct by remote control came when the rocket's main engine failed and it tumbled off course. This was the first mishap for the Delta rocket, praised as NASA's most dependable launch vehicle, in 9 years and 43 consecutive launches. The four most used vehicles for launching satellites (the Delta, Titan 3D and Atlas Centaur rockets and the Space Shuttle) were all put on hold, grounding the agency for an undetermined amount of time. A short circut was the leading suspect the Delta loss. (W Times, May 5/86; May 6/86; W Post, May 5/86; May 6/86; WSJ, May 5/86; May 6/86; NY Times, May 5/86; May 6/86)
 Soviet cosmonauts made a historic trip between Space Stations as they traveled 1,800 miles in their Soyus T15 transport module from the recently launched Mir to the Salyut7 station. The mission was broadcast on state television. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), May 6/86; B Sun, May 7/86; NY Times, May 8/86)
 Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that John W. Thomas, Spacelab Program Officer Manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to assume management responsibility for the Solid Rocket Motor redesign team at the Marshall Space Flight Center on May 12, 1986. The Space Shuttle Challenger accident investigation uncovered several deficiencies in the design of the solid rocket motor joint. An independent group of senior experts would also be involved in all phases of the program; they would report to NASA Administrators and review and integrate the findings and recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8658)
 Dr. James C. Fletcher became NASA's administrator for the second time. His first term in this position ran from April 1971 to May 1977. During the interim, he held the William K. Whitford Professorship of Energy Resources and Technology at the University of Pittsburgh and headed his own consulting firm. Past achievements include positions as research physicist with the United States Navy Bureau of Ordinance, research associate at Harvard University, instructor at Princeton University, positions in the private sector with Hughes Aircraft Company, RamoWooldridge Corporation and Space Electronics Corporation, and president of Space General Corporation. He also developed patents in sonar devices and missile guidance systems and has been associated with the President's Science Advisory Committee. After being sworn in, Fletcher announced that Space Shuttle flight would not resume for another 12 to 18 months and promised to fully review NASA's quality control program and decisionmaking process. He also noted that the 70 percent reduction in quality control staff for which NASA was recently criticized was "misleading" because "inhouse" work such as the Moonlaunched Saturn rockets were no longer a responsibility. A full Senate0*approved his nomination on May 6. (NASA Release 8660; B Sun, May 13/86; W Post, May 13/86; WSJ, May 13/86; NY Times, May 13/86)
 Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge restated at a conference of the Aviation Space Writers that the USAF would like to purchase a new rocket that could lift medium weight satellites. The rockets, which the service calls "medium lift vehicles," were needed to launch 12 NAVSTAR navigation satellites scheduled for Shuttle flights. He also informed the conference of an interest in larger rockets, "complementary expendable launch vehicles," (an updated Titan rocket) for putting the Pentagon's heaviest satellites into orbit. (B Sun, May 14/86; NY Times, May 13/86; May 20/86)
 NASA considered both a crewtended station and one that would be permanently tended. The Phase B study period for the Space Station identified and evaluated alternative systems, components and philosophies that would result in a configuration responsive to the needs of potential users, be costeffective to operate and maintain, and flexible in terms of growth, size, and capabilities. A crewtended station could have people aboard only when a Shuttle orbiter docked to it; the orbiter would provide the habitable facilities. While Congress directed NASA to examine an option "which phases in permanent crew features of the Station," NASA pointed out that the "phased approach would force postponement of experiments important to advancement of manned spaceflight and would increase the total cost of developing the permanently manned Space Station." NASA went on to argue that the savings achieved by the phased approach would be offset by the cost of operating the Station in a crewtended mode for several years and by the cost of maintaining the industrial base during the delay period before resuming assembly of the permanently tended station. Savings of the crewtended phase were estimated at $284 million in 1984 dollars and total cost prior to permanently crewtended capability at $1 billion. (NASA Release 8659)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an independent panel to review NASA's management practices, especially the decisionmaking process on the morning of the January 28 Challenger accident. The review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that Shuttle flights would likely resume by July 1987, with an optimum of seven launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his "highest priority." Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told members of Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would investigate the transfer of two Morton Thiokol engineers, Allan McDonald and Roger Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently' 0*objected to the Challenger launch on the morning prior to its deadly flight and later detailed their scenarios before Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow be involved with the reassignments. The subcommittee advised NASA to reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened to severely reduce NASA's budget for new space programs if the agency did not undergo some drastic changes. (Department of Housing and Urban Development Independent Agencies Appropriations for 1987, May 13/86; W Times, May 14/86; W Post, May 14/86; WSJ, May 14/86; NY Times, May 14/86; P Inq, May 14/86; C Trib, May 14/86; B Sun, May 14/86)
 After more than a year of study by NASA centers and contract teams, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced a baseline configuration for the permanently crewtended Space Station that would guide preliminary design activities for the remaining eight months of the Phase B studies. The contract called for development of the Space Station to begin in October 1986, ending with a permanently tended habitable station in 1994. A total of 14 Space Shuttle flights were thought to be required for Major features of the design included two vertical keels 361 feet long and connected by upper and lower horizontal booms 146 feet long (the Space Station measured 503 feet at its widest point); two 44.5foot long, 13.8foot interior diameter U.S. supplied modules, with external interconnects for laboratory functions and crew quarters for eight members and two smaller logistics modules to alternate between the ground and the station; modules located near the station's center of gravity to provide the best possible microgravity environment for experiments, with raft patterns having four nodes and two tunnels to serve as module interconnects; internal module pressure of 14.7 per square inch and 80/20 nitrogen/oxygen mixture ratio to approximate sea level Earth atmospheric conditions, with a closed loop environmental control and life support system where oxygen and water could be recycled and nitrogen and food could be resupplied; hybrid solar power system with 75 kilowatts of power, where 25 kilowatts would be provided by photovoltaic system and the remaining 50 by the solar dynamics system; five locations on the structure for placing attached payloads and a facility for servicing free flying spacecraft and platforms with a telerobotic servicer; polar platform with useful payload on single Shuttle launch and a coorbiting platform to support astrophysics and materials processing; gaseous hydrogen/oxygen propulsion system for altitude control (assembly would be at 220 nautical miles and operational altitude at 250 nautical miles minimum); metric as standard unit of measurement; and inclusion of international elements into the overall design, including the Canadian Mobile Servicing Center and hardware provided by Japan and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 8661; NY Times, May 15/86; W Times, May 15/86)'!0*May 15: NASA and Boeing Aerospace Company entered into an agreement concerning materials processing experiments. Crystals of a size and quality impossible to create on Earth would be attempted aboard three Space Shuttle flights. Working with the University of Alabama, Boeing agreed to fund the experiments, including a chemical vapor transport crystal growth furnace installed in the galley area. These crystals were expected to be of the type valuable in the commercial production of semiconductor and electrooptic devices. The experiments would underscore NASA's commitment to the development of commercial endeavors in space, and would continue with the Space Station. (NASA Release 8662)
 Space agency officials announced that it would cost $625 million to get the remaining Shuttle fleet off the ground. The money would go to salvage and investigation costs ($43 million), spare parts ($46 million), and corrective actions ($537 million). The corrective actions included redesign of the solidfuel rocket booster, changes in the main engine, and changes in steering, braking and other systems, but not escape options for the crew. The Senate Appropriations Committee trimmed the request to $526 million because, it was reasoned, the agency could not spend all of its money before the fiscal year ended on September 30. Other officials from NASA met with President Ronald Reagan to discuss the Nation's launch capability and requested $2.8 billion to replace the Challenger. The request, which was part of a $5 billion to $8 billion total that included expendable launch vehicles, violated the deficit reduction GrammRudman law. Chief of Staff Donald Reagan questioned the need for a new Shuttle that might be outdated within 10 years. President Reagan queried, "Should we be buying the technology of the '70s for use in the '90s?" In grappling with the NASA budget, the President considered a recommendation to bar all commercial and foreign launches from the Shuttle. (W Times, May 16/86; W Post, May 16/86; WSJ, May 16/86)
 An Energy Department analysis released to Representative Edward Markey stated that radioactive releases resulting from a Space Shuttle accident carrying a plutoniumpowered satellite could cause 367 cancer cases and contaminate 367 square miles of land. The former estimate hinged on people staying in the launch site area for more than a year. (W Post, May 19/86; C Trib, May
 Two papers delivered by Dr. Allan Harris and Dr. Eugene Shoemaker to the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore dealt with the possibilities and consequences of a comet, asteroid, or large meteoroid striking the Earth. Chances of the first two bodies striking us in the next 100 years, the paper determined, were only 1 in 1000. An encounter with the third, however, would be more likely (this occurs about once every two decades) and'"0*although the meteoroid would explode in the atmosphere, less advanced nations might mistake the explosion for a nuclear attack. Asteroids and comets are still monitored, notwithstanding the low odds of a collision. Asteroids lend themselves to search methods because they follow an Earthlike orbit, but the latter have an elliptical orbit difficult to track. Also presented to the Baltimore meeting were the results of the findings of a joint U.S./Brazilian atmospheric study conducted in July and August 1985 by NASA and the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais. Analysis of the study concluded that gases from the rain forests in the Amazon Basin in Brazil set off a chain of chemical reactions that eventually impact global air quality and the Earth's radiation budget. Trace gases in the troposphere resulting from biological activity in forest soil and vegetation were measured with instruments aboard NASA's Electra aircraft. (NASA Release 8663; 8664)
 The Pentagon considered waiting until 1991 before a Shuttle would be launched for the first time from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Temporarily closing the $2.8 billion facility would save $400 million a year in maintenance. The major advantage, however, given the increased number of launches per year, is that using only Cape Canaveral in Florida would save time because moving a Shuttle between the two coasts is time consuming. Only launches from Vandenberg, however, could safely put the Air Force's highly classified satellites into polar orbit. (NY Times, May 21/86)
 Representative Edward P. Bolland, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee, advised NASA that it needed to make some difficult choices in its bigticket items. The Congressman specifically asked Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher how he would choose between a new Shuttle and the Space Station, to which he responded that the two projects were inseparable. Fletcher further pointed out that a fourth Shuttle was necessary because another accident would leave the Nation with only two, crippling the space program. The subcommittee, said Bolland, was most concerned about the cost of the Space Station. (B Sun, May
 Ground testing of auxiliary thrusters designed to allow the Space Station to maintain a proper orbit and altitude demonstrated that the thrusters can operate for long periods of time with no hardware degradation. Fueled by water broken down into hydrogen and oxygen, the thrusters ran for as long as 22,000 seconds, and, with a target of 10 years of Space Station life, the goal was for them to run 40,000 to 60,000 seconds. Bell Aerospace Textron and Aerojet TechSystem Corporation conducted the tests for NASA. (NASA Release 8665)
 Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said at a Board of'#0*Governors meeting that he expected President Ronald Reagan's approval for a replacement Shuttle. He reiterated what he told the President earlier and averred, "We need a fourth orbiter right away, as soon as we can build it." Fletcher also warned that if it were not built and if we do not begin operating the Space Station by 1994, "that could be very dire, indeed, for the future of American science and technology and the American economy." (Remarks prepared for Delivery: Aerospace Industries Association of America, Board of Governors Meeting, Williamsburg, Virginia, May 22/86; P Inq, May 23/86; W Times, May 23/86; B Sun, May 23/86)
 Dr. James C. Fletcher said that a redesigned space vehicle (the aerospace plane) would take 10 years longer to build than a replacement for the Challenger. He also relayed the information that 44 potentially flawed parts, not including the orings, were discovered in the shuttle and would have to be attended to before it could again fly. (NY Times, May 28/86; W Post, May 28/86; WSJ, May 238/86)
 NASA announced that TRW, Inc. was awarded a contract to replace the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost in the Challenger accident. Plans called for a replacement spacecraft and followon satellites to keep the TDRS system operational through the end of the century. As of this date, one TDRS was in geosynchronous orbit near Brazil over the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 8670; WSJ, May 30/86)
 Another setback for Western launch capability occurred as an Ariane rocket was destroyed by ground controllers 4 minutes and 36 seconds after liftoff in French Guiana, when its third stage failed to ignite. Also lost was an Intelsat V communications satellite; it was the third time failure in the rockets had occurred for that reason. Arianespace, a French company that sold space on the rocket, was in fierce competition with NASA for multimilliondollar commercial contracts, but ceded its monopoly when forced to postpone future flights while the accident was being investigated. With the grounding of the U.S. space program, western nations were left with the Ariane rocket as the only means to place commercial satellites into space. (LA Herald, Jun 1/86; CSM, Jun 16/86)
 Researchers at the Construction Technology Laboratory found that concrete made from lunar soil, which contains no organic substances, was 5 percent stronger than highstrength Earth concrete. Because NASA planners anticipated a return to the Moon in the 21st century to establish a permanent lunar base, the concept of lunar building materials was a valuable asset when the cost of otherwise transporting them was considered. (NASA Release 8668) '$0** Satellite remote sensing technology, NASAdeveloped software for processing satellite imagery, was used by scientists and medical researchers at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories in conjunction with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) for enhancement of disease diagnosis. NMR, sensitive to soft tissue and superior to Xrays and CAT Scans, is a technology that has been around since the 1940s, but previously had not been used as a diagnostic tool. (NASA Release 8669)
 The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident released its report, two hundred pages, plus appendices, that recommended reorganization of NASA's management structure. Other changes cited by the Commission included more rigid quality control, reorganization of the lines of communication in the NASA chain of command, a larger role for NASA astronauts in Shuttle matters, and a Shuttle escape system. By the time these conclusions were announced, the report had been sent to the printers; it was scheduled to be on President Ronald Reagan's desk by June 9. (Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident; W Post, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; B Sun, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86; WSJ, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86)
 NASA announced the seven winners of the sixth annual Space Science Student Involvement Program (SSIP) and the winner of the SSIP Student Newspaper Competition. SSIP, a joint venture of NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, and the corresponding newspaper competition were both aimed at the secondary school level. (NASA Release 8671)
 Preliminary investigation into the Titan rocket lost on
 outer casing of the solid rocket booster might have peeled, allowing flames to burn through its casing. Although made by United Technologies, the design was identical to that used in the boosters made by Morton Thiokol for the Space Shuttles and raised the question as to whether solidfuel booster rockets in lieu of liquidpropellant rockets were suitable for human space flight. NY Times, June 4/86)
 NASA located a video tape concerning the Shuttle mission 51E Flight Readiness Review (FRR) that contained twoandonehalf minutes of discussion on previous oring erosion. Because there was no requirement to record audio or video of FRR's, no cataloging of the tape was made. The Presidential Commission was provided with the tape but informed NASA that no new information was on it. (NASA 8677)
 Two nearEarth asteroids, composed of nickel and iron and could provide future space mining, were discovered shortly before this date by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. About one mile in diameter, each, one asteroid is inside and one is outside of'%0*Earth's orbit. (NASA Release 8673)
 Two hundred fiftyeight members of Congress signed a letter addressed to NASA urging them to find a second supplier for its Space Shuttle booster rockets. Congress, described as further tightening the rein on NASA, believed that competition for the sole provider, Morton Thiokol, would equate to savings. Aerojet General said it was ready to build a seamless booster, a safer design. Congress also wanted NASA to eliminate some of the rules that favored Thiokol, such as requiring any second manufacturer to purchase nozzles for the rocket from them. (W Times, Jun 6/86; WSJ, Jun 6/86; P Inq, Jun 6/86; B Sun, Jun 6/86)
 Investigation into the Delta rocket crash May 3 indicated that the accident could have been a result of a faulty hardwareassembly program in the engine compartment. A short circuit was most likely the cause, said Lawrence Ross, Chairman of the Delta review board, but sabotage was not ruled out. (B Sun, Jun 6/86)
 Following the release of the Presidential Commission's report, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would adopt most of the recommendations. He stated, "The whole agency needs a major reexamination." He further said that he still expected the Shuttle fleet to resume operation by July 1987, that the President will opt for a replacement Shuttle, and that he remained committed to the Teacher in Space Program. Congress, however, pointed out that fiscal restraints would render it nearly impossible to make all the Committee's suggested repairs while building a new orbiter and pursuing the Space Station and the aerospace plane. (NASA Release: Statement of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, Jun 9/86; W Post, Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 10/86)
 Hearings before the House of Representatives investigating the Challenger accident began on this date. Testimonies were given by William P. Rogers, Dr. James C. Fletcher, various NASA personnel, various personnel from Morton Thiokol, Inc., and various personnel from the military and industry. The hearings were to take place June 10, 11, 12, 17, 18 and 25, 1986 and July 15, 16, 23, and 24, 1986. (Investigation into the Challenger Accident: Hearings before the Committee on Science and Technology House of Representatives, 1986)
 NASA installed a super computer known as the Cray XMP for use in key NASA research projects and for sharing with other NASA Centers, industries, and universities. The computer made possible the analysis of problems previously thought impossible to solve. A solution that might take one hour on the Cray XMP, for example, would take 200 hours on a popular business mainframe computer. NASA noted that the research underway at Lewis' Structural Mechanics Branch would have been prohibitively expensive and time consuming without the super computer. (NASA'&0*Release 8674)
 NASA officials said that resuming Space Shuttle flight by
 by the Presidential Commission were followed. The report called for correction of the Shuttle's braking system, development of an escape system, and review of more than 700 critical components; however, the biggest obstacle lay in the redesigning and testing of the booster rockets. The Commission recommended a costly and time consuming fullscale, vertical test for the new rockets. NASA had relied on a less expensive, scaled down, horizontal test for new designs in the past and made no commitment for following this advice. The added preparation time would most adversely affect the Air Force, who earlier had warned that even a 1year delay would produce a backlog of 40 payloads by 1992; some of their satellites could not fit aboard any untended launch vehicle then in use. Some former commercial customers had negotiated flights with the French Ariane rocket program, but because they were also grounded, China and Japan were being sought for President Ronald Reagan, in the meantime, had called for a replacement orbiter, but had not yet revealed how it would be funded. (NY Times, Jun 12/86)
 Astronaut Owen K. Garriott planned to leave both NASA and government service during the current week. His past achievements include a 2month stay in space aboard Skylab and the 10day Spacelab 1 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 8675)
 Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June
 The Soviet Union said that it was prepared to fill the void left by the United States and Europe for commercial space launches. Moscow revealed this fact in an announcement that also called for a World Space Organization. The Organization would oversee joint space projects that the Soviets hoped would unfold in the future. (C Trib, Jun 13/86; CSM, Jun 16/86) ''0*June 13: In a move that would greatly reduce the chances for resuming Shuttle flights by July 1987, President Ronald Reagan urged NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher to comply with all of the recommendations put forth by the Challenger commission. President Reagan also ordered Fletcher to report back to him after 30 days with details on how and when the findings would be implemented. Also, the two reportedly discussed approval of Federal funds for a replacement orbiter and the President's final decision was expected to follow after a few days. (Letter from President Reagan to James Fletcher, Jun 13/86; W Post, Jun 14/86; WSJ, Jun 16/86; W Times, Jun 16/86)
 The Peoples Republic of China moved to fill the void left by the United States and Europe for commercial space launchings as it negotiated with two U.S. firms. Hughes Aircraft Company expressed an interest in working with China to establish a launch base in the Hawaiian islands. Peking, at the same time, announced an agreement it had made with the U.S. company Teresat, Inc., for putting two of their satellites into orbit in 1987 and 1989 at a price ranging from $20 million to $25 million, about 15 percent less than what Ariane and the Space Shuttle charged. Teresat, however, would first need to locate an insurer for launches and secure approval from the State Department. China claimed its program was capable of 10 to 12 launches per year. (W Post, Jun 16/86; CSM, Jun 16/86; WSJ, Jun 17/86; C Trib, Jun
 Astronaut James Van Hoften announced his resignation from NASA to enter private industry. His past achievements include two Space Shuttle Flights and the position of Assistant Professor of Civil Engineering at the University of Houston. He was the fifth astronaut to leave NASA since the January 28 accident. (NASA Release 8678; USA Today, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jul 29/86)
 The $3 billion launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California was deemed unsafe according to a Senate report released on this date. The salient feature cited was the closed exhaust ducts that could fill with hydrogen gas in the event that a Shuttle's main engines were shut down to abort liftoff or at the end of a flightreadiness testfiring. The report also noted that fog, high winds, and cool temperatures were common to the area and that the proximity of the launch pad to the control center put support personnel at risk. Because the Department of Defense required the California site to achieve polar orbit for reconnaissance satellites, it was recommended that they adopt the "new" Titan missiles. (W Times, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jun 18/86; Jul 9/86)
 Allan McDonald, in charge of the booster rocket redesign task force, told members of Congress that the new booster joints would fall into the "criticality1R" category, meaning that they'(0*would have a backup. No specific design had yet been chosen, and the engineer stated, "We're looking at some designs with orings and some without. We're looking at various seating concepts." McDonald was taken off Morton Thiokol's solid rocket team after testifying before the Rogers Commission concerning his objection to launching the Challenger in cold weather, but was reassigned to head the task force after complaints from Congress. (USA Today, Jun 19/86; W Times, Jun 19/86; NY Times, Jun 19/86)
 Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer was appointed Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Office of Commercial Programs, where he would be responsible for advancing the interests and participation of the private sector in the U.S. Space Program. He previously had cofounded businesses in the private sector and had served at the White House. (NASA Release 8679)
 NASA announced that it would terminate further development of the $1 billion Centaur Upper Stage for launching other spacecraft on board a Space Shuttle. The Shuttle 51L accident prompted major safety reviews and safety criteria, which the Centaur, even after modifications, could not meet. Under Richard H. Truly's direction, NASA initiated efforts to examine alternatives for those national security missions that had planned to use Centaur. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions were dependant on such a launch, other options for launching them from the Shuttle with a Titan rocket were being considered. (NASA Release 8680, W Times Jun 20/86; W Post, Jun 20/86; WSJ, Jun 20/86; NY Times, Jun 20/86; CSM, Jun 23/86)
 Following a speech in Washington, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge told reporters that the Space Shuttle would not fly again until early 1988. The Air Force, he said, would use the expendable launch vehicles being developed as often as possible and that NASA's goal was to have military and nonmilitary payloads on a 5050 schedule. For reasons of security, Aldridge had hoped President Ronald Reagan would authorize funds for a new orbiter, but sources revealed that the President would hold back any decisions concerning the space program until after NASA began implementing some of the recommendations from the Roger's Commission. (W Post, Jun 24/86; W Times, Jun 24/86; NY Times, Jun
 TRW, Inc. was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for design and delivery of the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), a reusable, remotely operated propulsion vehicle for hauling satellites from one orbit to another. The OMV's primary uses would be spacecraft delivery, retrieval, boost, deboost, and close proximity visual observation beyond the operating range of a Space Shuttle. The OMV, "space tug," was also to be made to adapt for use in Space Station activities. (NASA Release 8681; WSJ, Jun 26/86; LA Times, Jun 27/86)')0** The first flight of an aircraft with both a digital jet engine control system and a mated digital flight control system took place at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility with a modified F15. The integration of engine and flight control (Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control) between the system's computers could increase performance 2 to 10 percent. (NASA Release 8682)
 NASA officials confirmed that the Agency had considered reproduction of the Delta rocket and was ordering at least one from McDonnell Douglas for launching an Indonesian communications satellite early in 1987. Officials at the corporation assured NASA that the grounded Delta rocket could be ready for launch in a few months because problems were worked out and the production line for the rocket was partially restarted. (W Post, Jun 27/86; WSJ, Jun 27/86)
 Three government agenciesthe National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)proposed a longterm plan for the study of human effect on the Earth's environment. The project envisioned cooperation from other scientifically advanced nations and would use the disciplines of geology, meteorology, oceanography, forestry, agriculture, and computer and satellite technologies to study the Earth as an integrated system. NSF director, Erich Bloch, noted that "for the first time in history we have the capability to observe the entire Earth from the outer reaches of its atmosphere to its molten inner core." NASA's Earth System Sciences Committee predicted that the program, enlisting satellites from countries around the globe, would be in full swing by the middle 1990s. (B Sun, Jun 27/86; CSM, Jun 30/86)
 For the first time since the January 28 accident, the Space Shuttle's main engine underwent a 11/2 second test for ignition. It was an uneventful and successful run, and NASA officials offered it as a signal that the program was gearing up for a targeted July 1987 mission. (B Sun, Jun 27/86; C Trib, Jun
 Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced that Andrew J. Stofan had been appointed Associate Administrator for the Space Station. He also announced a number of organizational and management structural changes for the program and transfer of its supervision from the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to Washington, D.C. The changes followed recommendations from a committee headed by former Apollo Program Manager Samuel C. Phillips that were consistent with findings from the Rogers Commission, which investigated the Challenger accident. Phillips examined the Space Station program from both a technical and management perspective and Dr. Fletcher, in turn, made changes that assured the flow of important information to'*0*proper decisionmaking levels. Another result was the procurement of a versatile computerbased information network to link NASA and contractor facilities and to provide engineering services. (NASA Release 8684; W Post Jul 1/86; NY Times, Jul 1/86; W Times, Jul 1/86; C Trib, Jul 2/86)
 Al Louviere, who headed a team of engineers at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, recommended to Shuttle Program Director Arnold Aldrich that an escape system be built into orbiters. Equipped with pressure suits and an oxygen supply, astronauts could bail out of the aircraft while it was in gliding flight below 100,000 feet. Although no specific plan was given, Louviere stressed the fact that no escape system could have saved the Challenger crew. (p Inq, Jul 2/86)
 The Delta 178 rocket accident that occurred on May 3, 1986, was caused by mechanical damage to wiring caused by vibration during flight. The rocket's first failureafter 43 flights since 1977was attributed to a design change, a shift from polyvinylchloride (PVC) insulated wiring to Teflon insulated. Unlike PVC, which is overwrapped for greater abrasion protection, Teflon wiring bundles are overwrapped in only a very limited number of locations; the abrasion resistance of mechanical damping was not adequately considered when making the change. The investigating board recommended a review of the booster electrical control system and possible design changes, verification of the quality of all connectors, and a reemphasis on highly attentive, quality workmanship. Another study released concerned the Titan 34D mishap of April 18; it determined the cause of the accident to be insulation inside one of the two solid rockets being pulled away and allowing "burn through." Neither accident was deemed the result of any major design flaw and, subsequent to minor modifications, the United States planned to resume untended rocket launches. The investigating board also observed potential problems resulting from highhumidity conditions for vehicles stored at the Kennedy Space Center, to instrument limitations, and lack of protection from contamination of the Rocketdyne engine relay box. These problems were not directly connected with the Delta 178 `"rocket accident or the Titan 34D mishap. (NASA Release 8685; W (#Post, Jul 3/86; WSJ, Jul 3/86; NY Times, Jul 3/86; B Sun; Jul
 NASA issued a request for proposals to various contractors for a satellite for use in a joint venture with the French Space Agency, Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, in the Topex/Poseidon oceanographic mission. The satellite would map the'+0*circulation of the world's oceans by using a precise radar altimeter to measure height variations on the sea surface. Contingent upon congressional approval of funds, a launch of the satellite in late 1991 was planned. (NASA Release 8686)
 A fullscale Spacehab module mockup intended to double the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle middeck was delivered to NASA's Ames Research Center by Spacehab, Inc. The mockup was intended as a test bed for artificial intelligence, robotics systems, and human performance. Spacehab planned to build three of the modules over the next three years. Another corporation, Sverdrup Technology, was chosen for a $45 million support services contract in which they would provide test complex services for Space Shuttle main engines and engineering and laboratory and data work for NASA and 18 other Government agencies. NASA also planned a program that would develop software tools for writing computer programs in ADA, a language used by the Department of Defense for missioncritical computers. The project was expected to run for three or four years and cost $200 million. (Def News, Jul 7/86)
 In a response to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the establishment of the Office of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance and the appointment of George A. Rodney, from Martin Marietta Corporation, to head the office as Associate Administrator. Objectives of the office were to ensure a program that monitored equipment status and designed validation problem analysis and system acceptability in Agencywide plans and programs. Rodney's responsibilities were to have oversight of safety, reliability, and quality assurance functions related to all NASA activities. (NASA Release 8687; W Post, Jul 9/86; W Times, Jul 9/86; B Sun, July 9/86; P Inq, Jul 6/86)
 With a request for proposals issued to approximately 250 firms, NASA planned to implement a Technical and Management Information System (TMIS) to support overall functions of the Space Station, including design, development, and operation. The TMIS would link the various NASA centers involved with the program and would automate the generation and interchange of documents, correspondence, schedules, engineering data and drawing, budget data, and other management information. Carried out in implements, the first would be operational less than one year after the contract award date. (NASA Release 8688)
 Richard G. Smith, Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, announced his retirement. He plans to join the private sector with General Space Corporation. His achievements span 35 years in the space program and include work with the rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal; management of',0*the Saturn Rocket program at Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Headquarters, Director of the Skylab Task Force, and he is the recipient of awards for his contributions to Apollo, Skylab, and Space Shuttle programs. Smith had earlier warned that investigation into the Challenger accident would result in a mass exodus from NASA and later added that the investigation damaged the reputations of many officials. (NASA Release 8689; W Times, Jul 11/86; W Post, Jul 11/86; NY Times, Jul 11/86; LA Times, Jul 11/86
 NASA planned for a display of current and future technologies at the 34th Annual EAA International FlyIn Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition, with an exhibit entitled "21st Century Aviation," August 18 in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Featured would be hypersonic cruise vehicles and high altitude aircraft that could fly from the U.S. West Coast to Tokyo five times faster than subsonic flyers and have the capability of taking payloads and passengers to Earth orbit. In addition, NASA also planned advanced cockpit displays in which aircraft controls reacted to voice commands, and presentations of a supercomputer capable of one billion computations per second, rotocraft research and potential applications, aeronautical art, and the Search and Rescue Satellite (SARSAT) system. The latter display was intended to show how using a satellite saves time in rescuing air and maritime casualties. (NASA Release 8690)
 In response to a recent order, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher handed President Ronald Reagan a 50page report that outlined the agency's plans for implementing the Rogers Commission's recommendations. Among the items detailed were booster redesign, changes in NASA's management, review of "critical items" whose failure would lead to vehicle loss, establishment of a safety organization, improved communications, landing safety, launch abort and crew escape, flight rate, and maintenance safeguards. Fletcher also submitted a companion letter urging the President to authorize funds for replacement of the Challenger. Because of the requirements for getting the Shuttle flying again, NASA confirmed the aircraft would be grounded until at least early 1988. (Actions to Implement the Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Jul 14/86; NY Times, Jul 15/86; W `"Post, Jul 15/86; B Sun, Jul 15/86; W Times, Jul 15/86; P Inq, Jul (#15/86; C Trib, Jul 15/86)
 Lawrence B. Mulloy, a manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, in charge of the solid rocket motors that were held responsible for the Challenger accident, announced his retirement after more than 30 years of Government'-0*service. He was among those who opted for liftoff of the illfated Shuttle and was repeatedly faulted for this judgement by William P. Rogers, chairman of the commission investigating the accident. He was the third Marshall manager to retire since the accident, following William R. Lucas and George B. Hardy. (W Post, Jul 17/86; P Inq, Jul 17/86; B Sun, Jul 17/86)
 NASA got back tapes from IBM that were recovered from the Atlantic Ocean six weeks after the Space Shuttle accident and revealed that the Challenger crew had no knowledge of events leading to the catastrophe. IBM engineers, who were simultaneously researching tape restoration, were called upon and after isolating the computer zeros and ones, NASA engineers began the job of translating the data into a facsimile of human voice. W Post, Jul 18/86; NY Times, Jul 18/86; B Sun, Jul 18/86)
 Shuttle director Richard H. Truly announced NASA's interest in an improved, secondgeneration solid rocket motor design for study by the National Space Transportation System program manager. Among the requested changes were asbestosfree insulation, alternate case and propellant design, and modified burn rate for improved performance. Outside geometry and interfaces with other Space Shuttle elements would not be affected. He added, however, that the tentative schedule for launching a Shuttle in early 1988 would not be contingent upon this newly designed booster rocket. (NASA Release 8694; NY Times, Jul 21/86)
 Conrail, created by Congress from six bankrupt northeastern railroads, argued against a measure proposed by Senator John Danforth that would take $450 million from the Governmentowned railroad and transfer the funds to NASA. If passed, the plan would help compensate for the House and Senate Armed Services Committee's move to cut $566 million from the Air Force budget that was earmarked for NASA and military use of the Shuttle. (W Post, Jul 22/86)
 Testing of recently installed weather protection structures was scheduled for August 19 at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida with Space Shuttle Atlantis. The $3.3 million system of sliding and folding doors and seals would cover previously exposed, lower portions of the orbiter and greatly reduce risk to the heat protection tiles, subject to damage from heavy rains, hail, and windblown debris. (NASA Release 8695)
 Thomas Paine, Laurel Wilkening, George Field, Jack Kerrebrock, Kathryn Sullivan, and Carl Sagan testified before Congress concerning Paine's report, "Pioneering the Space Frontier." (Hearing before the Committee on Science and Technology, July 22/86)
 The National Scientific Balloon Facility found a'.0*promising new material in a flight test series of high altitude balloons. The balloon film, developed by Raven Industries, was 0.0008 inches thick; two successful flights carried one 3000pound payload to an altitude of 130,000 feet and another 4300pound payload to 120,000 feet. At that time, the NASA balloon program provided support for approximately 50 flights per year for studies primarily in high energy astrophysics, astronomy, and upper atmospheric research. Because of its weightcarrying capacity and flight duration, the balloon was also important in infrared astronomy research and in cosmic and gamma ray investigations. (NASA Release 8696)
 NASA announced another test of a Space Shuttle engine to take place later in that week. The purpose was to collect additional data to be added to the previous test of the same engine, that ran for 250 seconds, at the National Space Technology Laboratory. (NASA Release 8697)
 NASA officials announced that the launch of an AtlasCentaur rocket scheduled to carry a Navy communications satellite into orbit on August 28 was postponed indefinitely. The flight was originally set for May 22, but the Delta rocket accident canceled that liftoff. The Atlas was the only remaining U.S. rocket system that had not been grounded; the delay resulted from the discovery by engineers of problems with some of the rocket's electrical parts. (W Post Jul 24/86)
 Dr. James C. Fletcher released to members of Congress a statement indicating that employment at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, would increase from 12,600 to 14,000 employees during Space Station development, with a potential for another 1,000 jobs should JSC take on additional Space Station tasks. "Another way to look at this," he warned "is that without the Space Station program, JSC's employment level likely will not grow significantly over the next few years." The projected increase notwithstanding, officials at the JSC were concerned with their status because of the recent decision to move the habitation module's development to the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville Alabama. They were assured, however, that the move had to do with coordinating the habitation module and the module structure and that "the Johnson Space Center's role as NASA's preeminent center of excellence in manned spacecraft systems is not changing." (NASA Release 8698; NY `"Times, Jul 26/86; W Post, Jul 26/86)
 Because of NASA's expertise in microelectronics and other miniaturized instruments, its technology was studied for use in controlling hydrocephalus, an impairment characterized by an accumulation of fluids in the brain that can lead to mental disorders. The microprocessorcontrolled cerebrospinal fluid outflow regulating system would replace an implanted shunt that'/0*diverts fluid from the brain to other parts of the body. Because the shunt is not always successful and often needs repair, this new technology, which can be reprogrammed to meet changing needs, offered hope for improvement and stability. (NASA Release 8699)
 Following a review of the wreckage and all other available data from the Challenger flight, copies of the final report on the investigation into the cause of death of the crew were released. Although NASA was unable to arrive at a positive determination, it seemed possible, after examining the transcripts from internal communication, that the crew was unaware of the events immediately preceding the breakup of the Release of the Challenger tapes to the news media, however, revealed that some members of the crew may have been aware of the accident. Seconds before the crash, pilot Michael Smith uttered the phrase "Ohoh" and subsequent to that other evidence revealed that a few astronauts attempted to use emergency air supply. The exact cause of death was never determined, but sources agreed that it was doubtful that the initial blast was sufficient to cause death or injury and whether any of the crew were able to maintain consciousness until the cabin struck the ocean's surface could not be determined. (NASA Release 86100; W Post, Jul 29/86; W Times, Jul 29/86; NY Times, Jul 29/86; WSJ, Aug 5/86)
 Administration sources said that President Ronald Reagan might delay funding for a new orbiter until 1987. Because budget restraints made any commitment to a replacement impossible, many advisors were in favor of producing expendable launch vehicles for private satellites. (W Post, Jul 30/86; P Inq, Jul 30/86; WSJ, Jul 31/86)
 NASA announced four teams to establish centers for the Commercial Development of Space. The centers, joint undertakings of academic, industry, and government teams, were (1) University of Wisconsin, Space Automation and Robotics and Dr. John Bollinger; (2) Ohio State University, Real Time Satellite Mapping and Ivan Mueller; (3) University of Houston, Molecular Beam Epitaxy and C.W. Chu; and (4) Clarkson University, Commercial Crystal Growth in Space and William Wilcox. Criteria for selection were based on new and unique research leading to commercial activity, management teams capable of directing commercial research, and available nonNASA resources to help operate the center. (NASA Release 86102)
 Dr. James C. Fletcher acknowledged that NASA did not sufficiently consult Congress on decisions pertaining to Space Station management prior to the June 30 announcement and said he would postpone plans for moving Space Station management from Houston to the Washington, D.C. headquarters. Because "considerable misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the'00*intent of the decision on the Space Station work package realignment has resulted," said Fletcher "I intend to conduct a thorough review of all aspects of Space Station design, work package assignments and functions, and conduct extensive conversations with members of Congress." (NASA Release 86103; USA Today, Aug 1/86)
 White House officials announced that top members of President Ronald Reagan's cabinet were in favor of halting commercial launches aboard the Space Shuttle, a move that would cost NASA $850 million in revenue. White House spokesman Larry Speaks argued that eliminating the launches would stimulate the private aerospace industry, reluctant to compete with NASA in the past, to quickly fill the void. Another reason for the reduced number of launches, he noted, was the increasing backlog of scientific and military payloads. Focus on those two types of missions exclusively would ease the immediate need for a fourth At the same time, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge said that he intended to ask Congress for $2.6 billion in order to acquire a fleet of rockets that would reduce both the backlog of 21 payloads and the Pentagon's dependance on the Space Shuttle. He added that no Space Shuttles would be launched from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base until 1992, a saving to tax payers of $1 billion. (W Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug 1/86; W Post, Aug 1/86; B Sun, Aug 1/86; NY Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug
 The Lunar and Planetary Laboratory at the University of Arizona and NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, planned a Planet Mercury Conference for early August. More than 10 years had elapsed since the last conference and a significant amount of data had developed during the interim. Scheduled topics included Mercury's role in helping scientists understand the origin of planets, Mercury as an endmember planet, groundbased and Earthorbital observations of Mercury, and possible spacecraft missions to the planet. (NASA Release)
 In Space Station Phase B Program Level Agreement, NASA and the ESA announced agreement on hardware elements for a preliminary design of a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module and a polar orbiting platform, the latter for conducting Earth observations. Under the agreement, ESA would conduct research on a preliminary design of a mantended freeflyer (pressurized module and resource module) for international utilization, primarily in the fields of material and life sciences and fluid physics, that would require both a longduration and undisturbed microgravity environment. (NASA Release 86104) '10*August 5: Preliminary data from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE), a threesatellite project that began in October 1984, indicated that clouds reflect more heat than they retain and appear to cool Earth's climate, possibly offsetting the "greenhouse effect." Incomplete coverage and sporadic observations have limited decades of study on global heat flows done with sounding rockets, balloons, and satellites. In a broader attempt, the ERBE instruments measured the average monthly heat budget on regional, zonal, and global scales; tracked the seasonal movement of heat from the tropics to the poles; and determined the average daily variation in heat on a 620mile regional monthly scale. An ERBE package contained two radiometer instruments. One, a scanner, was used for narrow fieldofview scanning with shortwave measurements of reflected solar energy and longwave measurements of Earthemitted energy. The other, a nonscanner, was used for wide fieldofview of the entire disc of the Earth, a 10degree region of Earth, and the total output of the sun's radiant energy. (NASA Release 86105)
 NASA announced that James R. Thompson would be appointed Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, in late September. He had been Deputy Director of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory since 1983 and previous to that had spent 23 years at Marshall, where he managed development of the Space Shuttle's main engines, worked in the Skylab Program, and was Associate Director of Engineering for the Center. He was also NASA's manager for the Challenger investigation (NASA Release 86106; NY Times, Aug 6/86)
 Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a Senate subcommittee and testified that the $7.7 billion budget for NASA was "barely adequate" and could further delay Shuttle flights while possibly stripping the private sector of some 25,000 jobs. He also said that the currently designed Space Station was intended to be built using four Shuttles. With only three Shuttles, the Station would need to go back to the drawing board. The Senate appeared to be looking at a civilian sponsored space program for commercial launches as a way to reduce costs. (W Post, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
 Documents released by the Roger's Commission investigating the Challenger accident revealed that the Space Shuttle Columbia had narrowly avoided a severe mishap on January 6 when it came within 31 seconds of launch after 18,000 pounds of liquid oxygen had been inadvertently drained from its external tank. The mistake would have left the ship without enough fuel to obtain orbit; the error was blamed on fatigue among the ground crew, who were pursuing a rigid schedule. (NY Times, Aug 6/86; W Post, Aug 6/86; W Times, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
 NASA and the Space Telescope Science Institute announced that U.S. amateur astronomers would be given a small'20*amount of observing time with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Amateur astronomers have made significant contributions to astronomy, and, at this point, there are at least a quarter million of these astronomers. With a 941/2inch mirror, the HST would be the largest astronomical telescope ever placed in space; it serves as an example of international cooperation between NASA and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 86108)
 In a White House meeting President Ronald Reagan indicated that he would allow NASA to honor only some of its higher priority contracts for commercial and foreign satellite launches from the Space Shuttle. Regarding a new orbiter, Chief of Staff Donald Regan has reversed his stance and now favors the replacement. Regan changed his mind, he stated, because he believed that NASA would not just correct its major faults, but would bring the Shuttle up to date with current technology. In a related matter, the Senate agreed to reimburse NASA with $56.3 million for military launches, a move protested by Senator Sam Nunn, who claimed that the money would come at the expense of intelligence activities. (NY Times, Aug 8/86; W Post, Aug 8/86)
 As of this date, two companies (Boeing Aerospace Operations and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company) had submitted proposals for the Payload Ground Operations Contract, a threeyear costplusawardfee contract with optional extensions of up to 15 years. The selected contractor would be responsible for preparing all payload for launch aboard Space Shuttles and expendable launch vehicles, as well as operations, maintenance, and engineering of the related processing facilities. The contract would consolidate work that was performed under separate, onsite contracts involving about 900 people. Space Station components requiring launch from the Kennedy Space Center and preparation of NASA payloads at the Vandenberg Launch Site in California were to be included. (NASA Release 86109)
 NASA chose a new design for its solid rocket motors, a major step for returning the Shuttle fleet to flight. Each joint would be sealed by three orings constructed from a more resilient material than that used originally, and would seal at all times, not just from pressure produced by expanding gas inside the rocket. Other changes included a metal clip meant to force the joint to remain sealed, interlocking insulation to prevent hot gases from directly contacting the orings, and a bolt assembly between the rocket nozzle and the engine for providing an additional seal at the nozzle joint. Hundreds of (#tests for the new design were scheduled for the coming fall. (NY Times, Aug 12/86; Aug 13/86; W Times, Aug 12/86; W Post, Aug 13/86; C Trib Aug 13/86)
 Pratt & Whitney was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to a contract award for the design, development, test, flight certification, and production verification of alternate'30*highpressure fuel and oxidizer turbopumps. With a proposed cost of about $182 million and a period of performance of five to six years, the turbopumps were intended to be interchangeable with the Space Shuttle's main engine turbopumps, provide extended life capability, and enhance safety margins. (NASA Release 86112)
 Members of a House Space Subcommittee endorsed NASA's $7.7 billion budget and authorized funds for a new shuttle and President Ronald Reagan ordered that a replacement orbiter be built. The craft would take about seven years to construct, according to administration officials. The money for the project, earmarked to come from other space programs, would be allotted annually. The first payment was to be $200 million, and the rate of progress for building it depended on future financing. The President also restated his hopes for private industry to develop a capacity for launching commercial satellites. (W Times, Aug 14/86; Aug 15/86; B Sun, Aug 14/86; Aug 15/86; NY Times, Aug 15/86; C Trib, Aug 15/86; W Post, Aug 15/86; CSM, Aug 18/86)
 In a statement released by the White House Press Secretary, President Ronald Reagan announced "two steps that will ensure America's leadership in space exploration and utilization." His first target was the building of a fourth Space Shuttle beginning in fiscal year 1987, deemed necessary for accomplishments in space (especially the Space Station). He also announced that NASA would ease out of the business of launching commercial satellites by allowing the private sector to assume the responsibility, which, he said, would eventually be done "better and cheaper." NASA, he stressed, should focus solely on the exploration of space. (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Statement by the President, Aug 15/86)
 A Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope for studying gamma ray sources in the universe was the basis for a $93,000 contract awarded to Martin Marietta. By housing the telescope inside of a Space Shuttle external liquid hydrogen tank, which is normally discarded just before the Shuttle achieves orbit, Martin Marietta deemed it possible that the unit could also be set into orbit. Telescope components would be carried in the cargo bay and assembled inside the emptied tank by astronauts, who could enter via an existing 36inch aft manhole port or through tank modifications. The satellite could then be pressurized to provide the needed environment for gamma ray detection technique; the rays would be converted to positrons and electrons that travel the length of the telescope emitting light. Gamma ray astronomy is essential to understanding the evolution of stars and the universe and the physical processes occurring in pulsars, quasars, and black holes. (NASA Release 86111)
 Astronaut Sally K. Ride was named Special Assistant to the Administrator for strategic planning, where she would be responsible for reviewing NASA's goals and objectives for near'40*tolongterm planning. Ride was a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle flights and a member of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86114)
 Elizabeth Dole predicted that U.S. rocket companies would begin launching private satellites by 1989 and capture 50 percent of the international market. Her announcement came after President Ronald Reagan's confirmation that NASA would no longer handle the business. Representatives from General Dynamics Corporation and Transpace Carriers, Inc. expressed hope that they would soon announce launch contracts. Some satellite officials, however, were less enthusiastic because NASA had the goahead to launch at least some of the 44 commercial satellites, leaving the agency with limited but palpable competition. In a related matter, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that a large portion of future flights would be devoted to scientific missions and that he expected a commercial launching industry to supplement the Shuttle. (W Post, Aug 19/86; W Times, Aug 19/86; NY Times, Aug 19/86; CSM, Aug 26/86)
 The XWing Rotor Systems Research Aircraft, which combines the hover characteristics and vertical lift of conventional helicopters and the high cruise speed of fixedwing aircraft, was formally viewed. Engineers and developers did not foresee the aircraft as a replacement for either fixed or rotary winged aircraft, but one that would serve unique purposes. (NASA Release 86113)
 Martin Marietta announced plans to enter the private launching business with its Titan class rockets. The Titan was the largest of all U.S. expendable rockets, and spokesman Jack Boyd said that he hoped to market the launch for dual payloads. The corporation had previously submitted a formal request to the Air Force for use of its launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (W Post, Aug 20/86; LA Times, Aug 20/86)
 NASA announced that it would cease implementation of work package realignment for a period of up to 90 days while two teams composed of NASA personnel, Phase B contractors, and representatives from user groups and international partners reviewed Space Station design and work package assignments and functions. The task force, headed by W. Ray Hook, Manager, Space Station Office, would critically examine all aspects of the current Space Station baseline configuration in terms of the amount of extravehicular activity required for assembly and maintenance, launch capacity of the Shuttle fleet, assembly sequence of the baseline configuration, resultant impact to the utilization of the station, potential impact on international partners, and overall technical performance and integrity of the Station. The Executive Technical Committee, headed by NASA Associate Administrator Andrew J. Stofan, would approve the assumptions, engineering, and technical constraints identified by'50*the task force and oversee their activities. (NASA Release 86116)
 NASA announced that Lieutenant General Forrest S. McCartney, on assignment from the Air Force, would take over as Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, beginning October 1. McCartney succeeded Richard Smith, who retired on July 31. The press opined that the move would give the military greater control of the space program. McCartney's past Air Force assignments include positions as satellite controller, as project officer in the Titan 3 program, in the Directorate of Space at USAF Headquarters, as monitor for satellite communications programs, and director of range engineering at USAF Eastern Test Range. (NASA Release 86117; W Post, Aug 21/86; NY Times, Aug
 For the fourteenth time since August 1985, the launch of a weather satellite that the Air Force had hoped to put into orbit was again postponed, this time because of a leak of liquid oxygen. Past delays were caused by technical problems with the AtlasE booster rocket and its payload and scheduling conflicts. The satellite was next intended to be launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on August 30. (LA Times, Aug 26/86; NY Times Aug 26/86)
 A NASA Aries sounding rocket was destroyed by a range safety officer at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, 50 seconds after liftoff at an altitude of 77,000 feet, when a problem in the vehicle's guidance system was discovered. The rocket carried a 2,300 pound Xray telescope, designed to study distant stellar objects emitting soft Xrays, jointly developed by Dr. Gordon Garmire of Pennsylvania State University and Drs. R. Novick and William HainMin Ku of Columbia University. (NASA Release 86119; W Post, Aug 28/86)
 The Official Flight Kit and Personal Preference Kits that were recovered during the mission 51L (Challenger) salvage operation were returned to the institutions, organizations, and families of the crew they were flown for. In addition, NASA planned to present to each state and territory one 51L crew patch, one U.S. flag, and the respective state or territory flag with the request that these items, which were flown, be displayed appropriately in memorial to the crew. (NASA Release 86120; B Sun, Aug 28/86)
 The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics announced that NASA's budget should be doubled to ensure that the United States retains its lead in space programs. The Institute described the budget as "no growth" and said that it would "insure that the U.S. becomes and remains a secondclass power in space." The report called attention to advancements made by the Soviet Union, Western Europe, and Japan, and also recommended'60*attempting to develop a greater student interest in space science. (B Sun, Aug 28/86; W Times, Aug 28/86; CSM, Aug 28/86; P Inq, Aug 28/86)
 The U.S. Marine Corps salvage operation for the 51L Space Shuttle accident, which involved the Freedom Star, the Liberty Star, and the Independence vessels, came to an end after a sevenmonth effort. It was the largest ocean recovery operation in history and at its peak involved 22 ships and 6,000 personnel, as well as numerous aircraft. The search yielded 45 percent of the Challenger, 50 percent of the external tank and solid rocket boosters, 95 percent of the SpartanHalley spacecraft, 35 percent of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, and 90 percent of the Inertial Upper Stage. (NASA Release 86121; C Trib, Aug 29/86; B Sun, Aug 29/86; W Times, Aug 29/86; W Post, Aug 31/86)
 The Air Force was forced to destroy an unarmed Minuteman 3 ICBM over the Pacific Ocean after an undisclosed problem developed during its 30minute test flight. Since February 1995, ten successful minuteman test launches had been done when another rocket had to be destroyed. (NY Times, Aug 29/85; P Inq, Aug
 The UNISTICK control system, used in NASA's lunar rover vehicle during the Apollo moon landings, was utilized as a handoperated device for steering, acceleration, and brake control in vehicles for handicapped drivers. The joystick type system was developed by the Johnson Engineering Corporation, which had made plans for commercial production. (NASA Release 86123)
 The Peoples Republic of China announced that it was nearing human space flight and was in the process of choosing astronauts for its planned Space Shuttle. It had built and was using an extensive training center and had solved many of the problems space has to offer, such as maintaining life support. No date was given as to when a craft would be built. (W Post, Sep 1/86; W Times, Sep 1/86)
 NASA said it had canceled 18 Space Shuttle missions over a 5year period for Spacelab because of the Challenger accident. The agency further stated that it planned to release a list of other scrubbed missions. (W Post Sep 1/86)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that the Nation was in need on a fifth orbiter, the funding for which would need to come from private financing. The claim by NASA's advisory council that the United States was approaching secondclass status in space, he acknowledged, was "on track." Fletcher'70*made a formal request on September 9, the same day that President Ronald Reagan petitioned Congress for the initial $272 million needed to begin work on a fourth Shuttle. (USA Today, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 9/86; B Sun, Sep 10/86)
 Because of the Challenger accident and the absence of any Shuttle activity, NASA was expected to announce layoffs at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where 800 to 1,000 employees would lose their jobs. For the same reason, Martin Marietta said that 700 to 800 of its workers would be laid off, by October 3, from its plant that produced Shuttle fuel tanks. (W Post, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 5/86)
 Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it had signed an agreement to launch a communications satellite for Federal Express from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 1989. Because the Titan 3 rocket to be used could deliver payloads up to 32,00 pounds, the corporation was searching for another customer to join the launch. Reagan administration officials were quick to point to the agreement as the birth of the private rocket industry. (W Post, Sep 5/86; P Inq, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 5/86)
 NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics planned a symposium on Quality and Productivity for December. The event would focus on strategies for revitalizing organizations and provide a forum for discussing issues involved in increasing national quality and productivity. The symposium would bring together over 900 key executives from industry, government, and academia. (NASA anno)
 NASA launched its first successful rocket since the Challenger accident, a Delta rocket from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Carrying two payloads for the Strategic Defense Program, one satellite would attempt to track down and intercept the other. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, manufacturer of the rocket, viewed the event as a stepping stone that might lead to the company's entry into commercial launches. NASA had two more Delta rockets in its inventory, one committed to a U.S. Government weather satellite identical to the one lost in May and the other to an Indonesian weather satellite. (NASA Release 8632; WSJ, Sep 8/86, P Inq, Sep 6/86; NY Times, Sep 6/86; Sep 8/86; W Post, Sep 6/86; C Trib, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 6/86)
 NASA extended a $1.32 billion contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company for processing services at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The contracted price, however, did not reflect the schedule changes brought on by the Challenger accident; the changes would be handled through contract amendments. NASA also awarded contracts at $500,000 million each to five different firms for the study of designs for second generation solid rocket boosters. The companies were required only to submit concepts for a newly designed rocket. (LA Times, Sep 6/86; WSJ Sep 8/86)'80** NASA cleared a site at Wallops Island, Virginia, for use by Space Services, Inc., a new rocket company, to launch its Conestoga rocket. The company planned to put cremated remains of 10,000 people on a satellite that was to orbit the Earth. (P Inq, Sep 9/86)
 Boeing Aerospace Company was selected for a oneyear contract with two oneyear options, valued at $1 million annually, to encourage U.S. firms, with private investment, to join with NASA to explore the application and utilization of new and innovative technologies for the mutual benefit of both parties. Issac T. Gillam, NASA Assistant Administrator, Office of Commercial Programs, noted, "Use of the microgravity environment of spaceflight for research leading to commercial development, production, and application of technologies and materials needed on Earth is a key to the Nation's future in the world economic market." Boeing, familiar with the needs and procedures of both the firm and NASA, would provide the technical and business services necessary to help commercial users prepare proposals to NASA and act as an intermediary. (NASA Release 86127)
 The first conference on control/structures interaction technology for large, flexible spacecraft, sponsored by NASA and the Department of Defense, was scheduled for November 1820, 1986. (NASA anno)
 NASA announced the formation of an operations task force for the Space Station, cochaired by Carl B. Shelly and Dr. Peter T. Lyman. The task force was to explore alternative approaches to operating and managing a deployed Space Station that had to integrate a diverse set of U.S. and International hardware elements to accommodate a wide range of tended and untended user activities and to recommend an effective concept for operating the system. (NASA Release 86129)
 Astronaut Frederick H. Hauck, former Navy Captain, was appointed Acting Associate Administrator for External Relations. He was commander of STS51A and pilot for STS7, as well as a member of the support crew for STS1 and reentry capsule communicator on the support crew for STS2. In midOctober, Kenneth S. Pedersen would become the Deputy Associate Administrator, upon his return from Georgetown University. Since 1979, he had been Director, International Affairs Division and Assistant Associate Administrator for External Affairs. Hauck's duties included policy level management and direction and coordination of the Agency's relationships with public and private organizations. (NASA Release 86130)
 COSPAS/SARSAT, an international search and rescue system, was scheduled to monitor the aroundtheworld, nonstop and unrefueled flight of the Rutan Voyager airplane. The SARSAT system uses four satellites, three from the Soviet Union and one'90*from the United States, to locate downed aircraft and ships at sea by picking up their emergency signals. The Rutan Voyager aircraft, designed by aeronautical engineer Burt Rutan and piloted by his brother Dick and Jeana Yeager, carried a 11/2pound prototype beacon that could transmit on a 406 Mhz frequency for location determination and a 121.5 Mhz frequency on which rescue workers could hone in. The signals could also be recorded by a satellite if the aircraft was not in immediate range of a ground station. Since the initiation of the program in September 1982, 606 lives had been saved, by September 1986, in 251 emergencies worldwide. (NASA Release 86132)
 Fairchild Space Company proposed a lightweight refueling device to be attached to the Space Shuttle's bay that could service satellites with the fuel required for keeping them in orbit. The refueling device would extend the maximum life span for a satellite about 15 years. Fairchild was in a race with Rockwell International and Martin Marietta for the lightest weight and best functioning design; submission of the designs to NASA was to be no later than November 7. (W Post, Sep 15/86)
 NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), in Pasadena, California, studied a program that would send a nuclearpowered spacecraft hurling into deep space traveling 225,000 miles per hour. The mission, said JPL Director Lew Allen, could be launched by 2005. The craft was expected to travel 1,000 astronomical units, 1,000 times the distance between the Earth and Sun, sending back data for more than 50 years. The Voyagers 1 and 2 spacecraft were expected to eventually reach deep space, but their slow rates of speed, about 36,000 miles per hour, would put any data gathering activity too far in the future. (LA Times, Sep 16/86)
 The Senate Appropriations Committee approved a plan for a new orbiter that diverted $2.9 billion in defense funds for a reserve to be used by NASA. The proposal asked the Navy to reduce production of the F/A18 fighter and delay construction of a Trident submarine, the Air Force to delay construction of the C17 transport plane, the Army to buy fewer M1 tanks, and defense contractors to shoulder the burden of the cost of tools in its manufacturing. Although the plan called for NASA to oversee construction, the Air Force would launch and operate the new Shuttle. (W Post, Sep 11/86; Sep 12/86; WSJ, Sep 11/86; LA Times, Sep 17/86)
 NASA had another successful launch; a 25yearold rebuilt AtlasE rocket, a onetime ICBM, carried a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration weather satellite, NOAA10, into orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA Director Larry Heacock said that the polar orbiting satellite would render "half of our satellite program restored to full working capability." (Public Affairs Plan For NOAAG Launch; ':0*Trib, Sep 18/86; W Post, Sep 18/86; W Times, Sep 18/86; NY Times, Sep 18/86)
 Six days after launch and 24 hours after being put into operation, the Search and Rescue Satellite Aided Tracking satellite (SARSAT) picked up its first distress signal from 4 downed Canadians in a remote area of Ontario. Rescue workers were easily able to locate the downed Cessna, and all four Canadians were taken to safety. Canada, France, the United States, and the former Soviet Union all shared in the search and rescue program known as COSPAS/SARSAT aboard the NOAA10 satellite. (NASA Release 86144)
 NASA announced to Congress plans for modifying the Space Station that Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher predicted would be finished by 1994. The new design cut the amount of space walks during construction in half, increased the amount of living and laboratory space, and kept all human aspects concerning the project at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The Space Station, according to plans for assembly, would need 17 Space Shuttle flights between 1993 and 1994. In the meantime, Congress approved legislation, based on a
 manufacturers for solid rocket boosters. The House also voted to authorize spending whatever money would be needed to begin construction of a new orbiter in fiscal year 1987. (P Inq, Sep 26/86; WSJ, Sep 26/86; W Post, Sep 26/86; W Times, Sep 26/86; NY Times, Sep 26/86)
 NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, awarded a $6.6 million, fouryear contract to General Electric for definition, modification, and test of propulsion systems for supersonic short takeoff and vertical landing technology development. In support of next century military aircraft, design and modification of a GE F110 engine would focus on a fan air collection and valving system by taking compressed air from the engine and redirecting it to vertical lift producing devices. (NASA Release 86136)
 Westinghouse Electric Corporation and Space Industries Company announced their partnership to build a $250 million, permanently orbiting space facility for scientists to perform research. The 14.5footdiameter 35footlong cylinder would provide a "shirt sleeve" work place that would benefit a (#host of industries. (P Inq, Sep 30/86)
 NASA released transcriptions of the prelaunch intercom tape of the 51L, Space Shuttle Challenger, for public consumption. The tape was about an hour long, beginning when the crew first entered the craft to two minutes and five seconds before liftoff. It contained nothing that was relevant to the';0*accident and was not provided to the Presidential Commission in support of the investigation. Because the intercom channel provides a private mechanism for exchanging spontaneous comments and recording information of a personal nature, NASA had not released these transcripts previously. Because of media inquiries, however, the prelaunch tape was transcribed. (NASA Release 86135; 86137; 51L Transcript Folder; NY Times, Oct
 The European Space Agency announced that it planned to fly four missions relating to the Space Station project. The maiden flight for the Spaceplane Hermes, said Director General Dr. Reimer Lust, would be launched between 1996 and 1998, by a new Ariane 5 rocket. (NY Times, Oct 6/86)
 NASA announced that Aaron Cohen would be appointed as Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, and that Jesse W. Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that position to be Special Assistant to the General Manager, NASA Headquarters. Since 1962 Cohen had served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then in the Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of the Engineering and Development Directorate, and then as overall Director of Research and Engineering at the JSC. Moore came to NASA in 1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science. From there he was appointed Director of the Space Flight Division; Director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division; and Deputy Associate Administrator and acting Associate Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86138; NY Times, Oct 3/86)
 A decision was reached by NASA to test the new booster rocket design for the Shuttle fleet by firing the rockets horizontally, and not vertically as the Rogers Commission had suggested. A NASA spokesman called this method of testing "the most demanding" and the one that "best satisfies the Commission's intent." (NY Times, Oct 3/86; W Post, Oct 3/86; P Inq, Oct 3/86)
 The Jet Propulsion Laboratory Successfully tested a new space radioastronomy technique, Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI), that combined data from radio telescopes on the ground with data from an antenna on NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The result was a better resolution of three quasars (among the most distant objects known and designated 1730130, 1741038, and 1510089) than what groundbased radio studies at the same wavelength could provide. It was the first time an orbiting satellite had been used as a radio telescope. (NASA Release 86140; W Post, Oct 3/86; LA Times, Oct
 NASA opted to use the deactivated Minuteman facilities'<0*at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for longterm storage of debris recovered from the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Large concrete covers were to be placed over the tubes for a weather tight seal, concluding NASA's primary activities related to the analysis and disposition of recovered hardware. (NASA Release 86141)
 NASA announced a sevenyear schedule of tasks for the Shuttle fleet, and that Shuttles would resume flying in early 1988. The schedule reflected President Ronald Reagan's directive to phase out commercial and foreign launches, inasmuch as 24 of the 44 contracts had been voided. This left only 12 percent of the Shuttle missions devoted to commercial and foreign launches. An increase to 41 percent of the payloads, as opposed to 31 percent, would be given to Department of Defense missions. The remaining 47 percent of the schedule was reserved for the space agency's own missions, 33 percent for scientific studies and other needs, and 14 percent for the Space Station. The first year, said NASA, would see only 5 flights; that number would, it was hoped, increase to 16 flights per year by the 1990s. (WSJ, Oct 6/86; W Post, Oct 4/86; P Inq, Oct 4/86; B Sun, Oct 4/86; NY Times, Oct 4/86)
 A House Science and Technology Committee issued a report stating that Congress and the White House shared the blame for the launch schedule pressure that led to the January 28 Challenger accident. The report agreed with many of the findings laid out by the Rogers Commission, but differed by stating that the accident was not a result of poor communication through NASA management, but "poor technical decisionmaking [by them] over several years." The report concluded that NASA's management lacked the expertise needed to operate the Space Shuttle and warned the Agency not to succumb to similar pressure concerning future flights. The National Research Council, in an independent study requested by Congress, urged NASA on October 9 to limit its Shuttle flights in the 1990s to 11 or 13, not the 16 annual flights proposed by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. (Investigation of the Challenger Accident: Report of the Committee on Science and Technology, House of Representatives, Oct 29/68; W Post, Oct 8/86; Oct 10/86; W Times, Oct 8/86; NY Times, Oct 8/86)
 NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration signed a memorandum of agreement for a fiveyear, $24 million research project to study wind shear detection and avoidance that would cover technology assessment, present position sensor integration, hazard characterization, pilot factors in wind shear, and effects of heavy rain. For pilot training, an environment was created that could mirror wind shear in a flight situation, thus'=0*providing a safe simulation for training. Microburst is the most dangerous type of wind shear for study. It is a small, intense downdraft, often accompanied by heavy rain, which, upon striking the ground, spreads out into a circular vortex radiating an all directions and leaving little time for reaction by a pilot. Between 1965 and 1985, there were at least 26 accidents and 3 incidents involving 626 fatalities and 235 injuries where wind shear was a direct cause or contributing factor. (NASA Release 86143)
 NASA scientists were searching for ways to clean up the orbiting debris left from nuclear powered satellites and wreckage from antisatellite weapons testing. Considering the high speed of orbiting craft, scientists reported that even a fleck of paint could be dangerous, the probable culprit that caused a cracked windshield in the seventh U.S. Shuttle flight. Because slightly larger objects could result in catastrophic damage, the planned Space Station sacrificed some valuable weight to armor crew quarters. (W Times, Oct 13/86)
 A panel of scientists and engineers, established at the behest of the Roger's Commission, endorsed NASA's redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket, but urged the Agency to increase its test schedule and to consider alternative designs. NASA's efforts had been limited by confining any redesign to plans that incorporated the rocket segments already ordered before the Challenger accident. Because the chosen design could prove inadequate and because NASA would begin investigating second generation booster rockets, all alternative design changes, the panel concluded, were in need of study. (P Inq, Oct 14/86; W Post, Oct 14/86; NY Times, Oct 14/86)
 NASA announced that it would allow private contracts for McDonnell Douglas, builders of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, builders of the Atlas Centaur, to market their products. The two companies were also granted the use of NASA launch facilities, with the agreement to reimburse for any costs incurred. Talks with Transpace, a competitor who had hoped to market the Delta rocket, were ended. (W Post, Oct 15/86; W Times, Oct 15/86; WSJ Oct 15/86)
 A balloon launched from the National Scientific Balloon Facility carried a telescope camera 22 miles up to study gamma rays from stars, black holes, and other sources. It was (#considered the highest resolution telescope for that purpose. (W Times, Oct 16/86)
 NASA planned to proceed with construction of a second horizontal test stand for redesign and recertification of the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Motor (SRM) at the Morton Thiokol, Inc., Wasatch facility in Utah. The newer test stand would more'>0*closely simulate the stresses on the SRM during an actual launch and ascent. (NASA Release 86146; W Times, Oct 17/86)
 Communications Satellite Corporation announced that it had found a way to double the life of an orbiting satellite by reducing fuel consumption. Satellites in a geosynchronous orbit appear stationary over the Earth, allowing ground stations to communicate. Because of gravitational forces, most coming from the moon, satellites tend to drift north or south to a degree where communication can be lost. To compensate for the drift, rockets are fired to bring a satellite back to its original orbit. Most of a satellite's fuel is spent firing its rockets. The new approach, elements of which are used by the military, allows the satellite to drift and be tilted by its rockets so that the antenna's "footprint" can be located. Ground stations receiving messages needed to undergo some modifications as well, however. (W Post, Oct 17/86; WSJ, Oct 17/86; NY Times, Oct 17/86)
 Using data collected between June 1978 and summer 1986, from NASA's costal zone color scanner on board the Nimbus7 satellite, scientists from many international institutions completed a computergenerated color image that shows the distribution of microscopic plant life, phytoplankton, in surface waters over the North Atlantic Ocean. This image was generated by measuring sunlight reflected from the sea surface at five wavelengths to determine ocean color. The most striking feature of the study for understanding man's role in carbon dioxide and other important cycles is the "spring bloom," high phytoplankton concentration extending across the Atlantic and into the North Sea. (NASA Release 86147)
 NASA released studies done by Donald Heath, a scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, which reveal that the Earth's ozone layer is thinning at a much higher rate than previously thought, about 3 percent between 1978 and 1984. This data was gleaned from a satellite orbiting 570 miles above the Earth. (C Trib, Oct 20/86; B Sun; Oct 20/86)
 Dr. Dale D. Myers became Deputy Administrator for NASA; he succeeded Dr. William R. Graham who left NASA to become Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Myers had served as an atlarge member to the NASA Advisory Council and before that as president and chief operating officer for Jacobs Engineering Group. Other achievements include positions as Undersecretary for the U.S. Department of Energy, vicepresident of Rockwell International, president of North American Aircraft, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, and vice president/program manager for both the Apollo Command/Service Module Program and the Space Shuttle Program at Rockwell International. (NASA Release 86149)'?0*October 21: Several senior staff changes were made at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to include: Robert C. Goetz, from Deputy Center Director to Technical Assistant to the Center Director; Clifford E. Charlesworth, from Director of Space Operations to Special Assistant to the Director; Henry O. Pohl, from Division Chief to Director of Engineering; William R. Kelly, from Director of Center Support to Director, Administration; Dr. Wayne R. Young was named Deputy Director for Administration; Paul J. Weitz, from Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office to Technical Assistant to the Center Director. (NASA Release 86151)
 Thomas L. Moser was named Director of the Space Station Program Office in Washington, D.C., a position created to conduct a longrange assessment of overall NASA capabilities and requirements. Moser began his career with NASA in 1963 as a mechanical systems design and analysis engineer, and served further as a structural subsystem manager for the Apollo command module; project manager for the Shuttle Structures and Mechanics Division; head of structural design and manager for the orbiter structure and thermal protection system; technical assistant to the director and deputy manager for the Orbiter Project Office; Director of Engineering at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 86152)
 The Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, announced plans to build, and open by 1989, a $40 million visitor's center near its complex. The center would include a large geodesic dome, two hightech movie theaters, a simulated lunar landscape, a Mission Control Center simulation, and an exhibit hall featuring past achievements. (LA Times, Oct 23,86)
 Joseph F. Sutter was appointed chairman of the NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, an advisory group to the NASA Administrator. Sutter, in 1986, had a 41year career with the Boeing Company as an aerodynamicist, received numerous awards for development of jetpowered airliners, and was nominated to receive the Wright Memorial Trophy, to be presented in Washington, D.C. He had also been appointed to the Presidentiaal Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86154)
 NASA engineers settled on a design for the Shuttle's new booster rockets, and beginning in early 1987, four fullscale tests were planned. John Thomas, manager of the booster design project at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, predicted that the tests would run smoothly and that Shuttle flight would resume in February 1988. (C Trib, Oct 28/86)
 In conjunction with its 1986 Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA announced the selection of 172 research proposals from 144 small firms for Phase I Award'@0*Negotiations. Selected from 1628 proposals, about onehalf of the sixmonth, fixedprice contract efforts would be eligible for Phase II followon contracts of up to two years. This program was designed to stimulate technological innovation in the private sector and strengthen small business participation. (NASA Release
 A study by NASA scientist Linwood B. Callis concluded that the recently discovered thinning ozone layer might have been a result of increased sunspot activity. Other scientists, however, were hesitant to accept the theory and remained steadfast in their belief that manmade chemicals were responsible for the depletion. (LA Times, Oct 30/86; C Trib, Oct
 Parallel contracts for the Advanced Stirling Conversion System were awarded by NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, to Mechanical Technical, Inc. and Stirling Technology Company, for $253,385 and $246,576, respectively. Research was to be funded by the Department of Energy, as ground application took precedence over any potential space uses. The system would include a freepiston Stirling engine, a liquidmetal heat pipe receiver, and a means to provide power to a utility grid. The external combustion engine has only two moving parts and works by heating air, or another gas, in a cylinder, with a power source at one end, such as focused solar energy, which expands the gas and moves the piston. Electric power to the utility grid would be transferred from the engine directly, via a linear alternator, or indirectly with hydraulic output to a groundbased fluid pump coupled to a generator. (NASA Release 86156)
 NASA announced plans for extending operations to five of its ground tracking stations located at Ascension Island in the southeast Atlantic, Santiago (Chili), Guam, Hawaii, and western Australia. Closing dates for these stations was moved up and was conditional on the February 1988 launch by the Space Shuttle of a second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS); a TDRS was destroyed during the Challenger accident. Two TDRS's could provide 85 percent coverage of an orbiting spacecraft, compared with the 50 percent coverage provided by ground stations. (NASA Release 86157)
 Several engineers at NASA recently questioned the proposal to add 100 bolts to a critical joint between the exhaust nozzle and the solid fuel segments in the Shuttle booster rockets. The purpose of the fasteners was to prevent further leakage of hot gases. Many engineers, however, saw these holes as another way for the gasses to escape because they were to be placed between inner and outer orings. (B Sun, Nov 3/86; 'A0*Times, Nov 3/86)
 NASA officials announced that James Kingsbury, engineering chief at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would retire at the end of November. He was one of the high ranking officials who had worked on Challenger's fatal rocket boosters. (USA Today, Nov 5/86)
 In a part of NASA's strategy to return the Space Shuttle safely to flight, Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator, announced the new management and operations structure for the National Space Transportation System (NSTS or Space Shuttle program). The changes were aimed at establishing clear lines of communication in the information transfer and decision making processes. The management change, which also moved control of the operation to Washington, D.C., was directed by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly and followed recommendations made by the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology and the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. As part of the restructuring, Arnold D. Aldrich, who joined NASA in 1959, was named Director, NSTS, and Richard H. Kohrs and Robert L. Crippen were named his deputies. Truly stated that "the formation of this program management organization is one of the most positive steps NASA has taken in the last several months to strengthen the Shuttle program and return to flight status." (NASA Release 86159; W Post, Nov 6/86; NY Times, Nov 6/86)
 The United States and the European Space Agency were pursuing an agreement aimed at preventing Japan from dominating small satellite launches in the same way it had taken over the small car industry. The United States hoped to reach assent with the European Space Agency concerning employment schedules, insurance standards and rates, Government subsidies for research and development, and the leasing costs of Governmentowned launch facilities to private firms. (W Times, Nov 6/86)
 NASA's Ames Research Center dedicated the $2.3 million, 21,336 square foot Fluid Mechanics Laboratory, a new research facility designed to stimulate basic knowledge of aerodynamic flows. The Laboratory could support multiple, simultaneous smallscale wind tunnel research while having full access to supercomputer resources. The laboratory would concentrate on vortex flows, a major factor in maneuverability and reduced drag by aerodynamic means, for applications ranging from developing fuelefficient aircraft to lowspeed research on the National AeroSpace Plane. (NASA Release 86158)
 United Technologies Corporation proposed implementing the launch propulsion and guidance system used in NASA's Space Shuttle for an untended space vehicle. The guidance system, they averred, would allow untended rockets to deliver much heavier'B0*payloads at a cheaper cost than the Shuttle. Operation, they claimed, would begin about three years after NASA approved the plan. (AP, Nov 8/86)
 Negotiators concluded an agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union for cooperation in scientific exploration, primarily focusing on Mars research, said officials from NASA. The agreement, said other sources, made no commitment to a specific joint mission and could be signed at the upcoming summit meeting. (LA Times, Nov 11/86; CSM, Nov 11/86)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the $10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year 1987, a 40 percent increase from fiscal year 1986. Fletcher, according to NASA officials, planned to meet with President Ronald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of years of underfunding. The increased funds could support the Civil Space Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military aeronautics research program; and the Xray Astrophysics Facility, advanced technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 billion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov
 Technology developed by NASA for delivering a culture medium into the Martian soil was modified and implanted into a diabetic patient to serve as an insulin pump. Although other insulin pump implants have been used in the past, the spaceage pump not only had a longer life, but also was programmable after being implanted. (C Trib, Nov 20/89)
 A weeklong exercise to upgrade the Search and Rescue Satellite System got underway at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, expanding coverage to the Southern Hemisphere. (LA Times, Nov 12/86)
 Martin Marietta, in competition for a contract to build the Space Station, unveiled a fullscale model depicting its plans at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. The intended crew module has eight sleeping quarters, each with a video recorder and a computer giving crew members direct access to home and the Space Station's main computer. (C Trib, Nov
 A $13 million Air Force satellite that had served as a museum piece at the Smithsonian Institution was renamed Polar BEAR and lifted into polar orbit aboard a Scout rocket, NASA's smallest booster. The satellite's mission was to photograph the Northern Lights and sample electrical particles and the magnetic field in order to design better communications. (NY Times, Nov'C0*15/86)
 The third stage of a French Ariane rocket that had been launched nine months earlier blew up on this date. U.S. officials asked Arianespace to look into the matter in order to prevent a recurrence because orbiting debris posed an increased danger to other satellites. (W Times, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86)
 President Ronald Reagan vetoed a NASA authorization bill on the grounds that the bill's attempt to create a National Space Council (NSC) interfered with Presidential decisionmaking power. Establishment of the NSC, he said, would duplicate other interagencies while creating "unacceptable interference with my discretion and flexibility." The move did not affect NASA's budget. (Memorandum Withholding Approval of H.R. 5495, Nov 14/86; P Inq, Nov 15/86; NY Times, Nov 15/86)
 For the first time since the Challenger accident, astronauts boarded a Space Shuttle; they took part in a mock countdown at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on the Atlantis. Computers halted the drill 25 seconds short of simulated engine firing, but officials deemed the test successful. (W Post Nov 19/86; NY Times, Nov 19/86)
 Leaders from the 11membernation European Space Agency (ESA) met with NASA officials to discuss their $2 billion contribution to the Space Station project and to seek a greater management role and benefits from it. One European official noted, "NASA must realize that ESA is a mature space agency that can manage manned space flight alone if necessary." Although the statement appeared to be a threat to withdraw, Richard Barnes, NASA Director of International Affairs, saw no intent on the part of Europe to pull out. Leaders from both sides, however, agreed to a joint statement saying, "While recognizing that differences currently exist, Professor Luest and Dr. Fletcher jointly concluded that these differences are not irreconcilable." (NY Times, Nov 22/86; AvWk, Nov 24/86)
 The results of a study conducted by Geologists Dr. Matthew Golombek and Dr. Laurie Brown suggested that the northwest Mojave Desert had shifted about 25 degrees clockwise because of periodic, violent earthquakes some 16 to 20 million years ago. Golombek reported that "results of magnetic studies of volcanic rocks taken from 19 sites suggested that the movement was caused by shear (the Earth's tectonic plates sliding past or over one another) from the Pacific Plate sliding along the fault past the North American Plate." Magnetic minerals had once lined up parallel with the Earth's magnetic field to the North, but the study found minerals now pointing 25 degrees to the east, and it was determined that tectonic movement had rotated the rocks. (NASA Release 86160; LA Times, Nov 30/86) 'D0*November 26: NASA selected the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS), a launch vehicle that fits in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle, to carry three probes for planetary missions. Despite earlier plans for alternative launch vehicles following cancellation of the Shuttle/Centaur Upper Stage and the Challenger accident, NASA felt an urgent need to reestablish its planetary program. The probes scheduled for launch in 1989 and 1990 included the Galileo, a joint mission with Germany that would circle Jupiter and measure electromagnetic fields and plasma particles; the Magellan, which would orbit and map Venus using radar; and the Ulysses, a joint mission with the European Space Agency designed to orbit and study the poles of the sun. These three were the first missions for orbit around bodies other than Earth that would employ the IUS. The IUS boosters were manufactured by Boeing to launch three scientific missions. They were to have launched the General Dynamics hydrogenfueled Centaur rockets, but the highly volatile boosters, thought possibly unsafe for human space flight, were grounded after the Challenger accident. Because of its less powerful rocket, the Galileo needed to slingshot Venus in order to reach Jupiter, as opposed to flying directly to the planet. The added time for the mission was expected to run $50 million. (NASA Release 86161; NY Times, Nov 27/86)
 NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded an $8.9 million fiveyear contract to Calspan Corporation for operation of the Marshall Problem Assessment Center and the Safety Issue Assessment Center. Under the contract, Calspan would receive problem reports and safety issues from the contractors of Marshall's numerous projects, check the accuracy and completeness of the reports, track the closeout of proposed corrective actions, perform trend analysis and special study into causes of problems and safety issues, and appraise Marshall management on a daily basis. (NASA Release 86163)
 Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced four key appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet the goal of getting the Space Shuttle back to full operation. Dr. Judson A. Lovingood was named Associate Director for Propulsion Systems, with responsibility for propulsion projects for the Space Shuttle Main Engine, Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility, and Marshall Centerassigned payloads and Spacelab payload integration. John P. McCartney was named Director, Propulsion Laboratory to oversee research and development, engineering, and technical direction of propulsion systems design, and analysis related to launch and space vehicles. Dr. George F. McDonough was named Director,'E0*Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with responsibility for research and development in structural design and analysis of launch and space vehicles, analysis dynamics behavior, specification of dynamicsrelated design criteria, and analysis of atmospheric and environmental processes. (NASA Release 86164)
 A Tracking and Data Relay Satellite lost transmitting capability on an Sband singleaccess antenna, SA1, which provided voice and data links to low Earthorbiting satellites, including the Shuttle. Services were switched to the remaining antenna, SA2, and little or no data loss to customers occurred. (NASA Release 86175)
 Astronaut Joe H. Engle retired from the United States Air Force as a colonel and resigned from NASA. After coming to NASA in 1966, he commanded Columbia and Discovery flights and was named Deputy Associate Administrator, in March 1982, for the Office of Space Flight. (NASA Release 86166; W Post, Dec 3/86)
 The Soviet Union recently had their version of the Space Shuttle on a launch pad for tests. Photos of the incident were taken by a U.S. satellite, and Government officials predicted that the country would begin human space flight in 1988. (B Sun, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86)
 Western European officials announced that the grounded Ariane rocket would not be ready to fly in February as was earlier hoped, adding to the strains fed by the West's inability to launch. Modifications were recently approved for the rocket's faulty third stage; no new flight date was given. (NY Times, Dec
 McDonnell Douglas Astronautics was selected for negotiations leading to the award of a threeyear contract, with another threeyear option, and a sixyear price tag of $327 million, to perform Payload Ground Operations for Kennedy Space Center activities, both in Florida and elsewhere inside and outside the United States. The work was being done by five different contractors, and NASA hoped to obtain a single, longterm contract. Responsibilities included payload/cargo processing and integration, Spacelab operations and integration, support to experimental integration activities, payload/cargo deintegration, NASA/Vandenberg payload operations, payload related facilities, systems and ground equipment operations, maintenance and sustaining engineering, customer accommodation and launchsite support functions, and payload related support operations and services. (NASA Release 86167)
 NASA participated in a study of controlled California'F0*forest fires in the San Gabriel mountains. The data focused on the global effects of fire on atmospheric quality, air and water pollution, erosion, soil depletion, and species extinction, as well as how a fire could be handled more effectively. Scientists hoped to learn more about the effects of fire on different biogenic gases, such as nitrogen oxide and methane hydrocarbons, and how changes in these gases affect the atmosphere, the climate, and the biosphere. For its aerial study, NASA flew a U2 aircraft at 60,000 feet. A similar study on the effects of a nuclear winter was scheduled. (NASA Release 86134; W Post, Dec
 Remote sensing via satellite, combined with a computer technology that could provide a simulation of the properties and processes in the soil, related Dr. Elissa Levine, would allow shortterm prediction of changes that occur in soils over a period of time and the ability of the soil to support different types of plant life. Advancing her theory at an annual meeting in New Orleans, Levine noted, "We can obtain critical environmental data which will help us understand how changes brought about by both nature and humankind will affect the total ecosystem over time." (NASA Release 86170)
 The sixth FLTSATCOM communications satellite, F7, was launched by an AtlasCentaur rocket fired from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Department of Defense added this satellite to their communications network among naval aircraft, ships, submarines, ground stations, Strategic Air Command elements, and Presidential command networks. With this addition, the network could provide 23 high frequency communication channels and one super high frequency channel with an experimental Extra High Frequency package. The rocket had been grounded since May because of previous NASA rocket failures, beginning in January with the Challenger explosion, and had experienced eight delays before becoming NASA's third successful major flight of the year. (NASA Release 86165; W Post, Dec 5/86)
 A joint venture of Hughes Aircraft and RCA, the Earth Observation Satellite Company said that the Reagan administration was withholding funds for the Landsat program it managed. The $65 million not released was earmarked for new satellites, receiving stations, and support operations. The Landsat satellite was launched in 1972 as a data gathering operation for the government and public, but its monopoly for providing detailed services to companies and private individuals was broken by the French satellite, SPOT. Elimination of the program, warned a representative from the company, "would destroy the first U.S. attempt to commercialize space." (W Post, Dec 5/86)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, responding to negotiations with the White House budget office earlier in the week, warned that the planned $8 billion Space Station and a new'G0*replacement Shuttle were in jeopardy of not meeting scheduled completions. He stated that the 35 percent increased budget for fiscal year 1987 was earmarked only for costs resulting from the Challenger crash and could not be benchmarked for future budgets. The strict budget, he added, could afford no new projects. In a separate statement, Fletcher agreed to remove himself from any future Shuttle booster rocket contracts. Senators called for an investigation of the contract awarded to Morton Thiokol in 1973, a decision in which Fletcher had considerable influence. (W Times, Dec 8/86; NY Times, Dec 8/86)
 NASA looked ahead to the launching of four new generation space observatories that promised a new era for astronomy. The Gamma Ray Observatory, providing a greater wavelength range, could determine if arriving gamma radiation originated in quasars and pulsars or from other sources. The Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility would study highly energetic environments found in nearly every object in the universe, including stars, planets, neutron stars, black holes, quasars, and cores of active galaxies. The Space Infrared Telescope Facility could span the infrared part of the spectrum with a 1000fold increase in sensitivity, enabling it to search for planets around stars. The Hubble Space Telescope, penetrating the universe in visible and ultraviolet light, was predicted to expand the observable universe by hundreds of times, see objects with ten times the clarity of ground observatories, and detect objects 1,000 times dimmer than those observed by previous spacecraft. (NASA Release 86168)
 NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, developed an airborne sensing device, an infrared radiometer, for measuring ocean surface temperatures and charting temperature and wind maps. Tested over southern California's ocean aboard the Goodyear blimp Columbia, the new instrument was unique in that it could distinguish water temperature from the temperature of the air immediately above it. Researchers expected that the device could greatly enhance satellite capability to monitor ocean weather. (NASA Release 86169)
 Because the ocean surface mirrors the ocean floor as gravity pulls water down into depressions and forces it up around the mountains (looking north from Puerto Rico, for example, the ocean surface drops nearly 60 feet), scientists at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, employed satellites to map the ocean's floor. Data taken from altimeters on the Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and the Sea Satellite were used to generate a computer image of the ocean surface, reflecting the Earth's structure underneath the water. The data, said Dr. James Marsh, also increased knowledge of circulation and current systems. (NASA Release 86172) 'H0*December 9: Fortynine research proposals from 45 small, high technology U.S. firms, totaling about $23 million, were selected for immediate negotiation of Phase II contract awards. These proposals were chosen from 100 submitted to the Small Business Innovation Research program, a program designed to strengthen the role of small business participation in Federal research and development and contribute to the growth and strength of the private sector. (NASA Release 86174)
 NASA signed an agreement with the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company (3M) allowing the company to fly 62 materials processing experiments aboard future Shuttle flights. The microgravity experiments in organic and polymer science were to be conducted on a spaceavailable basis, and NASA would have use of 3M's experiment equipment for scientific investigations. (UPI, Dec 9/86)
 NASA scientists halted design of additional shielding for two nuclear powered satellites. The shield, they ascertained, would help only during the first two minutes of launch and would actually become a detriment after that. The Interagency Nuclear Safety Review Panel would not give launch approval for the scientific missions until 1999, but NASA officials saw a good chance for approval of launching the radioisotope thermoelectric generator powered satellites from the Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Dec 15/86)
 NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California, modified an F15 jet engine to increase its thrust by 10 percent and fuel savings by 5 to 7 percent. The modification grew out of NASA's Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control program (HIDEC), which lessened unneeded engine stall margins (the amount that engine operating pressure must be reduced to avoid stall). The typical 25 percent stall margin allows for a contingency of any of the worst flight conditions and robs 15 percent of an engine's usable power. The HIDEC created engine and flight control systems that communicate with each other; thus the engine adjusts itself according to actual flight, not assumed constants. (NASA Release 86176)
 General Samuel Phillips presented the Report of the NASA Management Study Group, for which he was Project Director, to Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. The report conducted an assessment of NASA practices in longrange and strategic planning, managing NASA programs, human resources and procurement, maintaining budget, financial and program control, and dealing with external affairs. The report went on to assess the effectiveness of NASA's organization and to make recommendations to improve agency practices and organization. (Report of the NASA Management Study Group, Dec 16/86)
 Senator Albert Gore made public his order for a'I0*congressional investigation into whether NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had violated conflictofinterest rules when he awarded Morton Thiokol the Shuttle booster contract in 1973. Dr. Fletcher denied the charges, but said he would seriously consider removing himself from future booster rocket contract decisions. NY Times, Dec 19/86)
 The Pentagon, which had previously voiced objection to the Space Station, asked for a postponement in negotiations between NASA and foreign participants because the Department of Defense (DoD) hoped to use the orbiting laboratory for some of its Strategic Defense Initiative experiments. The DoD envisioned only a very limited need for the facility, but other countries would no doubt vehemently object because the project was intended only for peaceful purposes. (WSJ, Dec 22/86; NY Times, Dec 20/86)
 Analysis conducted by the Office of Space Station in the areas of Space Station management, use of expendable launch vehicles, and cost impacts resulting from design changes was accepted by NASA. Changes included replacing the nodes and tunnels that connected pressurized modules with larger resource nodes, revising the assembly sequence to provide early scientific return and reduce extravehicular activity, achieving an initial power level of 37.5 kilowatts, achieving permanent human capability, and placing fixed servicing capabilities closer to the modules. Realignment of certain work package responsibilities was also recommended; the total cost increase would be around $49 million. (NASA Release 86180; 86181)
 NASA ruled out a recommendation to supplement its Shuttle flights with untended launch vehicles for building the Space Station. The combination would accelerate assembly by up to nine months, said Space Station manager John Dunning, but the time savings would be offset by a 10 to 40 percent increase in potentially dangerous space walks. Using expendable launch vehicles, he went on, would also require an orbital maneuvering rocket to keep the parts in place. (NY Times, Dec 28/86)
 Astronaut Paul J. Weitz was named deputy director of the Johnson Space Center (JCS), Houston, Texas. Past achievements include participation in the first astronaut visit to the Skylab, serving as commander of the sixth Space Shuttle mission, and serving as technical assistant to the JSC Director. (NASA Release
 NASA extended a oneyear, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86184) 'J0** The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to a 10year, $99 million contract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the personnel, equipment, and supplies necessary to carry out duties at the Slidell Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86185) During 1986: The Space Shuttle Challenger accident and the subsequent investigation and recovery activities headed the list of prominent events for NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of note: Voyager 2 encountered the planet Uranus in January, continued with its journey and was expected to reach Neptune by 1989. A new baseline configuration was drafted for the Space Stationa major milestone for development. NASA and the Department of Defense initiated a joint AeroSpace Plane research program concerning vehicles capable of horizontal takeoff and landing, singlestage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle, and Dr. James C. Fletcher, for the second time, became Administrator of NASA. Two books concerning NASA endeavors were published in 1986. Joseph P. Allen's EnteringSpace deals with an astronaut's journey into the last frontier, and William E. Burrows' Deep Black looks into space espionage and national security. (NASA Release 86177)
