 NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a longduration, humantended scientific satellite called the Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA's four proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would study highenergy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable information about these phenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic research in plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the various forms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determine whether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could be scheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatory would be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 1215 tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above the Earth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 881)
 Engineers at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah concluded that a design flaw had led to the failure of a previously untested Space Shuttle booster part during a fullscale test firing December 23. NASA officials delayed the flight schedule after they discovered that a portion of the booster's nozzle assembly, which guides the vehicle, had fallen apart during testing, a month Engineers finished taking the booster motor apart and recovered all six missing pieces of the failed nozzle part. Known as the outer boot ring, the failed part anchored the booster's nozzle to a flexible rubbery "boot" that allowed the nozzle to swivel. One purpose of the boot ring was to shield the metal and rubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intense heat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster's nozzle was deliberately moved to the maximum seven degreessome three degrees beyond what would be required during a normal Shuttle flight. NASA was looking into the possibility that the extreme steering might have caused the boot ring to come apart or A group of officials at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, developers of the original design test requirements for an extreme swiveling of the nozzle, studied whether the maneuver should be repeated in future tests of whatever design is adopted, or whether a less severe maneuver would be an adequate test under the more stringent, postChallenger standards. The test failure would probably force a delay of 6 to 10 weeks in the resumption of Space Shuttle flights, delaying the STS26 flight of Discovery to no earlier than August 1988. (NASA Release 87190; UPI, Jan 4/88; W Post, Jan 5/88; NY Times, Jan 6/88) 0*January 11: Speaking at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics supported Aerospace Sciences Conference, Ross M. Jones, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, presented a proposal to launch very small, low cost scientific probes to various destinations in the solar system by using Earthorbiting electromagnetic launchers or railguns. Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong electromagnetic forces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities, were being developed by the U.S. military for use both on the ground and in space. (NASA Release 884; M News, Jan 11/88; W Times, Jan 11/88; LA Times, Jan 11/88; LA Star News, Jan 12/88)
 President Ronald Reagan signed a report to Congress creating a joint Department of Defense (DoD) and NASA program for the development of the Advanced Launch System (ALS). The ALS was intended to provide a launch system that would meet longterm national launch needs; would be flexible, robust, reliable, and responsive; and would drastically cut costs in all elements of the space launch system. The management plan created a joint program office headed by an Air Force program manager and a NASA deputy program manager. DoD would manage the systems engineering and integration, vehicle, logistics, and payload module. NASA would manage liquid engine systems and focused technology efforts. DoD would accept full funding responsibility for the program, with any unique civil requirements not addressed by the ALS baseline being funded by NASA. (NASA Release 885)
 NASA announced that Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, would leave the Agency to serve a s Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, effective February 1, 1988. (NASA Release 886)
 EG&G Florida, Inc. was awarded a $635,529 contract to make modifications to the Space Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF). This work would include grinding a 3,500foot section at each end of the runway to smooth the surface texture, removing cross grooves and adding longitudinal "corduroy grooving." Additionally, existing landing zone light fixtures were to be modified and markings on the entire runway and overruns repainted. These modifications were intended to enhance landing safety by reducing Space Shuttle orbiter tire wear during landing operations. The SLF is 15,000 feet long and 300 feet wide, with a 1,000foot paved safety overrun at each end. Work was scheduled to begin January 26 and be completed by midMarch 1988. (NASA Release 8810)
 An engineer who, only hours before the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch the spacecraft in cold weather was named a winner of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award. Roger M. Boisjoly, a former engineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.the manufacturer of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor blamed for the Challenger accident that0*killed seven crew memberswas honored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for attempting to halt the launch and for his attempts to have the flawed rocket redesigned. The AAAS, in an announcement, cited Boisjoly "for his exemplary and repeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as an engineer by alerting others to life threatening design problems on the Challenger Space Shuttle and for steadfastly recommending against the tragic launch." Boisjoly was to receive the AAAS award during February 14 ceremonies in Boston. (LA Star News, Jan 27/88)
 This date marked a decade of continuous operation of the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE). The IUE is credited with some of the most important advances in modern astronomy, including the discovery of galactic halos, monitoring volcanic activities on Io, beaming the first images ever recorded of Halley's comet from space, and monitoring the intense emissions of ultraviolet radiation from Supernova 1987A. The IUE was a joint effort of NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), and the British Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC). Goddard scientists, engineers, and technicians designed, integrated, and tested the IUE. An ESA team built the solar array and the ground facilities near Madrid. SERC, in collaboration with the University College, London, provided four TV camera detectors for transforming the spectral displays into video signals. (NASA Release 889)
 NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
 The Washington Post reported that the Martin Marietta Corporation agreed to launch communications satellites for the General Electric Corporation (G.E.) on untended Titan rockets during the next several years. According to the news account, the agreement to launch 15 satellites would establish Martin Marietta as the dominant company, developed in the two years since the January 28, 1986, explosion of the Challenger, in the domestic rocket business. The ageeement was expected to bring in revenues between $750 million and $1 billion for Martin Marietta through the0*early part of the next decade, one senior company official told the Post. Analysts told the newspaper that the G.E. agreement would make Martin Marietta dominant over two U.S. rivals in the commercial satellite launching businessMcDonnell Douglas Corporation, manufacturer of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, manufacturer of the Atlas Centaur rocket. (UPI, Jan
 A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Hiroyuki Osawa, President of the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), recently signed an agreement to allow NASA to directly receive data from Japan's Earth Resources Satellite (ERS1). The0*agreement would allow NASA to have access to realtime data from Japan's ERS1 synthetic aperture radar and optical sensor. NASA would receive the data at a ground station at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Data from the ground station would be provided to NASDA. Japan's ERS1 was scheduled to be launched by NASDA on the H1 launch vehicle in early 1992. (NASA Release 8812)
 NASA commemorated the second anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. At the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, workers preparing to resume Shuttle flights paused to pay silent tribute to the Challenger crew by halting all activity at 11:38 a.m., the time of the Challenger lift off from launch Pad 39B on January 28, 1986. Flags around KSC and at NASA Centers throughout the country were lowered to half staff while workers stood silent for 73 seconds, the length of the fatal Challenger flight. Just before the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S. McCartney spoke to workers over a television circuit and loudspeakers saying: "As we make preparations to return the Space Shuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to remember the men and women of the Challenger crew." (UPI, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 29/88; C Trib, Jan 29/88;
 It was announced in a recent NASA press briefing that there had been a total of 230 reported "close calls" since the Challenger accident. A "close call" was defined by NASA as an incident in which there is no injury, no damage, and no impact on schedule, but which possesses the potential for a more serious mishap. (NASA Release 12988)
 Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
 A DMSP F9 meteorological observation satellite was successfully launched at 9:53 p.m. aboard an AtlasE rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base Space Launch Complex3 in California. The 1,650pound Department of Defense (DoD) satellite was placed in a nearpolar orbit. (W Times, Feb 4/88; Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988, 171)
 An experimental jetliner being developed by McDonnell Douglas Corporation debuted in a 1hour flight from the Douglas Aircraft Facility in Long Beach, California. The aircraft, with one unducted fan (UDF) engine and one ordinary jet engine, was a forerunner of the planned MD91 and MD92 passenger jets that McDonnell Douglas was actively marketing to airlines. The UDF engine, developed by GE, had demonstrated significant reductions in fuel consumption over conventional jet engines. McDonnell Douglas' MD91 and MD92 airliners were being developed to meet the expected demand among airlines for alternative, fuelefficient aircraft during the latter 1990s. "This is as big a jump in technology as going from propellers to jets," said Walt Orlowski, program manager for the experimental aircraft. "We are at the forefront of aviation technology." (LA Times, Feb 3/88)
 A Trident 1 missile exploded 18 seconds after a training test launch from the nuclear submarine Simn Bolvar. A brief statement issued by the Navy said the first stage fired as planned but suffered a malfunction shortly after breaching the ocean surface 50 miles off Cape Canaveral, Florida, in the Atlantic Ocean. This was the third failure for the Trident series of submarinelaunched ballistic missiles since August. The Navy planned to conduct an investigation of the test failure. (W Post, Feb 7/88; W Times Feb 8/88)
 A NASA Delta 181 launch vehicle carrying a major Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) experimental payload was launched at 5:07 pm EST from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The 6,000 pound payload, the heaviest ever carried by a Delta rocket, consisted of a main orbiting sensor platform and fifteen subsatellites released from the main spacecraft during the first 4 hours of the 12hour experiment. The goal of the $250 million exercise was to test the ability of an orbiting sensor platform to detect and track the various components of Soviet Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) in flight. Four of the subsatellites were small solidfuel rockets whose exhaust plumes simulated the exhaust from the upper stages of Soviet ICBMs, whereas other test objects simulated real and "dummy" Soviet warhead reentry vehicles. During the mission, the main satellite and subsatellites were monitored by over 100 radar tracking stations, which simulated the groundbased component of an antimissile defense system. In addition, the exercise also included0*the detection, by sensors on the satellite, of a 40foot sounding rocket launched from Kauai, Hawaii. The experiment was declared a success despite the failure of an infrared sensor. The Delta launch, originally scheduled for February 4, was delayed five days because of an apparent valve malfunction on the Delta. Data gathered by the satellite during the 12hour exercise would be transmitted to Earth over a 10day period. (SSR 1988 008AD; UPI, Feb 9/88; NY Times, Feb 9/88; W Post, Feb 9/88; W Times, Feb 9/88; USA Today, Feb 9/88;
 NASA announced that Andrew J. Stofan, Associate Administrator for the Space Station, would retire from the Agency on April 1. Stofan's career with NASA spanned nearly 30 years. He had directed the Space Station program since June 1986. During his tenure, the program underwent a major cost review which culminated in an Administrationapproved plan to develop the Space Station in two phases. Stofan also oversaw the establishment of the Space Station program office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 8816)
 The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive "Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21st century. The release of the space policy had been delayed for several days because of a dispute among NASA, the President's Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of the commercial space initiative. The most controversial component of the initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), an orbiting, Shuttletended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by some members of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward the permanently crewtended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a "minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council's recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF from Space Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response to the Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statement recommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and a reconfiguration of the facility as a crewtended laboratory. A draft of the 39page commercial space initiative included a report by the National Security Council on national security implications of commercializing space, and legislative and administrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Among other key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicle industry and the establishment of limits on the amount of thirdparty liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. President Reagan also announced a program to develop the technologies needed to conduct humanassisted exploration of the solar system, including a mission to Mars. The program, labeled Project Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year 1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the Moon and Mars. (Presidential Directive on National Space Policy: Fact Sheet, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; NY Times, Jan 24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88)
 NASA successfully launched the first of three suborbital rocket experiments to study Supernova 1987A. The rocket, launched from the Woomera, Australia Range, carried an Xray spectrometer that observed Xray emissions in the 0.37 keV band. Two additional rocket experiments were scheduled for launch during a window lasting until March 20. An earlier series of sounding rocket observations of Supernova 1987A were conducted from Woomera during November and December 1987. Both campaigns used Black Brant IX twostage, solidfuel rockets. (LRC Release 887)
 A segment of a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was test fired at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah in a test of the solid rocket motor nozzle joint. The overall test objective was to evaluate performance of the redesigned solid rocket motor casetonozzle joint that had an insulation adhesive defect and damaged oring in order to determine the failsafe performance of the redesigned joint. The redesigned casetonozzle joint included 100 added radial bolts, adhesively bonded insulation surfaces, and an added "wiper" oring designed to keep the adhesive on the insulation surfaces during assembly. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. (NASA Release 8823)
 NASA announced that it would lease to the U.S. Government unassigned space aboard a commercially developed space facility. The leasing agreement would apply for five years beginning at the end of fiscal year 1993. At least 30 percent of the facility would be available for commercial use. The facility would be deployed, checked out, and serviced periodically on orbit by Space Shuttle crews. It would provide a crewtended, shirtsleeve workspace and would also be able to operate in an untended, freeflying mode, providing a microgravity environment for periods of four to six months. NASA would initiate an open competition to be managed by the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 8825)
 NASA announced the appointment of Manuel (Manny) Peralta as Associate Administrator for Management, effective February 28. He had been acting in this post since April 28, 1987, replacing June Gibbs Brown, nominated by the President to become Inspector General for the Department of Defense. Prior to joining NASA, Peralta had over 30 years of industry experience in business, engineering, and project management, most recently as a senior0*executive with Exxon, responsible for implementation of worldwide capital projects and the European Engineering Office. (NASA Release 8726 and Key Personnel Change Announcement, Feb 25/88)
 NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747100 jetliner to serve as a second Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) for the space transportation system. A letter contract was signed with Boeing Military Airplane Company, a division of the Boeing Company, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for NASA use. The additional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability and eliminate a potential singlepoint failure in the space transportation system. The 231foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttle orbiter vehicles from landing sites to orbiter processing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The 747100, which is nearly identical to the original SCA, was selected to minimize costs associated with modifications and operation. (NASA Release 8828; JSC Release 88005) During February:
 Aviation Week Space Technology reported that the Soviet Union was assessing a major expansion of its untended Mars balloon/rover mission planned for 1994. Soviet officials were evaluating the possibility of significantly increasing the payload capability of its dual Mars orbiter/lander spacecraft by using aerobraking instead of rocket propulsion to enter Martian orbit. Aerobraking would enable the Soviets to dispense with rockets needed to decelerate the spacecraft sufficiently to enter Martian orbit, thereby making available an additional 3,300 pounds of payload An approved aerobraking maneuver would give the Soviets several new features to the balloon/rover mission, including: a 110pound subsatellite that would be released into Martian orbit to provide Mars gravity data; 10 "meteorbeacons" dropped on the surface that would return data on temperature, pressure, and wind velocity; 2 penetrators that would dive as deep as 16 feet into Mars' surface to return data on chemical composition, soil temperature, and water vapor content; a high resolution orbiter imaging system; and 2 Earthreturn vehicles, which would serve as test vehicles for a future automated soil sample return mission. AvWk, Feb 29/88)
 Using NASA's new supercomputer at the Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility, Dr. Kozo Fujii, a research fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, developed a computer model that simulates the airflow field physics associated with vortex breakdown and provides new insights into its causes. Vortex breakdown is a complex phenomenon that can cause loss of lift and control for highperformance aircraft. Understanding and' 0*eventually controlling vortex breakdown would improve maneuverability and safety for highperformance aircraft. (NASA Release 8813)
 NASA announced that an international team of researchers, coordinated by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, was using satellites to study how the Earth's tectonic plates move in the Caribbean Sea and Central and South America. The experiment, spanning several years, would allow researchers to chart the motions of dozens of land sites in 16 countries using signals from orbiting navigation satellites. Research teams carreied electronic receivers designed to pick up signals from seven NAVSTAR satellites operated by the U.S. Department of Defense, as part of the Global Positioning System (GPS) program. By locating receiver equipment at established survey markers in South America and the Caribbean, and collecting GPS data from up to four GPS satellites passing overhead, researchers calculated the location of receiving sites on the ground and are planned to compare measurements over time to determine tectonic displacement. The plates studied included the Caribbean plate, in portions of the southern Caribbean Sea; the Cocos plate, in the Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Central America; the Nazca plate, off the west coast of South America; and the South American plate, upon which lies most of the South American continent. The research was funded by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Earth Science and Applications Division. (NASA Release 8830)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on the agency's proposed 1989 budget. He stressed that 1989 would be a crucial year for NASA, a year that would "make or break" the Nation's space program. The proposed budget included funds to increase the rate of Shuttle flights in 1989 in order to "fly off" the backlog of vital defense and science missions. A build up of funding for Space Station hardware development was also requested. Dr. Fletcher testified that the requested additional funds for the Space Station were the minimum necessary to avoid the disbandment of development teams and the indefinite deferral or cancellation of that program. He also warned that if funds for advanced technology were not approved, the necessary technological foundation for future achievements would not be built, and the goal of longterm U.S. space leadership would "become an idle dream." (1989 NASA Authorization Hearings Before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 8831; AP, Mar 22/88; W Times Mar 23/88; LA Times Mar 23/88)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
 In response to a civil suit brought under the Freedom of Information Act by the Associated Press and six other news organizations, the Justice Department disclosed documentation showing that the Federal Government and Morton Thiokol paid $7,735,000 in cash and annuities to settle all claims with the families of four of the crew members who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. Thiokol, maker of the faulty booster rocket blamed for the January 28, 1986, explosion, paid $4,641,000. The Government's share of the settlement was $3,094,000. The settlements were reached on December 29, 1986, with the immediate survivors of the spacecraft crew members, Francis R. Scobee, Ellison Onizuka, Gregory B. Jarvis, and Sharon Christa McAuliffe. Settlements had been reached among Thiokol and two other familiesthose of Judith Resnik and Ronald E. McNair with no Government contribution. A claim by the widow of Michael J. Smith against Thiokol was still pending in Federal court. The Federal Government maintained that it cannot be held liable for the deaths of civilian and military government employees who die on duty. (UPI, Mar 8/88; NY Times, Mar 8/88; W Post, Mar 8/88; WSJ, Mar 8/88; USA Today, Mar 8/88; LA Times, Mar 8/88; W Times, Mar 8/88; C Trib, Mar 8/88; P Inq, Mar 8/88; AP, Mar 13/88)
 NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
 NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the new Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, effective immediately. Abbey had been Special Assistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November 1987. He began his NASA career in 1967 as Technical Assistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program. He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Director of Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight Crew Operations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and service awards. (NASA Release 8836)
 A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 3 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Kourou Launch Center in French Guiana carrying two communications satellite payloads, including a U.S. satellite. The launching had been scheduled for December but was delayed for extra tests after abnormalities were detected in the oxygen and liquid hydrogen thirdstage engine. Twenty minutes after launch, the Ariane 3 released the French Telecom 1C and GTE's Spacenet III Geostar R01 communications satellites for autoboost into geostationary orbit, 22,554 miles above the Equator. The spacenet satellite was expected to begin its boost toward geostationary orbit at 87 degrees west longitude on Wednesday. (FBISWEU88049, Mar 14/88; SSR 1988 018AD; NY Times, Mar 13/88; W Post, Mar 12/88; LA Times, Mar 12; C Trib, Mar 13)
 NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) departed NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for Guam to study the Sun's atmosphere during the total solar eclipse of March 1718. A team of seven scientists aboard KAO was to make a flight through the shadow of the Moon as it moves across the Pacific Ocean. The scientists were interested in the few seconds at the beginning and end of the solar eclipse when the Sun would be almost completely covered by the Moon and when the edge of' 0*the solar disk would begin to reappear from behind the Moon. The Kuiper would intercept the path of the eclipse about 600 miles northwest of Guam. The Kuiper, a modified Lockheed C141 jet transport aircraft, is fitted with a 36inch diameter telescope and flies at 41,000 to 45,000 feet. Measurements of the solar atmosphere would be made at the farinfrared wavelengths of 30, 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 micrometers, representing the first attempt to record simultaneously these wavelengths from the Sun on such a narrowly defined spatial scale. (NASA Release 8837; ARC Release
 A report released by an international panel of over 100 scientists assembled by NASA showed that the depletion of the Earth's ozone layer over the Northern Hemisphere had increased at a much faster rate than previously believed. The report, prepared over 17 months, provided definitive evidence showing that the ozone layer, which shields life on Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation, had been depleted by an average of about 2.3 percent, since 1969 over most of the United States, and by as much as 5 percent over the South Pole. The observed ozone loss was at least twice as large as scientists had predicted and was attributed primarily to the continued release of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). The NASA study group reexamined years of groundbased and satellite observations of the atmosphere in order to remove the normal biennial fluctuations of many atmospheric characteristics and the effects of the 11year solar cycle. The groundbased observations were limited to midlatitudes in the Northern Hemisphere because there were few stations elsewhere in the world. This was the first effort by scientists to separate the effects of solar and biennial fluctuations from the monthly data at different latitudes. The release of the study results followed ratification by the U.S. Congress of the Montreal Protocol, an agreement endorsed by 46 countries, which calls for a 50 percent reduction in emissions of CFCs by the end of the century. (UPI, Mar 15/88; NY Times, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 16/88; W Times, Mar 16/88; USA Today, Mar 16/88; WSJ, Mar 16/88;CSM, Mar 16/88;B Sun, Mar 16/88; P Inq, Mar 16/88; C Trib, Mar 16/88; LA Times, Mar 21/88)
 NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles through fiscal year 1993. Two interplanetary missions were planned for launch in 1989: Magellan, a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative project with Germany to survey Jupiter and its moons. The Hubble Space Telescope also maintained the flight assignment date of June 1989. Astro1, a Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in the ultraviolet spectrum, was being reconfigured to enhance the study of Supernova 1987a and was slated to fly on STS35 in November 1989. Two additional Spacelab missions were assigned flights for September 1990a Spacelab Life Sciences mission in March and the first Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS1)0*mission. The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in the projected schedule for a March 1990 launch, and the Ulysses mission to study the Sun and its environment remained at the projected
 Another important addition to the manifest was a mission to retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) in July 1989. The manifest was also designed to support the commercial space initiative included in the National Space Policy. In addition to the Shuttle launches, thirtyfive launch vehicle launches were planned through fiscal year 1993. (Payload Flight AssignmentsNASA Mixed Fleet, Mar/88; NASA Release 8838)
 Congress ordered a temporary halt to NASA's efforts to lease a commercial crewtended space laboratory, citing several irregularities in NASA's handling of the procurement process and questioning the space agency's abrupt reversal of its prior opposition to the facility. The chairmen of the House appropriations subcommittee for NASA, Representative Edward Boland, and the Chairman of the House authorization subcommittee for NASA, Representative Bill Nelson, agreed to freeze funding for the facility until these issues could be addressed. Several ranking members of the House and Senate had written NASA to complain that the Agency was moving ahead with a contract without congressional authorization. (H Post, Mar 24/88; AvWk, Mar 28/88)
 Morton Thiokol, Inc. was fined by Utah state officials for six safety violations in connection with a December 29, 1987, fire that killed five workers and destroyed a missile casting building at Thiokol's Wasatch facility near Salt Lake City. The Utah Occupational and Safety Health Division sought fines of $31,700 against Thiokol, citing violations of safety rules related to protection of workers, deviations from approved procedures, and failure to take precautions against static electricity buildup in a rocketcasting facility. An Air Force investigation into the immediate cause of the fire, which occurred during the casting of solid rocket propellant into the metal casing of an MX missile segment, was pending. (UPI, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 17/88; NY Times, Mar 17/88; WSJ, Mar 17/88; W Times, Mar 17/88)
 NASA began flight tests of a new design of lownoise, energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unducted propellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternative to highercost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version of the old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 8840)0** The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for the Martian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moon and its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobos mission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Soviet spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both would approach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 8841)
 NASA concluded negotiations with the ESA on a bilateral memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the design, development, operation, and use of the permanently crewtended civil international Space Station complex. Under the terms of the new MOU, ESA would provide the Columbus laboratory module to the international Space Station complex. This permanently attached, pressurized module would support approximately 40 single equipped racks for payloads and storage. ESA would also provide an untended, freeflying polar platform for Earth observation experiments, complementing the polar platform under development by the United States. As a third element, ESA would provide a mantended free flyer (MTFF) designed to accommodate longduration microgravity applications in the fields of fluid physics, life, and material sciences. (NASA Release 8844)
 NASA unveiled plans for an ambitious program to study the Earth as a single ecological system, the Los Angeles Times reported. Called the Earth Observing System, the U.S. portion of the multinational project would cost well above $2 billion and would use a wide range of orbiting laboratories, including free flying platforms and facilities aboard the international space station. The heart of the program would include four platformstwo from the United States, one from Europe, and one from Japanthat would be launched into polar orbit around the Earth by the participating countries. The program, which was still in the planning stage, was described by NASA science division spokesman Charles Redmond as "a critical element in NASA's strategic plan." LA Times, Mar 23/88)
 The San Marco D/L spacecraft was successfully launched on a U.S. Scout launch vehicle from the San Marco Equatorial Range in Kenya. The launch, originally planned for March 18, had been delayed to permit replacement of a yaw rate gyro in the Scout. Five scientific instrumentsthree from the United States, one from the Federal Republic of Germany, and one from Italywere carried on the spacecraft to study Earth's lower atmosphere. (SSR 1988 026B; NASA DAR, Mar 3/88; NASA Release Mar 2/88; LRC Release 888, 888A)
 NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
 NASA announced that it would remove and inspect the liquid oxygen turbopumps aboard the Shuttle Discovery, a move that was expected to delay Discovery's launch beyond the scheduled date of August 4. The pumps will be inspected to ensure that critical bolts in the devices are properly tightened and have not been stripped. Delays resulting from the inspection are expected to push back Discovery's launch date until late August. (UPI, Apr 2/88; W Post, Apr 3/88; USA Today, Apr 4/88; P Inq, Apr 4/88)
 NASA and the ESA announced the selection of scientific investigations to be conducted on two spacecraft as part of a joint NASAESA solar terrestrial research program. More than 130 U.S. scientists were scheduled to participate in the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and Cluster missions. Two spacecraft systems were to be built by ESA with instruments supplied by both ESA and NASA. The Cluster mission, involving a set of four satellites, was planned for launch on an ESA Ariane launch vehicle in December 1995. The Cluster would investigate the space plasma threedimensional microphysics phenomena in Earth's0*magnetic field environment, using four identical spacecraft in polar orbits. SOHO, planned for launch by NASA on the Shuttle or on an expendable launch vehicle in March 1995, would be placed at the EarthSun La Grangian point and investigate the physical processes that form and heat the solar corona and give rise to the solar wind. The SOHO and Cluster missions are an outgrowth of the International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) program, a major international program in solar and space physics organized in 1985 by NASA, the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), and ESA. (NASA Release 8848)
 NASA selected a telescoping pole as the egress method for the Space Shuttle's new crew escape system. The escape system, to be carried on all future Shuttle flights, would provide crew escape capability from the orbiter during controlled, gliding flight following failures or difficulties during ascent or entry where landing at a suitable landing field could not be achieved. Tests conducted in February and March, using a fixed pole extending through a hatchlike opening in a C141 aircraft, demonstrated that the pole would provide adequate orbiter clearance in an emergency egress situation. The telescoping pole system had been chosen over an alternative tractor rocket extraction system. (NASA Release 8850; JSC Release 88014; AP Apr 8/88; NY Times, Apr 8/88; W Post, Apr 8/88; USA Today, Apr 8/88; LA Times, C Trib, Apr 9/88; Apr 8/88; P Inq Apr 8/88; H Post, Apr 8/88; H Chron, Apr 8/88)
 Astronomers at the University of Hawaii at Manoa announced the discovery of the oldest and most distant galaxy ever seen. The galaxy, called 0902+34, was estimated to be ten times the size of the Milky Way and 12 billion light years from Earth. Measurements indicated that the galaxy was formed much earlier in the history of the universe than had been generally thought possible, requiring a revision of accepted theories on the distribution of matter in the early universe and the formation of galaxies. The galaxy was discovered by Dr. Simon J. Lilly, a staff astronomer at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. (NY Times Apr 12/88; W Post, Apr 12/88; W Times, Apr 12/88; P Inq, Apr 12/88)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the Moon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./U.S.S.R. humanassisted missions. "Going to the Moon together would give the two leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for further cooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission to Mars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crewtended mission. Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year0*in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted the notion that American space leadership was lost. Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budget request for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr 14/88; NASA Release 8852)
 NASA submitted to the Congress its acquisition plan for the Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The plan contained NASA's strategy for a full and open competition to introduce an ASRM into the Shuttle system. NASA contended that a new booster design would result in substantive improvements in flight safety, reliability, and performance over the current SRMs produced by contractor Morton Thiokol. The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advanced version of the segmented boosters currently in use in the Shuttle program. The new boosters would have a more reliable field joint design and would be more powerful than the current SRMs, providing for a 12,000pound increase in the Shuttle's payload capacity. Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttling the Space Shuttle's main engines during the period of maximum dynamic pressure, thereby reducing or eliminating about 175 "criticality 1/1r" failure modes for the Shuttle system. An important aspect of NASA's ASRM acquisition plan was the proposal that the boosters be developed in a new Governmentowned contractor operated (GOCO) facility and that the contract be subjected to competitive bidding. In response to protests by Morton Thiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, led by Senator Jake Garn, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility of building the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. The overall cost to develop the ASRM was estimated at just under $1 billion, including modern tooling and equipment, plus $200$300 million for construction of facilities. Under the current production schedule, the first ASRMs would be flight certified by 1993. Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the ASRM at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 8854; UPI, Apr 18/88; AP, Apr 19/88; USA Today, Apr 19/88; W Times, Apr 19/88; NY Times Apr 20/88; W Post Apr 20/88; WSJ, Apr 20/88; )
 The third fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was carried out at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126foot long, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor6 (QM6), underwent a fullduration horizontal test firing of two minutes. The test, tentatively labeled a success, was the third of five test firings to be carried out prior to the scheduled resumption of Shuttle flights in August 1988. (NASA Release 8851; MSFC Releases 8843, 8844; AP, Apr 20/88; UPI, Apr 20/88; NY Times Apr 21/88; W Post, Apr 21/88; USA Today, Apr 21/88; W Times, Apr0*21/88)
 The Canadian government announced that it would become an active partner in the international Space Station Program and would provide equipment worth $1.2 billion to the project. Canada's main equipment contribution to the Space Station would be a roving space robot that would serve as the "arms and legs" of the Station. The robot, which would be comparable to but more advanced than the "Canadarm" currently carried on U.S. Space Shuttles, would be a critical tool in Station construction and docking activities. In return for Canada's contribution, Canadian astronauts would be entitled to sixmonth tours of duty on the Station every two years. Canadian space officials announced plans to expand their astronaut corps in anticipation of the Canadian presence on the Space Station. (Tor Star, Apr 22/88)
 Two U.S. Navy navigation satellites were launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a 600mile circular polar orbit aboard a NASA Scout rocket. The two Oscar satellites were part of the U.S. Navy's longestablished, continuous allweather global navigation system. Made available to nonNavy users in 1967, the spacecraft had since been adapted for diverse civilian uses such as commercial shipping, charting of offshore oil and mineral deposits, and land survey projects. The system provided position information within onetenth of a nautical mile anywhere in the world. This marked Scout's 100th flight and followed closely on the heels of the Scout San Marco D/L launch, which took place on
 (SSR 1988 033AG; NASA Release 8855)
 The fifth and final shortduration solid rocket motor Nozzle Joint Environment Simulator (NJES) firing test was carried out. The overall objective of the test, part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program, was to evaluate the failsafe performance of the redesigned casetonozzle joint with verified defects. (NASA Release 8856)
 A series of powerful explosions destroyed the Pacific Engineering & Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring over 350 people. The plant was a major supplier of the ammonium perchlorate oxidizer used aboard the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motors and other military and civilian boosters. The explosions produced flames that shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 footwide crater at the facility site. Seismographs at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 200 miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two of the blasts registered at 3.0 and 3.5 on the Richter scale. The cause of the explosions was investigated. 0*The destruction of the oxidizer plant raised concerns among NASA and contractor Morton Thiokol over the availability of solid fuel oxidizer beyond the next four Space Shuttle flights. A prolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering's production activities would also threaten the military's missile production schedule. (UPI, May 5/88; AP, May 5/88; NY Times, May 5/88; W Post, May 5/88; WSJ, May 5/88; USA Today, May 5/88; W Times, May 5/88; B Sun, May 5/88;
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher voiced alarm over the House of Representative's resolution for funding of NASA's fiscal year 1989 budget. Speaking in Washington before a symposium on "Science Education: A Challenge for Excellence in America's Future," Dr. Fletcher issued his toughest warning yet about the consequences of reducing the NASA funding levels proposed by the Administration. The Administrator warned that "the civil space program will be stopped in its tracks" if the House funding figure of $10.2 billioncut by over $1 billion from the Administration proposalwere to be passed. More specifically, Dr. Fletcher predicted the reduced budget would kill the Space Station program and lead to the abrogation of several international commitments in space science and applications. (NASA Release 8860).
 The Associated Press and United Press International news agencies reported that U.S. surveillance satellites had detected the explosion of a Soviet solid propellant plant 500 miles southwest of Moscow in the Ukraine. The Soviet Union confirmed that an explosion had occurredkilling three people and seriously injuring five othersbut denied that rocket propellants had been involved in the blast. U.S. intelligence officials claimed that the explosion destroyed several buildings at the plant and put a halt to all solid propellant manufacturing activities at the facility, which was the only source of solid propellant for the SS24 intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). Two weeks previously, a powerful series of explosions destroyed a solid propellant plant in Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring hundreds of others. Pentagon officials estimated it would take at least six months for the Soviet facility to resume production of ICBM propellants. (AP, May 18/88; UPI, May 18/88; W Post, May 18/88; WSJ, May 18/88; USA Today, May 18/88; W Times, May 18/88)
 NASA's Lewis Research Center and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were awarded the prestigious Collier Trophy at the annual Robert J. Collier Trophy Dinner hosted by the National Aviation Club. Lewis and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were honored for developing technology and testing advanced turboprop propulsion systems that offered dramatic reductions in fuel usage and operating costs for subsonic transport aircraft. (NASA Release 8859)
 An untended Soviet spacecraft carrying fuel, food, equipment, and mail, docked with the Mir space station. Two Soviet0*cosmonauts, on a long duration mission, tended Mir. The cosmonauts, Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, arrived at the space station in December and were expected to stay in space for about a year, breaking the 325day endurance record set the previous year by Yuri Romanenko. (FBISSov88108, Jun 6/88; SSR 1988 038A; AP, May
 A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched at 7:58 p.m. EDT from the Kourou Launch Center in French Guiana. The 162foot threestage rocket successfully carried into orbit the 2,619pound Intelsat 5 commercial communications satellite which would eventually propel itself into a 22,300mile geosynchronous orbit. This was the 22nd launch of the Ariane series and the second Ariane 2 launch in 1988. A total of eight Ariane 2 launches were scheduled for 1988. (SSR 1988 040A; AP, May 18/88; UPI, May 18/88)
 Science magazine published findings from a recent Earthbased radar mapping of the planet Venus, conducted by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) scientists. Newly processed radar pictures of the surface of Venus showed what may be geologically recent volcanic activity and impact cratering, including possible volcanic mountains and broad lava flows and fields like those which make up the Hawaiian Islands. The JPL radar images, with a resolution of less than a mile, were the latest in a series of Earthbased radar scans of Venus conducted at the Goldstone, California, complex of NASA's Deep Space Network. The Magellan spacecraft was expected to make more detailed radar observations of Venus in 1990. (NASA Release 8865; C Trib, May 21/88; )
 In an interview with the Washington Post, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev announced he would ask President Ronald Reagan to approve a joint SovietU.S. untended flight to Mars during the upcoming summit meeting in Moscow. A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman said Gorbachev's proposal for a Mars mission was recommended by Roald Z. Sagdeev, a Soviet space expert, as a symbol of superpower cooperation and a fruitful scientific and technological undertaking. "This is a field for cooperation that would be worthy of the Soviet and American people," Gorbachev said. "And I will make that proposal to President Reagan." (W Post, May 22/88; UPI, May 22/88; LA Times, May 22/88; B Sun, May 23; C Trib, May 23/88)
 NASA and the Department of Commerce awarded the first U.S. Government contract for commercial launch transportation services to a private firm. The two agencies contracted General Dynamics Space Systems Division, San Diego, California, to provide expendable launch vehicle transportation services for the Department's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). This contract marked the first time a contractor assumed systems performance responsibility for overall program and subcontractor0*management, vehicle design, production, testing and vehicletopayload integration, mission integration, launch services, system effectiveness, overall launch vehicle performance, and mission In a related matter, NASA's Kennedy Space Center recently entered into an agreement with General Dynamics that allowed the company to use NASA Launch Complex 36 and associated facilities for commercial launch operations of the Atlas/Centaur rocket. (NASA Release 8866; UPI, May 23/88; AP, May 24/88; B Sun, May 24/88; NY Times, May 25/88; C Trib, May 26/88)
 Negotiators from NASA and the government of Japan reached agreement in substance on the text of a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the permanently crew tended civil Space Station. The Japanese Science and Technology Agency would serve as NASA's counterpart in implementing this MOU. Under the terms of the new MOU, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM)a permanently attached, pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The pressurized portion of the JEM would provide a shirtsleeve environment for the Space Station crew to perform research activities. The JEM's exposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earth observation, communications, advanced technology development and other activities requiring direct exposure to space. The experiment logistics module, which would provide transportation and storage of logistics items, would be transported to the Station by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8870)
 Morton Thiokol announced that it would not bid on a $1.5 billion contract to build the proposed Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). Instead, Thiokol officials stated they would concentrate on building the current generation of redesigned solid rocket motors, currently undergoing final testing prior to the resumption of Space Shuttle flights in September. (UPI, Jun 6/88; AP, Jun 6/88; NY Times, Jun 7/88; WSJ, Jun 7/88; LA Times, Jun
 A Soviet Proton launch vehicle, carrying a Soyuz TM5 spacecraft with a threeman SovietBulgarian crew, took off from the Baikonur launch facility. The Soyuz TM5 crew was to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station. The launch, which occurred at 10:04 a.m. EDT, was the first Soviet crewtended launch in 1988. The Mir visit was to be a 10day mission in which the visiting astronauts would perform over 40 experiments aboard the station. The two astronauts aboard Mir were to remain after the departure of their colleagues and continue a yearlong endurance0*mission that was expected to break the record established by Yuri Romanenko in 1987. (FBISSov88110, Jun 8/88; SSR 1988 048B; NY Times, Jun 8/88; B Sun, Jun 8/88)
 Negotiations were completed among the United States, Canada, Europe, and Japan on the framework for international cooperation in the Space Station program. Under the agreements, the United States would provide the overall Space Station framework: operating subsystems, including life support and 75 kilowatts of power; laboratory and habitat modules; and a freeflying platform that would be placed in polar orbit for Earth observation. Canada would provide a Mobile Servicing System, which would be used in conjunction with the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of Space Station elements. Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module, a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The European Space Agency would provide a pressurized laboratory module, which would be permanently attached to the crewtended base; a freeflying polar platform to work together with the U.S. polar platform; and an astronauttended free flyer to be serviced at the crewtended base. The United States anticipated spending approximately $16 billion (fiscal year 1989 dollars) to develop Space Station hardware. The total foreign commitment to the Space Station was in excess of $7 billion. Furthermore, the partners would cover more than 25 percent of the Space Station's expected annual operating costs throughout the 2030 year life of the program. Signature of the agreements was expected later in the summer. (NASA Release 8874)
 The first direct observation of an atmosphere on Pluto was made by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) astronomers flying aboard NASA ARC's Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO). A team of astronomers from MIT, including Edward Dunham, James Elliot, Amanda Bosh, Steve Slivan, and Leslie Young, made the observation during a temporary occultation of a star behind Pluto. The observations were made at 41,000 feet (12,300 meters) altitude, approximately 500 miles south of Pago Pago, American Samoa, over the Southern Pacific Ocean. Information about the temperature, pressure, and extent of the atmosphere would be derived from the occultation data, obtained using a solid state video camera attached to KAO's 36 inch (92 cm) telescope. The airborne observations lasted about 1.5 minutes, occurring shortly after midnight. (ARC Release 8840)
 This date marked 5 years since the Pioneer 10 spacecraft had left the solar system on its trajectory toward interstellar space. Pioneer 10the most distant humanmade object in existencewas now 4,175,500,000 miles from the Sun, almost 450*times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Radio signals, moving at the speed of light, took 12 hours and 26 minutes to travel from Earth to spacecraft and back, the longest time of any radio communication in history. The spacecraft, launched in 1972, continued to operate extremely well as it collected and transmitted data back to Earth. Its primary mission, originally scheduled for 21 months, was to assess the feasibility of passage through the Asteroid Belt and provide the first closeup examination of Jupiter and its moons. Pioneer 10 accomplished all of its original goals by December 1973. At that point, the mission was indefinitely extended. Scientists reprogrammed the probe to explore the Sun's atmosphere and to look for a tenth planet and gravity waves in the far outer solar system and beyond. Recent improvements in the NASA ground stations were expected to allow communications with Pioneer 10 to continue until the range approached six billion miles, more than twice the prelaunch estimates. Project Manager Richard O. Fimmel expected that NASA would be able to track Pioneer 10 until the power source limited communications, which was expected to occur toward the end of the Both Pioneer 10 and its sister spacecraft, Pioneer 11, carried an easily interpreted graphic message in the event that they encountered any intelligent life forms on their journey. Scientists believed Pioneer 10 and 11 would travel among the stars virtually forever because the vacuum of interstellar space is so empty that the risk of any type of collision would be negligible. (ARC Release
 The fourth fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor7 (QM7), underwent a fullduration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. After a preliminary examination of the fired motor, NASA and Morton Thiokol officials declared the test an apparent success. The exercise involved the first use of a new test stand at Morton Thiokol. One remaining fullduration test, Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), would be conducted in July, prior to the next Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 887; NY Times, Jun 15/88)
 An advanced Navy navigation satellite, NOVAII, was launched into polar orbit on a NASA Scout launch vehicle from Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC), California. This was the 111th flight of the 73foot long, fourstage, solid propellant Scout launch vehicles. (SSR 1988 052C; NASA Release 8875)
 This date marked the tenth anniversary of the launch of0*NASA's Seasat Satellite, which ushered in a new era in space research focusing on unsolved questions of the world's oceans and weather. Launched on June 26, 1978, on an AtlasAgena rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, Seasat carried a payload of five scientific instruments unlike any package carried on previous remotesensing satellites. Among the experimental instruments Seasat pioneered were a synthetic aperture radar, which provided highly detailed images of ocean and land surfaces; a radar scatterometer to measure nearsurface wind speed and direction; a radar altimeter to measure the height of the ocean surface and waves; and a scanning multichannel microwave radiometer to measure surface temperature, wind speeds, and sea ice cover. The satellite also carried a passive visual and infrared radiometer to provide supporting data for the other four Seasat demonstrated how space sensors could be used in oceanography, serving as a protoype for a generation of international missions that could provide answers to some of the world's most baffling and threatening weather phenomena. (NASA Release 8884)
 Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
 The NASA Administrator appointed Ivan Bekey to be Special Assistant for System Engineering and Planning Integration, Office of Exploration. Bekey would be responsible for overall systems engineering for Office of Exploration studies and formulation of top level architecture. In the previous year, he served as Director of Program Planning for the Office of Policy and Planning. For the preceding six years, he was the Director of Advanced Programs, Office of Space Flight. He was also NASA coordinator for the National Commission on Space. Bekey joined NASA in 1978. (NASA Special Announcement on 066088)
 NASA officially transferred custody of Launch Complex 17 and East Coast Delta launch operations to the U.S. Air Force. Since 1960, NASA had conducted 143 Delta launches from the twopad Complex, located at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Under Air Force stewardship, Complex 17 would continue to be used to launch Delta medium class vehicles. The Air Force had procured 20 new Delta IIs for Department of Defense payloads. The first launch was scheduled for later in 1988. In addition, at least eight commercial Delta IIs would be launched by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington, Beach, California, from Complex 17 between 1989 and 1992. (NASA Release 8899)
 NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, inaugurated its Mark III Hypercube parallel supercomputer, the result of a 5year research and development effort at the JPL Center for Space Microelectronics Technology and the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). The Mark III spearheaded the arrival of massively parallel supercomputing. Its first module, placed online at the Caltech computer network, contained 32 nodes, or processing units, which together had a peak speed of about 512 million floating point operations per second. Three more 32node modules would be added during the next nine months to form a 128node hypercube with a peak speed of 2 billion floating point operations per second. The Mark II Hypercube was being used for scientific, engineering, and defense research applications, including analysis of NASA multispectral space imaging data; analysis of NASA synthetic aperture radar images taken from the Space Shuttle; and simulation of the Strategic Defense System. (NASA Release 8888)
 The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle was rolled out of the Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) to Launch Pad 39B in preparation for mission STS26, scheduled for late September. (UPI, Jul 4/88; NY Times, Jul 5/88; W Post, Jul 5/88; WSJ, Jul 5/88; W Times, Jul 5/88; P Inq, Jul
 An ad hoc committee, assembled to review safety risk management in the National Space Transportation System program, completed its report, finding that there had been "a positive change in attitudes" by NASA and NASA contractors towards safety. The sixmember committee, composed of both Government and independent safety experts, found no significant system safety issues that would adversely impact the STS26 launch. (NASA Release: 8889)
 The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 1 spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facility. Phobos 1 and Phobos 2, scheduled for0*launch the following week, would carry 100pound landers designed to analyze Phobos, the larger of the two moons of Mars. The 17milelong, potatoshaped Phobos and its smaller moon Deimos were thought to be asteroids captured by the gravitational field of Mars. Tracking support for the Soviet missions would be provided by NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN), whose primary mission would be to provide essential tracking data to permit landings on Phobos. The DSN would then shift to enabling a key scientific goal of the mission, to track Phobos very precisely. The 13,000pound Phobos spacecraft would carry more than two dozen robotic instruments on their 200day journey to Mars. (FBISSov88131, Jul 8/88; SSR 1988 058A; NASA Release 8887; UPI, Jul 8/88; NY Times, Jul 8/88; W Post, Jul 8/88;)
 The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 2 spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facility. The Phobos 2 launch occurred less than a week after the launch of its companion spacecraft, Phobos 1. (FBISSov88134, Jul 13/88; SSR 1988 059A; W Post, Jul 13/88; W Times, Jul 13/88; LA Times, Jul 13/88; P Inq, Jul 13/88; C Trib, Jul 13/88)
 NASA announced that a scientist at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a new, ground breaking computational model that could accurately simulate the complex, fluctuating air flow within aircraft engine turbines and compressors. The new computational model, developed by NASA scientist, Man Rohan Rai, was expected to generate significant savings for the aircraft engine industry once it became ready for commercial applications. The model performed one of the most complex computer simulations ever undertaken and provided the most accurate calculation to date of air flow within turbines. Engine concepts and designs had been tested primarily by experimental methods, most often by building prototype engines and subjecting them to a battery of tests. Advanced computer techniques were far less expensive and much faster. Current computational work was performed on a Cray2 supercomputer at the new Ames Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility. (NASA Release 8894; ARC Release 8850; SF Chron, Jul 13/88; Bus Week, Jul 25/88)
 In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senate approved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989$1.4 billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided only $200 million of the estimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic work on the Space Station program. An earlier House appropriations bill approved $902 million of the $967 million requested for the Station. Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if it lacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program. UPI, Jul 13/88; WSJ, Jul 14/88; W Times, Jul 14/88; USA Today, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 0** An Indianbuilt rocket carrying a weather satellite malfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after it was launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. The fivestage, 80foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled first stage boosters. This was the second failure of the new rocket, which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launch attempt in March 1987. The launch failure was interpreted by space experts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. (NY Times, Jul 14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Inq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88)
 The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASA general counsel. Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel since October 27, 1985. He began his career at NASA in September 1982, as Chief Counsel of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8898)
 The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
 President Ronald Reagan christened the planned international Space Station "Freedom," to symbolize the values shared by the U.S. and its allies. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the name "Freedom" was recommended by NASA officials and representatives of Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency, project participants. (WH Release, Jul 18/88; UPI, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88)
 NASA announced it would testthroughout the montha new deepspace communications system with its Voyager 2 spacecraft, in preparation for the Voyager 2 flyby of Neptune in August 1989. As part of the new system, NASA added the 27 telescopes from the National Radio Astronomy Observatory's (NRAO) Very Large Array (VLA) facility to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's deep space network (DSN). This action more than doubled DSN's ability to capture the Voyager signal, which became extremely faint as it approached the vicinity of Neptune. Under an agreement between NASA and the National Science Foundation, NRAO sponsors, engineers installed new receivers and microwave horns, tuned to the Voyager XBand radio frequency, on all the 82foot dish antennas at the0*VLA. Special signalprocessing and communication equipment was added so that the VLA would be linked by satellite to the DSN's Deep Space Communication's Complex at Goldstone, California. (NASA Release 88102)
 An ESA Ariane 3 rocket carrying two communications satellites was successfully launched from the Korou Launch Center in French Guiana. The Ariane 3, launched at 7:12 p.m. EDT, carried two satellites belonging to India, and the European Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), into polar orbit. (UPI, Jul 22/88; W Times, Jul 22/88)
 NASA announced selection of the Government sites to be used as production and testing facilities for the Agency's planned Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The Tennessee Valley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM production facility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilization also would be made of available manufacturing and computer capability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the Slidell Computer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimize total program costs. The planned ASRM, which would replace the current Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid1990s, would incorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability and safety margins, as well as provide a significant added performance capability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88104; MSFC Release 88102; UPI, Jul 27/88; W Post, Jul 27/88; USA Today, Jul 27/88) During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of a new hightemperature superconductor. According to a paper published in Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrated that "samples of yttriumbariumcopper oxide, when mixed with silver oxide, heat treated, and exposed to 320 degrees Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trapped in the sample." Because superconducting material excludes a magnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch. According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of the scientific team, the implications of high temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous. "In space, with the elimination of the weight associated with gravity, it should be possible to develop lowvibration, lowfriction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance of the discovery is that this new material not only has stronger suspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties: it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normal temperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than other high temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88104)
 A Wet Countdown Demonstration Test (WCDT) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's External Tank (ET) was conducted following several unplanned holds as a result of problems with ground support equipment. The WCDDT, carried out with Discovery deployed for launch at the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39B, consisted of loading the ET with liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen in mock preparation for a Shuttle launch. (NASA STS26 Press Kit)
 NASA launched the first of three untended balloons that would search for cosmic rays, including those that could provide evidence of galaxies made of antimatter. The balloon flights were to be conducted throughout August from a launching site at Prince Albert Saskatchewan Airport, Canada, as part of the NASA Balloon Program. Each of the balloons would carry one of three cosmic ray experiments: an extragalactic matter experiment that would search for heavy antinuclei; a scintillating optic fiber experiment; and a high energy spectrometer telescope. (NASA Release 88106; GSFCWFF Release 8825)
 NASA held dedication ceremonies for the newly renamed John C. Stennis Space Centerformerly the National Space Technology Laboratoriesin Hancock County, Mississippi. The Center was named for Mississippi's retiring senator by an Executive order signed May 20, 1988, by President Ronald Reagan. (NASA Release 8893)
 NASA appointed Gary L. Tesch to be NASA Deputy General Counsel. Tesch had been serving as Associate General Counsel (contracts) prior to this appointment. (NASA Release 88109)
 Astronomers at NASA's Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, and the University of California at Berkeley uncovered the most distant galaxy yet seen. Called 4C41.17, the newly discovered galaxy is located at an estimated distance of 15 billion light yearsmore than 90 percent of the distance to the visible limits of the universe. The discovery was made by a team of American and European astronomers, using the Very Large Array (VLA) Radio Telescope Facility near Socorro, New Mexico, and was confirmed a galaxy using the 2.1 meter optical telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory. Studying remote galaxies like 4C41.17 was expected to help forge a better understanding of how galaxies have evolved since the time of the Big Bang. This research was supported by NASA, the European Space Agency, the National Science Foundation, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope project, and the Space Telescope Science Institute. (NASA Release 88111; P Inq, Aug 9/88; B Sun, Aug 9/88; )
 After an aborted first attempt on August 4, a 22second flight readiness firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines was conducted on the launch pad at the Kennedy Space0*Center's Launch Complex 39B. The first FRF attempt had been halted inside the T10 second mark because of a sluggish fuel bleed valve on the number 2 main engine. The faulty valve was replaced prior to the FRF. (AP, Aug 10/88; UPI, Aug 10/88; NY Times, Aug 11/88; W Post, Aug 11/88; WSJ, Aug 11/88; CSM, Aug 11/88; W Times, Aug 11/88; B Sun, Aug 11/88; P Inq, Aug 11/88)
 A Space Systems Development Agreement was signed by NASA and Spacehab, Inc., a private firm that was developing a Shuttlebased pressurized module for commercial applications. According to the agreement, NASA agreed to provide Shuttle payload bay space for Spacehab's middeck augmentation module on six Shuttle flights beginning in 1991. Spacehab would pay $28.2 million (adjusted for inflation) for standard services for each flight. The Spacehab module, to be constructed by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntsville, Alabama, would be a metal truncated cylinder measuring 10 feet in length by 13 feet in diameter, designed to fit in the Shuttle's cargo bay. Shuttle crew members would access the module through a tunnel from the Shuttle's middeck. The company would make available to customers a variety of locker and rack accommodations, with associated support and integration services. Spacehab was specifically identified in the President's Commercial Space Initiative, announced in February, in which the Reagan administration committed to make the best efforts to launch the commercial module in the early 1990s.(NASA Release 88114)
 The fifth and final test of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, prior to resumption of Shuttle flights, was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126footlong, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), underwent a full duration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. The motor was extensively flawed to demonstrate the failsafe characteristics of the redesign. (NASA Release 88113; AP, Aug 18/88; UPI, Aug 18/88; NY Times, Aug 19/88; W Post, Aug 19/88; WSJ, Aug 19/88; USA Today, Aug 19/88; W Times, Aug 19/88; B Sun, Aug 19/88 )
 NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
 A Soviet Proton launch vehicle carrying a Soyuz TM6 spacecraft, with three cosmonauts on board, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The threeman Soyuz crew, which included an Afghan and a Soviet physician, was scheduled to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station on the weeklong mission. The physician, Valery Polyakov, was to remain aboard Mir after the departure of his Soyuz crewmates and continue monitoring the health of the Mir cosmonauts, who were in the eighth month of a recordbreaking yearlong endurance mission. (FBISSov88168, Aug 30/88; SSR 1988 075A; UPI, Aug 30/88; W Post, Aug 30/88; CSM, Aug 30/88; P Inq, Aug 30/88)
 NASA issued the newest update of its mixedfleet manifest, reflecting current planning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles (launch vehicles) through fiscal year 1993. The manifest reflected changes made to accommodate a slower than expected resumption of Shuttle flights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve the launch windows for three major planetary missions. Among the major changes made was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch from
 Defense Shuttle mission to an expendable launch vehicle. (Payload Flight AssignmentsNASA Mixed Fleet, Aug 1988; NASA Release 88120) During August: A Cray YMP, the fastest supercomputer in the world, arrived at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and underwent acceptance tests in the Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) Facility. The NAS was established as a national facility available to leading U.S. research institutions through a national network. It had longterm support from Congress to use the fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress in U.S. aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics, and chemistry. Supercomputer systems were complementing and extending aerospace research being done in wind tunnels and highvelocity (4,000 to 15,000 mph) shock tunnels. The new YMP central processor would not only solve old problems four times as fast as existing systems, but also would be used to investigate flow phenomena that could not be investigated currently by wind tunnels or computers. Another important application of the NAS supercomputer system would be the modeling of air flows for hypersonic vehicles such as the National AeroSpace Plane and the Space Shuttle. '!0*Ames was the first customer to take delivery of this new supercomputer, expected to be fully operational by January 1989. (ARC Release 8880)
 The fifth firing in a series of Transient Pressure Test Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program. For this test, flaws were intentionally cut into both the test article's field joints, the casetonozzle joint, and other components of the redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify the structural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability of the redesigned field and casetonozzle joints. (MSFC Release on
 A classified Department of Defense payload was launched aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle from launch complex 40 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Sources quoted by the Associated Press said the rocket failed to carry its payload into the correct orbit. The payload was widely believed to be a Vortex reconnaissance satellite. (SSR 1988 077AC; UPI, Sep 2/88; Reuter, Sep 2/88)
 A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched aboard a Titan 2 launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Civilian experts said they believed the rocket was carrying a cluster of Navy recon naissance satellites known as "White Cloud." The Titan 2 launch followed an apparent failure of a Titan 34D rocket to launch a military reconnaissance satellite into proper orbit. (SSR 1988 078AB; NY Times, Sep 6/88; W Times, Sep 6/88; CSM, Sep 6/88)
 China successfully launched its first experimental weather satellite, the Wind and Cloud No. 1. The satellite was launched by a Long March 4 launch vehicle from the Taiyuan launch facility in northcentral China. (FBISCHI8890, Sep 16/88; SSR 1988 080AB; AP, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 8/88)
 After a tense 24hour delay of deorbit burn, a Soviet Soyuz TM5 capsule carrying two cosmonauts landed safely in Soviet Central Asia. The Soyuz TM5, returning to Earth from a weeklong visit to the Mir space station, experienced premature shutdowns of its reentry motor during the first two deorbit burn attempts. The first shutdown had been caused by a malfunction in the automatic guidance system, whereas the second failure resulted from improper resetting of the flight computer. The problem was considered by some U.S. space experts as potentially life threatening because the Soyuz was estimated to have only 24 to 48 hours of oxygen left and a limited amount of fuel with which to attempt a third deorbit'"0*burn. The mission had been noted for the participation of an Afghani cosmonaut and the transfer to the Mir space station of a physician crew member. (FBISSOV88175, Sep 9/88; AP, Sep 7/88; NY Times, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 7/88; WSJ, Sep 7/88; W Times, Sep 7/88; B Sun, Sep 7/88)
 NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreement providing for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. The umbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access to NASAmanaged launch support facilities when conducting commercial launches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASA Release 88124)
 An ESA Ariane 3 launch vehicle carrying two U.S. communications satellites was launched from the Korou launch facility in French Guiana. The Ariane 3 was carrying the 1.3ton GSTAR 111 and 1.2ton SBS 5 telecommunications satellites, both designed for television, telephone, and digital data transmission. Upon reaching low Earth orbit, the GSTAR satellite failed to boost itself into its planned 23,000mile geosynchronous orbit. (FBISLat175, Sep 9/88; SSR 1998 081CD; AP, Sep 7/88; Reuter, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 9/88; NY Times, Sep 15/88; WSJ, Sep 15/88; W Post, Sep 15/88)
 A guidance system malfunction caused the Soviet Mars observer spacecraft Phobos 1 to wobble out of control on its way toward Mars. The spacecraft stopped responding to commands from Soviet ground controllers and was rapidly losing power as it was unable to properly orient its solar panels toward the Sun. Phobos 2 continued to function normally. (UPI Sep 9/88; NY Times, Sep 9/88; W Times, Sep 9/88;
 An untended Soviet Progress38 supply spacecraft, bound for the Mir space station, was launched from the Baikonur launch facility. The Tass News Agency reported the Progress38 ferried "expendable materials and various loads" for use by the Mir threeman crew. (SSR 1988 083A; C Trib, Sep 11/88;
 NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
 NASA set a target launch date of September 29 for STS26, the next Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of the launch date followed an updated assessment of the projected impact of Hurricane Gilbert on mission control and training facilities at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. In connection with the announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said, "NASA's decision to set this launch date is based on over two years of persistence and dedication by NASA and contractor personnel, culminating in the STS26 flight readiness review held at the Kennedy Space Center on
 my hat is off to all members of the Shuttle team whose tireless efforts have brought us here to the brink of America's return to manned spaceflight." (NASA Release 88127)
 Israel launched its first orbital satellite aboard an Israelibuilt rocket. The Horizon I experimental satellite was launched from an Israeli launch facility in the Negev desert aboard what U.S. experts believed was either a Jericho II or a Comet launch vehicle. The Horizon I was expected to have an operational lifetime of one month in low Earth orbit. (SSR 1988 087AB; NY Times, Sep 20/88; W Post Sep 20/88; W Times, Sep 20/88; CSM, Sep 20/88; B Sun, Sep 20/88; LA Times, Sep 20/88)
 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
 NASA marked its thirtieth anniversary with ceremonies at the Centers. (Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988)
 A localized electrical fire occurred on board the Magellan spacecraft during a power systems check at the Kennedy Space Center's (KSC) Spacecraft Encapsulation Facility (SAEF2). The fire, which occurred while a technician worked within the spacecraft, was quickly extinguished without injuries and with only minor damage to Magellan. The KSC fire department also responded but was not required to enter the SAEF2 clean room environment. The incident was being investigated by NASA. (NASA Releases 88141 and 88153).
 Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinners had been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of Space Science. From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment as Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88138)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received the International Technology Institute's (ITI) William F. Rockwell, Jr. Medal at the International Congress on Technology and Technology Exchange banquet, in Pittsburgh. The Rockwell Medal, awarded annually to a maximum of three individuals from different continents, recognizes contributions toward the generation, transfer, and application of technology for the betterment of mankind. (NASA Release 88139)'%0*October 20: Two of the three cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station took a fourhour spacewalk to replace a faulty component on an xray telescope attached to the station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, on a yearlong endurance mission aboard Mir, wore a new spacesuit design intended to increase flexibility. C Trib, Oct 21/88)
 NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope from February 1990 to an earlier date of December 1989. The earlier date was made possible following reassessment of a variety of factors, including payload requirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during the period. (NASA Release 88143)
 NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
 NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, and the Department of Energy's Argon National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois, signed an agreement to begin joint research in the development of hightemperature superconductivity (HTS) materials and technology. The objective of this major research effort would be to exploit recent rapid advances in HTS technology for significant space and aeronautical applications. Research and technology development would be undertaken in those areas where HTS could be an enabling technology or substantially improve existing Initially, research would concentrate on advanced studies and critical exploratory experiments to identify the most promising applications for further development. Among the first candidate applications would be superconducting magnetic energy storage, space electromagnetic propulsion, microwave power transmission, aeropropulsion, and electromagnetic launch systems. (NASA Release
 The Space Shuttle Atlantis was rolled out to Launch Pad 39B for a scheduled launch in late November of STS27, a classified Department of Defense mission. (NASA Release 88171) '&0*November 6: A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched into orbit aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle. Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988)
 NASA announced that it had negotiated a contract with Rockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division to consolidate Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida launch site. Under the contract, Rockwell's orbiter logistics operations in Downey, California, would be transferred to existing Launch Support Operations activity at KSC. During this same period, Rockwell's component overhaul and repair activities would move from its network of original Shuttle equipment manufacturers to the Rockwell Service Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. The move would complete a consolidation begun in 1985. (NASA Release 88156)
 Controllers at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, directed the Voyager 2 spacecraft to fire its hydrazine thrusters for 3 minutes and 29 seconds in order to steer the craft toward a flyby of Neptune on August 28, 1989. The Voyager 2 trajectory would bring it to within 3,000 miles of Neptune's cloudtops. (Voyager 2 Neptune Encounter Press Kit; LA Times, Nov 14/88)
 NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
 After several delays, the Soviet Union successfully completed an automated orbital flight test of the Space Shuttle Buran. The untended Soviet orbiterwhich is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiterswas launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198foot Energia rocket with two strapon boosters in a configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlike the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's engines for ascent to orbit. According to Soviet sources, the Soviet shuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landinga capability the U.S. Shuttles lack. After completing two orbits, Buran landed successfully on a 2.7mile runway at the Baikonur facility, ending the 31/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agency hailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude to crewtended Shuttle flights. In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBISSOV88222,''0*Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A; AP, Nov 15/88; UPI, Nov 15/88; NY Times, Nov 16/88; WSJ, Nov 16/88; W Post, Nov 16/88; LA Times, Nov 15/88; W Times, Nov 16/88; B Sun, Nov 16/88; P Inq, Nov 16/88; C Trib, Nov
 In a major setback for the U.S. radio astronomy program, the National Radio Astronomy Observatory's (NRAO) 300foot radiotelescope in Greenbank, West Virginia, unexpectedly collapsed, completely destroying the metallic antenna dish. The instrument, built in 1962, was one of the most powerful radiotelescopes in the world and had been responsible for several important discoveries, e.g. pulsars. The cause of the collapse was not known, but was not believed to be related to wind or other atmospheric conditions. The NRAO Assistant Director George Seielsand noted that the telescope structure, originally designed for a dish diameter of 140feet, had been expanded to a diameter of 300 feet without a corresponding increase in material strength. No decision was announced on whether funds would be sought for a replacement radiotelescope. (NY Times, Nov 17/88; W Post, Nov 17/88; B Sun, Nov
 NASA Administrator Dr. Fletcher appointed Kenneth S. Pedersen to be Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective immediately. Pedersen would be responsible for congressional, intergovernmental, international, and industry relations, educational activities and relations with educational institutions, and the NASA History Office. (NASA Release 88160)
 NASA announced the selection of General Electric, AstroSpace Division, Princeton, New Jersey, for negotiations leading to the award of a costplusawardfee contract for design, fabrication, instrument integration, and launch operation support of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) Wind and Polar missions. The two GGS laboratories, with their complement of scientific instruments, were to examine the flow of energy from the Sun through the Earth's geospace environment. This project was to be part of the overall scientific investigations within the International SolarTerrestrial Physics Program. The contract would provide for delivery of the Wind laboratory to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for launch readiness on December 30, 1992, and delivery of the Polar laboratory to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for launch readiness on June 30, 1993. Each laboratory would be launched on a government`"furnished expendable launch vehicle. (NASA News, Nov 23/88)
 A Soyuz TM7 spacecraft, carrying a joint SovietFrench crew, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, for a monthlong tour in the Mir space station. With French President Franois Mitterand in attendance, the threeman crew, which included French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, lifted off from Baikonur on the second FrenchSoviet crewtended mission. '(0*Chretien had also been aboard the first joint mission in July 1983. The threeman Soyuz crew planned to join the twoman crew, aboard Mir since January, to perform a series of scientific experiments. Additionally, Chretien was scheduled to become the first West European to perform a spacewalk. (FBISSov88228; SSR 1988 104A; NY Times, Nov 27/88; W Post, Nov 27/88; CSM, Nov 28/88)
 After 23 years in solar orbit, Pioneer 6, the oldest operating spacecraft, returned to the vicinity of its launch. The craft passed within 1.16 million miles of the Earth, roughly five times the distance between the Earth and its Moon. This distance was the closest Pioneer 6 had ever approached Earth since launch from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida in 1965. With only five lunar distances separating them, Earth's gravitational pull was strong enough to haul the craft toward its own orbit, thereby increasing time in orbit for Pioneer 6 by six days (from 311 to 317 days) and 6 million miles. The spacecraft was designed to study the Sun's atmosphere, the heliosphere. After 23 years, two of Pioneer 6's original instruments were still transmitting information on the turbulence of the solar wind to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Three sister probes followed Pioneer 6 into solar orbit. During the period from 1966 to 1970, Pioneers 7, 8, and 9 were launched into coordinated orbits. With Pioneer 6, this spacecraft team formed a network of solar weather stations monitoring the heliosphere, triangulating information back to Earth from the far side of the Sun, and increasing understanding of solar effects on Earth's magnetic field. (SSR 1965 105A; ARC Release 8881)
 Thomas L. Moser was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Station by the head of the Space Station Office, James B. Odom. Moser had been serving as Director of the Space Station Freedom program in Reston, Virginia, since October 1986. (NASA Release 88163) During November: NASA continued its multifaceted program of observation of Supernova 1987a, using untended scientific balloons and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO): NASA launched two heavylift balloons from Australia in November to continue scientific studies of Supernova 1987a. A 28.4 million cubic foot balloon was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 1100 pounds, to measure gammaray and hard xray emissions. A second, 29.47 million cubic foot balloon also was scheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 3700 pounds, that would measure gammaray emissions, but over a different energy band. These scientific missions were part of the overall NASA Balloon Program managed by the Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 88154; MSFC Release 88160) ')0*NASA deployed the C141 Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), to observe Supernova 1987a. KAO completed a fiveweek deployment to New Zealand to conduct high altitude observations of charged particle and heavy metals emissions produced in the explosion of the giant blue star, first detected in February 1987. The
 outward at 868 miles per second. Previous Kuiper observations of the expanding ejected cloud had greatly contributed to understanding how the explosion proceeds. KAO Supernova 1987a research was being conducted by the Astrophysics Branch, Space Science Division, Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 88168; ARC Release 8889)
 The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
 The Pioneer Venus orbiter spacecraft marked 10 years of orbital observations of the clouddraped planet. Ceremonies were held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to celebrate Pioneer's accomplishments. December 9 would also mark 10 years since a companion spacecraft, Pioneer Venus 2, had entered the atmosphere of Venus along with 4 hardimpact probes it had released. Observations by Pioneer revealed a great deal about the atmospheric content of Venus, plate tectonics, volcanic activity, and the magnetic field. Pioneer had also observed five comets, including Halley. Pioneer, whose orbit was deteriorating, was scheduled to cease operating in August 1992 and be destroyed upon entering the lower atmosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 88165)
 NASA and the Missiles Division of LTV Missiles and Electronic Group, Dallas, Texas, announced the signing of an agreement that would grant the firm exclusive rights to commercially produce and market the Scout launch vehicle. NASA considered the negotiation of the agreement as another important advance in establishing a strong U.S. commercial launch vehicle industry through the privatization of Government expendable rocket programs. (NASA Release 88167)
 The European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched'*0*its first Ariane 4 booster from the Korou launch center in French Guiana. The Ariane 4, the latest and most powerful ESAbuilt booster, carried two European telecommunications satellites. The launch had been delayed by 24 hours because of a faulty sensor on the rocket's third stage. (FBISWeu88238, Dec 11/88; SSR 1988 109CD; NY Times, Dec 12/88)
 Two Soviet cosmonauts and a French astronaut returned to Earth aboard a Soyuz TM6 capsule, following the completion by the Soviets of a record breaking yearlong endurance mission aboard the Mir space station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, launched into space on December 21, 1987, and French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, successfully landed their capsule in Kazakhstan. Titov and Manarov were to undergo extensive medical tests to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness. (FBISSov88245, Dec 21/88; NY Times, Dec 22/88; W Post, Dec 22/88; WSJ, Dec 22/88; CSM, Dec 22/88; B Sun, Dec 22/88; P Inq, Dec 22/88)
 E. Ray Tanner was appointed Director of the Space Station Freedom Program Office, effective January 3, 1989. Tanner had been serving as Manager of the Space Station Projects Office, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, since August 1988. Prior to that he was Deputy Director for Space Systems in the Science and Engineering Directorate. (NASA Release 88175; MSFC Release 88178)
 Margaret G. Finarelli was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective December 12. Finarelli had been serving as Director of the Policy Division in the Office of Space Station. (NASA Release 88164)
