Soviet space program experts announced that the 40-ton Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 would break up and fall to earth in February. Tass, the official Soviet press agency, implied Soviet officials had lost control of the station when it said the authorities would issue a "timely warning" to all countries on whose territory station "parts are likely to fall." Salyut 7 was launched in 1982 and last inhabited in 1986, holding up to six astronauts. The Soviet Union had planned to send a rescue mission with the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran but the Shuttle was delayed. (NY Times, Jan 1/91)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology physicist Alan Guth theorized that during a fraction of a second right after the explosion known as the Big Bang, the universe underwent phenomenal growth. It ballooned faster than the speed of light from being smaller than an atom to a size larger than astronomers can see with their most powerful telescopes. Nearly everything than now exists had its origin during this expansion, which Guth calls inflation. (WSJ, Jan 2/91)
NASA announced that it recently signed an agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) to cooperate in developing the Cassini spacecraft to study Saturn. The Cassini spacecraft would consist of the Saturn Orbiter provided by NASA and the Huygens Probe System provided by ESA. It was currently scheduled for launch by NASA on a Titan IV/Centaur vehicle in April 1996. NASA would provide overall Cassini mission operations and ESA will support probe operations. The flight from launch to Saturn orbital insertion requires approximately seven years; once there, the mission baseline lifetime is four years. (NASA Release 91-1)
The findings of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite have caused astronomers to question part of the Big Bang theory, according to a report by Dr. Will Saunders of Oxford University and his colleagues in the journal Nature. The cold dark matter model cannot explain the giant superstructures and companion supervoids found in galactic surveys. These structures appear too vast to have formed since the Big Bang. (NY Times, Jan 3/91; W Post, Jan 6/91; LA Times, Jan 4/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax County, Virginia was issued its first license for commercial space launches. The Department of Transportation licensed three launches to be used for experiments on the impact of weightlessness on payloads for the Center for the Commercial Development of Space at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. Orbital, which launched an experimental winged Pegasus rocket from a NASA B-52 bomber last year, was to use a different technology for the DOT-licensed flights. It would launch Prospector rockets developed by the company from a Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch pad refurbished by Orbit. The first launch was scheduled for March 1991, followed by launches in December 1991 and December 1992. (W Post, Jan 3/91)
NASA announced that in January 1991, it would conduct experiments from an orbiting satellite to test the possibility of creating an artificial aurora. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) was to release clouds of barium and lithium vapor in the Earth's magnetosphere, the region above the atmosphere.
The Environmental Quality Permit Board for the state of Mississippi in Jackson approved an air emissions and waste water discharge plan of NASA, needed to test-fire rocket motors at the John C. Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis. Water quality certification remained to be granted. The Board had one opposing vote from the head of the Department of Wild Life because of NASA's plans to fill in 69 acres of wetlands and clear 150 to 200 acres. The official considered this plan contrary to the president's policy that there be no net loss of wetlands. (Poplarville Democrat, Jan 3/91)
James W. McCulla, Director of Media Services, NASA, replied to an op-ed article in the Washington Post by Jessica Mathews, vice president of World Resources Institute. Mathews maintained that there was no justification for the U.S. space exploration program now that the Cold War had ended. McCulla replied that learning more about the universe, Earth systems, and life beyond Earth were significant goals.(W Post, Jan 4/91; P Inq, Jan 4/91)
NASA named Margaret G. Finarelli as Associate Administrator for External Relations and John D. Schumacher as Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations. Finarelli, who has served in a number of U.S. government agencies, joined NASA in 1981 as Chief of the International Planning and Programs Office. Schumacher came to NASA in 1989 from a law practice in New York City. (NASA Release 91-3)
The New York Times reported that the United States would announce today at a scientific meeting in New Mexico its intention to buy an advanced Soviet nuclear reactor, known as Topaz 2, built to power systems in space. The United States at present has no working nuclear reactors in orbit and this purchase constitutes a high point in East-West cooperation on technical matters. Topaz 2 is designed to operate up to five years in space and will be set up in the Albuquerque area. It was to be tested by the University of New Mexico, the Sandia National Laboratory, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Air Force Phillips Laboratory. The Topaz 2 can generate from 6,000 to 10,000 watts of electricity. (NY Times, Jan 7/91)
An unmanned $45 million Delta 2 rocket carrying a $110 million NATO communications satellite to replace an older military spacecraft was launched on January 7 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The rocket was built by McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company and was the 202d launch of a Delta. The satellite, which would enable political and military leaders in the NATO area to communicate with one another, was the first of two advanced NATO 4 satellites built by British Aerospace. (AP, Jan 7/91; NY Times, Jan 9/91)
An editorial deplored efforts of the Virginia congressional delegation to block NASA's possible closing of its Reston, Virginia, office. The editorial stated that to cut space program costs, which suffer from a bloated management structure, streamlining must occur and the Reston office was a good place to begin. (Space News, Jan 7-20/91)
NASA scientist Thomas J. Miller said NASA would establish a Nuclear Propulsion Systems Office at Lewis Research Center in early 1991 to develop nuclear propulsion for spacecraft. The Defense and Energy departments would join in this project; the NASA FY 1991 budget included about $1 million for nuclear propulsion development. Such propulsion could significantly reduce the time required from Earth to the moon or Mars. (AvWk, Jan 7/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center asked for proposals for a follow-on system to its Payload Data Management System (PDMS). The system was to be used to manage data relating to payloads for Space Shuttles and ultimately for the Space Station. The new system was to include a relational data base management subsystem, a project management subsystem, a technical documentation subsystem, and a page printing subsystem and covers a 10-year period. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
Kenneth Szalai, recently named director of NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Base, stated that NASA was putting a new emphasis on aeronautics. The facility's number one project involved the F-18 high-angle-of-attack program to help design more maneuverable aircraft. Similar work was underway on the X-29 as well as modifications on the F-15 jet fighter and testing of Space Shuttle landing gear systems. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 7/91)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Fisher, M.D., would resign effective January 31, 1991. He was to return to full-time medical practice in Texas. With NASA since 1980, Fisher took part in research and in the 20th Space Shuttle mission in August 1985 where he engaged in the longest spacewalk in the history of spaceflight. (NASA release 91-4; UPI, Jan 8/91)
In a commentary on the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, released in December 1990, Alston Chase pointed out that the report stressed that among NASA's major problems were that it "has grown too large and is trying to accomplish very complex tasks in which there is little margin for error." As an example of NASA's growth, the report cited that Viking involved some 13,000 people, whereas Apollo involved 180,000. (W Times, Jan 8/91)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
Resigning astronaut Dr. William F. Fisher warned that the planned $37 billion NASA Space Station could be canceled if its redesign is superficial. He stated that the Space Station needed total rethinking, adding that both Congress and a White House panel also indicated such a need. (NY Times, Jan 9/91)
Whereas NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York plans to announce that 1990 was the hottest year ever recorded, NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, says 1990 was only the fourth hottest year since 1979. The difference is accounted for by the fact that Goddard uses ground-based thermometers to record local heat while Marshall uses satellites, which broadly measure atmospheric temperature world-wide. In addition to the global temperature analysis, the World Resources Institute released two related studies. One was by Richard Heim of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Global Climate Laboratory. (WSJ, Jan 8/91; W Post, Jan 10/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; LA Times, Jan 10/91; CSM, Jan 16/91; NY Times Magazine, Feb 3/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald expressed the concern of some NASA staff over the number of flight waivers NASA had issued. NASA issues such waivers on certain critical items rather than change the Shuttle design, which would be very costly. Statistics indicate that the number of waivers approved since the Challenger accident more than tripled. According to Frank Pizzano, head of the reliability and maintainability engineering division at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the increase results from stricter standards for waivers but many weaknesses were eliminated in the Shuttle redesign after the Challenger accident. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 8/91)
NASA announced it modified its Space Shuttle orbiter production contract with Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division in Downey, California. The modifications, at a cost of $93.5 million, extend the mission duration of Columbia flights from 10 days to 16 days, plus a two-day contingency. Measures required include a regenerative carbon dioxide removal system, improved waste collection provisions, added gaseous nitrogen and crew stowage provisions, and additional power furnished by an Extended Duration Orbiter cryogenic pallet holding spherical tanks of liquid oxygen. (NASA Release C91-c)
Construction of Endeavour, authorized by Congress in 1987, is 90 percent complete and at a cost of $1.88 billion, not including main engines, was under budget and on schedule. Despite improvements, the command console technology is 20 years old to be consistent with other orbiters. Endeavour has the capacity of 28-day flights; the rollout date was scheduled for April 1991. (CSM, Jan 9/91)
NASA planners discovered that despite the problems it encountered, Astro-1 brought back much valuable data on December 10, 1990. However, there was no money in the FY 1992 budget for Astro-2. Instead, NASA appeared to be concentrating on such priorities as the Space Station program. The Astro program is Shuttle-dependent, with the assumption that the Shuttle would provide cheap and reliable space transportation. The Astro program needs to be reexamined. (CSM, Jan 9/91)
NASA stated that an artificial aurora borealis lasting from five to 15 minutes would be created by its satellite's release of chemicals the evening of January 10. The faux aurora is part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project of NASA and the Air Force, probing the Earth's magnetic field. (W Post, Jan 11/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; AP, Jan 11/91)
President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle received the crew of the Columbia Shuttle and their spouses. (UPI, Jan 10/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that Advanced Computer Systems, Inc. of Fairfax, Virginia, would provide administrative automated data processing services for GSFC's Information Management Division. The contract would take effect April 1, 1991, and would consist of a one-year basic period and four one-year priced options for a total of $58.8 million. (NASA Release C91-d)
NASA administrator Richard H. Truly announced additional actions to implement the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. Truly briefed the National Space Council on January 11 on the status of NASA's review. NASA decided as follows: Space science would remain NASA's priority and NASA would implement the existing strategic plan, as recommended by the advisory committee. In response to the committee's recommendation, NASA planned to form a special task force with the Department of Defense to assess over the next two months development of an evolutionary heavy-lift launch vehicle. Space Station Freedom restructuring activities, centering on life sciences on microgravity research and applications, conducted in concert with international partners, would be extended to incorporate the committee's recommendations. NASA would move with the Office of Personnel Management to structure a personnel management system that recognizes NASA's special needs to attract and retain top-flight scientists, engineers, and other specialists.
The first release of barium vapor, creating a green cloud, by the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite occurred the evening of January 12, NASA announced. The second release consisted of lithium vapor the night of January 13, causing a red cloud. (P Inq, Jan 14/91; USA Today, Jan 14/91; NY Times, Jan 14/91; AP, Jan 13/91; UPI, Jan 12/91; W Post, Jan 13/91)
An international conference at the University of California San Diego, sponsored by the university's Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, the California Space Institute, and Los Alamos, New Mexico's National Laboratory Center for National Security Studies expressed concern over the rising cost of space exploration and the difficulty of justifying such costly ventures as sending humans to Mars. Roger Bonnet, chief scientist of the European Space Agency, which cooperates with the United States on the Space Station, regretted American hesitations on the Space Station. (LA Times, Jan 12/91)
Reporting on the huge volume of data being created daily by the government, the Los Angeles Times stated that NASA's Earth Observing System, set for 1998 launch, could generate the equivalent of all 15 million books in the Library of Congress every 12 weeks. (LA Times, Jan 13/91)
Work done for NASA in connection with planning space habitats where people would live for years without a change of air revealed that potted plants, including their soil and microorganisms, act to "eat" pollutants commonly found in indoor air. (LA Times, Jan 13/91)
NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), through its Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped the distribution of nitrogen throughout our galaxy. The COBE team reported this information at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measurements are unencumbered by atmospheric and instrument emission and enable astronomers to understand better the processes occurring throughout the Milky Way. Scientists can measure the wavelength of emissions from ionized nitrogen atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of three instruments aboard COBE, NASA's first satellite primarily designed for cosmological studies. The data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
NASA announced the selection of nine scientists as team members in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) Microwave Observing Project. The SETI project has two elements: Targeted Search and Sky Survey. The Targeted Search was to use the largest available antennas and search over a 1 to 3 gigahertz (GHz) frequency range, looking for patterns that could indicate an artificially generated signal. The search would conduct the most sensitive search yet conducted of nearby (less than 80 lightyears distant) solar-type stars. The Sky Survey would use the 34-meter antennas of NASA's Deep Space Network sites to scan the whole sky over a 1 to 10 GHz frequency range. The survey could detect signals from the vicinity of distant sunlike stars or from areas beyond the solar-type stars. SETI observations were to begin on Columbus Day 1992, with the Sky Survey deployed at Goldstone, California, and the Targeted Search mounted at the National Science Foundation's Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico.
Ariane 44L, the most powerful rocket of the Ariane series of Arianespace, the commercial branch of the European Space Agency, blasted into space the night of January 15 from the northeast coast of French Guiana in South America. The rocket carried two European communications satellite: Italsat I, the first experimental communications satellite of the Italian Space Agency, and Eutelsat II-F2, the second communications satellite of the European satellite organization. (W Times, Jan 16/91)
Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported to the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia that the High Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced instrument on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made the best spectrograms ever obtained of Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to 100 times larger than the sun, is a massive star in a galaxy 170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is evolving toward a supernova state in the next few million years, is shedding its hot gases at a great rate in a "stellar wind" that strips the star of an amount of gas equal in mass to the sun every 100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed that the activity of pulsars inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was preventing the collapse of matter into a black hole and in some cases creating "born-again" pulsars in binary pairs form. (NASA Release 91-8; NY Times, Jan 17/91; B Sun, Jan 17/91; USA Today, Jan 17/91; P Inq, Jan 17/91; W Post, Jan 17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA Times, Jan 17/91; W Times, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91)
NASA showed on closed-circuit television pictures taken by Magellan after it had passed the halfway point in its eight-month mission to photograph Venus. The Magellan flew over 50.9 percent of the planet's surface and made successful pictures of 41.4 percent of the terrain. NASA announced some of the findings regarding the surface of Venus and the effect of tectonics on January 25. (AP, Jan 17/91; NASA Release 91-12; AP, Jan 25/91; NY Times, Jan 26/91; AP, Jan 31/91)
NASA announced that the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) would resume experiments after four successful chemical releases in the past week. The releases should aid in studying the way that charged particles interact with the Earth's magnetic and electric fields by creating artificial auroras. (NASA Release 91-9; Time, Jan 21/91)
The Astro three ultraviolet and one x-ray telescopes carried by Columbia showed no traces of the decay processes of tiny invisible particles known as neutrinos, it was announced at the American Astronomical Society conference. These particles are connected with the Big Bang theory. (NY Times, Jan 18/91; W Post, Jan 18/91; LA Times, Jan 18/91; C Trin, Jan 20/91; CSM, Jan 23/91)
NASA tightened security measures at its key facilities in the United States in the wake of the Persian Gulf War and the possibilities of terrorist activity. (UPI, Jan 17/91)
NASA lowered Lockheed Space Operations Company's overall annual rating from "excellent" to "very good," with the company receiving 89 out of a possible 100 points. The lower rating resulted from several Shuttle processing accidents, of which one related to Atlantis and three to Discovery. (Fla Today, Jan 23/91)
NASA technology developed by the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, designed sensors to monitor potentially damaging heat build-up in electronic circuits. Such technology was to be used in connection with the huge television Jumbotron screen for the Superbowl game on January 27. NASA's Technology Utilization program is cited as an example of the applications that can be made from NASA findings. (NASA Release 91-10)
Scuba divers exercising on an underwater treadmill at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, are helping gather data to be used in NASA's spacesuit design. (NASA Release 91-11)
Navy Captain Michael L. Coats, the astronaut to command the Discovery mission, said that astronauts in Discovery, although with no military charge, would seek to observe the Persian Gulf War in their flight. The Discovery's military payloads would provide data to help the united States detect missiles fired in future wars. (H Post, Jan 24/91)
NASA announced that it had signed an agreement with the National Science Foundation (NSF) by which the two organizations would use Antarctica as a testing site to prepare for future missions to the Moon and Mars. The agreement would enable NASA to benefit from NSF's 33 years of experience in scientific research in the harsh Antarctic environment. Scientists believe that Antarctica's climate, terrain, temperature, and isolation provide an environment on Earth that most closely parallels the conditions of isolation and stress to be faced on long-duration human missions in space. (NASA Release 91-13)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA would ask Congress to increase its budget by 13 percent in the next fiscal year, emphasizing projects with short-term ecological benefits and helping schools and teachers to encourage students with an aptitude for mathematics and science. Truly added that manned space flights would be downgraded in importance compared with unmanned programs and pure scientific research, particularly research that would benefit the life sciences and development of a new rocket engine. (SF Chron, Jan 25/91)
Soviet media reported that two Soviet cosmonauts spent six hours on a spacewalk outside their Mir Space Station, completing the installation of two telescopic booms that would enable the transfer of solar batteries from one part of the Space Station to another. They also installed laser reflectors that could be used as beacons for unmanned space ferries and Space Shuttles arriving at Mir. (AP, Jan 26/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly gave an interview to Space News about NASA's role in promoting space education and the agency's future plans. One of the difficulties is attracting greater numbers of women and minorities. He discussed NASA's plan to establish a new office of human resources and the need for more people schooled in Earth sciences.  In an editorial in the same issue, the publication commended NASA for its attention to education in high-technology fields and efforts to recruit women and minorities. It also pointed out the number of laid off workers in the aerospace industry as a result of the sharp downturn in the defense industry as potential employees in the space field. (Space News, Feb 4-10/91)
The Houston Chronicle interviewed a number of experts concerning NASA's Space Station redesign, based on a congressional instruction that the design be reviewed. The consensus was that as much of the existing design would be kept as possible, with some experts fearing that the changes may be too timid. (H Chron, Jan 27/91)
NASA announced that the University of Tennessee-Calspan's Center for Advanced Space Propulsion (CASP), Tullahoma, had selected three firms for the launch and recovery of the unmanned, Earth-orbital Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET) space system. Space Industries, Inc., Houston, would be responsible for payload integration, orbital operations, and recovery system and services; Space Services, Inc., Houston, would be in charge of the launch vehicle and services; and Westinghouse Electric Company, Millersville, Maryland, would supervise systems engineering and the service module. The initial funding for COMET in 1991 was $10.5 million. (NASA Release 91-14)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a message to all NASA staff on the fifth anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. He cited the important lessons learned, the stress on flight safety, and the successful Shuttle missions since that time. (NASA Release N91-8)
NASA announced the selection of 39 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). SBIR seeks to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small business in meeting federal research and development needs, and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. The awards included 36 small, high technology firms located in 17 states and were valued at about $19 million. (NASA Release 91-15; Huntsville Times, Jan 29/91)
NASA announced that the next Shuttle launch, scheduled for late February, would be delayed until early March in order to replace three thrusters used to steer the ship in orbit. During the eight-day flight, the 44 thrusters would be used to maneuver the ship into unusual positions. The ship's re-entry engines also would be fired so a satellite temporarily placed in orbit could observe the rocket exhaust plumes. The aim was better identification of the plumes of missiles aimed against the United States in future wars. NASA also displayed the Gamma Ray Observatory scheduled to be carried into orbit in early April. (P Inq, Jan 30/91; B Sun, Jan 30/91; USA Today, Jan 30/91; AP, Jan 30/91; NY Times, Jan 31/91)
NASA announced that the Ohio State University's Center for Mapping, Columbus, one of 16 NASA Centers for the Commercial Development of Space, had developed a system that would reduce the amount of time and money needed to gather information on highway conditions. The system uses both positioning data from the Defense Department's Navstar Global Positioning Satellite Systems and images taken from a pair of video cameras mounted in a standard van. The system would help locate roads needing repair and other hazardous conditions, including the location of fatal accidents. The 18-month project, called the Global Positioning System for Transportation Planning, involved the Federal Highway Administration, 38 state transportation departments, and the Canadian province of Alberta. The states had contributed $565,000 to the project, and NASA had given $280,000. The system also is ideal for mapping and the mobile unit enables digitizing to be done immediately. (NASA Release 91-16)
Robert Gibson, an astronaut removed from command of a Shuttle mission for violating flight-safety rules, unofficially has set a new altitude record of 27,000 feet in a single-engine Cassutt Formula 1 "midget" racing plane. (UPI, Feb 1/91; LA Times, Feb 3/91)
Red Star announced that pieces of the Soviet 40-ton Salyut 7 Space Station and the attached Cosmos-1686 cargo ferry will fall to Earth on February 6 or 7. The expected location of the fall site was not known. (LA Times, Feb 1/91; AP, Feb 2/91; C Trin, Feb 3/91; W Times, Feb 4/91)
Orion Network Systems of Rockville, Maryland, has been gradually creating a private satellite communications network for businesses in the United States and Europe. It was awaiting approval for its financing from the Federal Communications Commission. The satellites were to be built by British Aerospace Limited and the launch was to be handled by General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services of San Diego, which would use Atlas rockets. (W Post, Feb 2/91)
NASA announced its Mixed Fleet Manifest for the Space Shuttle and expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) for the next three years. Of the 26 Space Shuttle flights, 18 would be for NASA payloads or joint NASA/international payloads. The Shuttle was to focus on a variety of space science activities supporting life sciences, materials science, and astrophysics investigations. The remaining flights would consist of two international Spacelab missions, two flights of the commercially provided Spacehab module, the retrieval and reboost of a stranded commercial communications satellite, and three Department of Defense (DOD) missions. Seven Space Shuttle launches were planned for 1991, eight in 1992, and 11 in 1993.
The 10-day UN conference on global warming opened on February 4 in Chantilly, Virginia. The conference was to discuss the greenhouse effect and worldwide temperature rises. For the first time, the United States pledged at the conference to stabilize the amount of "greenhouse" gases it emits into the air. (W Post, Feb 3/91; USA Today, Feb 4/91; B Sun, Feb 5/91; NY Times, Feb 5/91; W Post, Feb 5/91; W Times, Feb 5/91; LA Times, Feb 5/91)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, began analyzing the photos of Venus produced by the Magellan Spacecraft. JPL operates Magellan for NASA. The pictures show a tortured landscape featuring extreme volcanism, particularly surface bulges 30 to 140 miles wide called "arachnoids." (LA Times, Feb 4/91)
The Bush Administration proposed $14.7 billion for NASA for FY1972, an increase of $1.2 billion. The proposal would allow starting a new family of rockets to lift heavy payloads. The budget would also authorize NASA and the Air Force to spend $175 million each to develop a new launching system by the end of the 1990s. The Administration also proposed almost $2 billion to continue development of a Space Station and almost $1 billion for NASA's "Mission to Planet Earth" as part of the study of global environmental change. (NY Times, Feb 5/91; USA Today, Feb 5/91; WSJ, Feb 5/91; UPI, Feb 4/91; UPI, Feb 5/91; Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 was expected to fall today. Unexpectedly high solar activity in recent years had increased atmospheric drag on the station and speeded its orbital decay. (NY Times, Feb 6/91; USA Today, Feb 6/91; UPI, Feb 6/91)
NASA announced it would be a major participant in the multi-agency High Performance Computing and Communication (HPCC) to begin in FY 1992. NASA had the lead role in coordinating interagency software and algorithm research and development. In this connection, NASA would buy advanced test beds from industry and use test beds developed by the Department of Defense to evaluate and build initial applications. NASA would also develop software to solve major computational challenges involved with robotic design and control. NASA centers would be equipped with the latest network communications to support the National Research and Education Network and NASA would expand the HPCC research program of NASA-funded research institutes and through NASA grants to universities.
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of 26 Space Grant State Consortia as a result of Phase II competition. Recipients receive four-year, $150,000-per-year grants to initiate new programs. States receiving such grants were Alaska, Delaware, District of Columbia, Indiana, Kansas, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oregon, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin. Twelve states with limited aerospace activity would receive similar grants to enhance aerospace research and infrastructure. They were Arkansas, Connecticut, Idaho, Louisiana, Maine, Montana, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, South Carolina, and West Virginia. Both grants require partial matching nonfederal funds and would be used in part to sponsor fellowship programs for undergraduate and graduate students. (NASA Release 91-19)
NASA announced it had modified its Space Shuttle contract with Rockwell International Corporation's Space Division at an additional cost of $27.6 million. The modification entailed the design, fabrication, testing, and installation of main propulsion system 14-inch disconnects into orbiter umbilicals in order to increase flight safety. Two other companies were involved in the work: Parker Hannifin and Martin Marietta. (NASA Release C91-g)
NASA announced its award of a $191 million, five-year contract to Krug Life Sciences, Houston, for medical operations and research support services. The work, covering the period March 1, 1991 through February 29, 1996, was to be done at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-f)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly briefed members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on the President's 1992 budget request of $15.7 billion for NASA, a 13.6 percent increase from the 1991 budget. Programs emphasized were the New Launch System to be developed with the Department of Defense; LIFESAT, a reusable biosatellite; Mission to Planet Earth, which shows commitment to the ecology; and a 17 percent increase for NASA's educational activities. (NASA Release 91-21)
NASA announced that two additional releases, one of barium and one of lithium, would be made during February as part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CCRES). CCRES was a joint NASA-US Air Force program to study the Earth's magnetic fields and the effect of space radiation on spacecraft components. (NASA Release 91-22; AP, Feb 7/91)
The report of the committee appointed by the Bush Administration, headed by Norman R. Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, produced favorable comments from industry, according to the New York Times. Industrialists believe that the report showed greater realism about the space program, with its emphasis on unmanned flights and request for larger funding for NASA. In contrast to this complimentary review, Alcestis Oberg in Space News maintained that the Augustine panel's recommendations were irrelevant and a new agency was needed to pursue moon and Mars initiatives. (NY Times, Feb 7/91; SP News, Feb 4-10/91)
NASA announced that the Magellan spacecraft was overheating because of dust or corrosion on its mirrors. Nevertheless, it should be able to map 95 percent of Venus. (WSJ, Feb 7/91; USA Today, Feb 7/91; AP, Feb 7/91)
Salyut 7, the Soviet Space Station, crashed into Earth's atmosphere near Argentina's border with Chile. Powered by solar energy and chemical batteries, it contained no nuclear fuel or other dangerous substances. (P Inq, Feb 7/91; AP, Feb 7/91; UPI, Feb 7/91; W Times, Feb 8/91; NY Times, Feb 8/91; UPI, Feb 8/91; AP. Feb 8/91; C Trin, Feb 8/91)
An editorial in Florida Today referred to NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's comment about NASA giving serious consideration to consolidating Shuttle operations at Kennedy Space Center. He estimated this would cut Shuttle costs 25 percent. Such a move would also result in consolidating Shuttle management, as recommended in the Advisory Committee report. (Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
Washington Technology reported that a major effort is underway to move NASA's Space Station program office to a site near Goddard Space Flight Center (SFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. Other sites being considered are Johnson SFC near Houston or Marshall SFC in Huntsville, Alabama. (Washington Technology, Feb 7/91)
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) chief scientist William Kinard of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, revealed that 200 experimenters in nine countries were analyzing the data gathered by the LDEF satellite that Space Shuttle Columbia rescued in 1990. The plan was to retrieve LDEF after 11 months, but delays and loss of Challenger stranded LDEF for five years and nine months. Nevertheless experiments were conducted and interesting findings were being discovered. (CSM, Feb 8/91)
Jim Gunn, an astronomer at Princeton University and designer of equipment for the Digital Sky Survey, was planning a map of the universe that would fit in a desk drawer. Based on Gunn's work on the Hale telescope in California, the Sky Survey's 100-inch "smart" telescope would perch on top of the Sacramento Mountains in New Mexico. (W Times, Feb 8/91; LA Times, Feb 17/91)
Lowell Hawkinson, chairman of the Gensym Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts, which created the G2 system, announced that Biosphere II, would be initiated in March. Biosphere II is an environment controlled by the advanced computer program G2 and designed for eight scientists to seal themselves inside for two years. NASA had been using G2 on its Shuttle flights to control certain functions since October 1989. According to Tony Heindel, a light controller at Mission Control at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, G2 monitors 16,000 data points per second, gathering such information as temperature, voltages, availability of jet thrusters, and condition of on-board computers and instruments. (NY Times, Feb 10/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reviewed The Steel Albatross, a novel about an underwater craft undetectable by sonar,just published by NASA astronaut Scott Carpenter. Concurrently, it reviewed Aurora 7, an account of the way in which various actual and fictional people were affected by Carpenter's flight in the Aurora 7 space capsule. (P Inq, Feb 10/91; W Post, Feb 17/91)
NASA announced that the German Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) began a new phase of operation on February 8. It started pointed observations of x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high energy phenomena. The US ROSAT Science Data Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, will process and distribute ROSAT pointed data and provide facilities for the scientific analysis of the data. Britain is also cooperating in this venture, which involved the original ROSAT launching from Cape Canaveral, Florida on June 1, 1990 on a Delta expendable launch vehicle. (NASA Release 91-23)
Wayne Littles, head of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center office charged with designing a heavy-lift launch vehicle for military and NASA purposes, commented on work underway. Still in the early stages, the heaviest lift models would carry at least 200,000 to 250,000 pounds. New advanced solid rocket boosters were planned as well as work on developing an unmanned version of the Shuttle, called Shuttle C. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 11/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced a nationwide search for a senior official to direct NASA's activities to send people to the Moon and to explore Mars. This announcement represented an implementation of a recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program to create a new Office of Exploration under an Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 91-24)
The NASA Advisory Council of 25 leaders in industry, government, and academia sent a letter to Vice President Dan Quayle commending NASA Administrator Truly's quick action in implementing the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program. (NASA Release N91-10)
The National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, developed a policy directive intended to strengthen the nation's commercial space industry. The policy creates guidelines requiring the government to act more like a private business in dealing with space-related enterprises. It calls for increased efforts to negotiate trade agreements to reduce or eliminate subsidies provided by foreign governments, including the Soviet Union, China, and Japan, to their commercial satellite-launching services. The policy would also encourage government agencies, particularly NASA and the Defense Department, to support space activity by entering into cooperative research and development efforts with private industry and assuming some of the financial risk; basing contracts with rocket and satellite makers on "performance standards" rather than complex military specifications; and taking into account the government's overhead and development costs in assessing bids by private firms. (P Inq, Feb 12/91; UPI, Feb 13/91)
An ongoing NASA project released a lithium canister from a satellite, producing a red sphere. Rick Howard, one of 40 scientists working on the project, said the purpose was to try to inject an artificial lithium plasma cloud to see if precipitation can be increased. (AP, Feb. 12/91)
The Christian Science Monitor discussed the cases of Ulysses, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), and Hipparcos, an ESA satellite. Ulysses, which was designed to study the environment over the north and south poles of the sun, developed a wobble that threatened its usefulness, but the problem was resolved. Hipparcos was designed to measure the positions, motions, and distances of more than 100,000 stars. It also developed orbit problems but to date measured more than 1 million stars. (CSM, Feb 13/91)
President Bush's 1992 budget included a proposed $15.7 billion for NASA, representing 8.5 percent real growth after inflation. The request contained no new projects except for $175 million for start-up work on a more cost-effective system of launch vehicles, as recommended by the Advisory Committee. (W Post, Feb 13/91)
NASA General Counsel Edward Frankle announced that Johnson Space Center's Leo Monford was NASA's Inventor of the Year. The award, to be presented March 28, was for a docking alignment system called Targeting and Reflective Alignment Concept, or TRAC. Used in combination with another of Monford's inventions, a Magnetic End Effector, it could change the shape of future robot arms, satellites, and Space Stations.
University of Colorado astronomer Jack Brandt talked of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its fuzzy focusing. Discoveries included proof that Pluto has a moon and dramatic photographs of a star spewing hot gases during its birth in the Orion constellation. (W Times, Feb 14/91)
John Guest, a geologist from University College, London, was working at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory on data from the Magellan spacecraft's mission to Venus. Evidence of volcanic action exists although Magellan's mapping mission, begun September 15, 1990, thus far reveal no volcano erupting. (AP, Feb 14/91)
NASA officials announced that its X-29 experimental aircraft flew five times on January 25, setting a new record for daily flights from the Ames-Dryden test center. The second of two X-29s built by NASA, it was conducting high angle of attack test studies and military utility in a joint project with the Air Force. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 14/91)
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
The Washington Times cited a congressional report, Orbiting Debris: A Space Environmental Problem, by the Office of Technology Assessment. The report warned of problems to space missions from debris in space and the need for international negotiations in this regard. (W Times, Feb 15/91; UPI, Feb 19/91)
The 10-day global warming conference of some 100 nations ended with little agreement. Delegates agreed to establish two working groups to consider a draft of a treaty at a second round of talks later in 1991. The United States and other countries hesitated to commit themselves on specific emission reductions. (W Times, Feb 15/91; USA Today, Feb 15/91; W Post, Feb 15/91)
The media reported that Shuttle Discovery was hauled to its launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Scheduled for a March blastoff, its mission was to learn more about how to detect rockets in flight, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative missile defense program. (UPI, Feb 15/91; LA Times, Feb 16/91)
NASA Combined Release and Radiation Effects satellite released a barium canister to gain data about the magnetosphere and more reliable predictions of magnetic disturbances in space. (AP, Feb 17/91; W Times, Feb 18/91)
Stanley G. Rosen, retired director of long-range planning for the US Air Force Space Division in El Segundo, California, and vice president for public policy of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said the Persian Gulf War demonstrated the need for radar satellites. Such satellites could penetrate clouds and battlefield smoke as well as monitoring all troop movements and could possibly detect Scud missile launchers. (LA Times, Feb 18/91)
An editorial commended the guidelines for invigorating the commercial space industry developed by the National Space Council and signed by President George Bush. Although stating that the guidelines would be difficult to follow and tough to enforce, it found the government's definition of a commercial venture helpful as well as the expansion of cooperative programs between the government and the private sector in commercial space. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91; AvWk, Feb 18/91)
William Lenoir, NASA space flight chief, outlined the revised plans for the Space Station to the National Space Council on February 5. The revision would save $6 billion over five years and would cut in half the number of astronauts to live aboard as of September 1999. The new design would assemble the station in larger pieces on the ground, thus requiring 23 Space Shuttle flights to build instead of the original 34 flights. The plan is due to Congress on March 5 but may be extended to a later date. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91)
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) ordered an independent engineering review of NASA's plans for the Earth Observing System to study global climate change. An Administration official said OMB wanted an assessment of the advisability of large, complex satellites and of the specific sensors and launch plans. (AvWk, Feb 18/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, awarded Metric Constructors, Inc., of Tampa, a $56,215,000 contract to build the Space Station Processing Facility. The 457,000-square-foot facility was to contain preflight and processing points for Space Station Freedom as well as 63,000 square feet of dedicated payload processing space. (NASA Release C91-h)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, Director John M. Klineberg announced that Peter T. Burr had been named Deputy Director of the center. Burr had served as Director of Flights Projects at Goddard since August 1989. (NASA Release 91-28)
NASA released its first in a new series of educational video products entitled "Space Basics," illustrating orbital science. A teacher's guide is also available. NASA planned that each future Shuttle mission would have a teacher's guide, "Mission Watch," and following the mission a summary report, "Mission Highlights." (NASA Release 91-29)
NASA officials reported that a quality inspector had discovered a cracked hinge in a fuel line door of Shuttle Discovery. The effect of the finding on Discovery's tentative launch date of March 9 was unknown. (UPI, Feb 19/91; AP, Feb 19/91; B Sun, Feb 20/91; W Post, Feb 20/91; NY Times, Feb 20/91; WSJ, Feb 20/91; USA Today, Feb 20/91; W Times, Feb 20/91; UPI, Feb 20/91)
The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors passed a resolution asking state and federal legislators to block a proposal to move NASA's Space Station program office out of Reston, Virginia. (Fairfax Journal Weekly, Feb 20-21/91)
An article on the Hubble Space Telescope commented that despite its flawed main mirror, the teamwork of the Hubble operational team combined with elaborate computer processing had enabled a rich scientific harvest. (CSM, Feb 20/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was scheduled to teach ninth grade geometry students at George Washington Junior High School, Alexandria, Virginia, on February 22. Selected as an "All-Star" engineer by the National Engineers Week 1991 committee, Truly was to share his engineering and aerospace knowledge with students. Astronauts Mary Cleave and Bonnie Dunbar were among the more than 10,000 engineers participating in the teaching program. (NASA Release N91-13)
Scientists from several US government and university laboratories reported finding the rare atmospheric isotope Beryllium-7 present on the surface of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF). Dr. Gerald J. Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, commented on the significance as twofold: to date the isotope is known as produced at much lower altitudes than the LDEF was orbiting; and only one atmospheric gas, atomic oxygen, is previously known as interacting with orbiting spacecraft. The LDEF was returned from space by Space Shuttle Columbia in January 1990 after nearly six years in Earth orbit and was still being analyzed. The LDEF program was managed by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-30)
Data analysis of cracks on the external door mechanism of Discovery continued, and fuel will be loaded without decision as to whether the launch would proceed on schedule. The door mechanisms of Space Shuttles Atlantis and Columbia were also examined, and cracks were discovered on Columbia. (NASA Release, Feb 21/91; C Trin, Feb 22/91)
Dr. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that Magellan to date had mapped more than 58 percent of Venus, including Aphrodite Terra, the largest of the highland regions. Various hypotheses exist regarding the formation of the different "continents" on Venus, and the mapping should clarify the situation. (NASA Release 91-31)
The Soviet bank, Moscow Narodny, financing the May Anglo-Soviet mission aboard the Soviet Mir Space Station, announced that Helen Sharman, a chemist, would be Britain's first astronaut. (AP, Feb 22/91; LA Times, Feb 23/91)
Scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that the ozone hole over the South Pole did not appear to be improving. The ozone loss in 1990 equaled the previous low detected in 1987 in "depth, duration, and area." The findings were based on NASA's satellite observations of a complete cross section of the ozone layer. The findings complemented measurements at certain altitudes taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sounding balloons. (UPI, Feb 22/91)
NASA announced its closing for security reasons of the public viewing site for watching Space Shuttle landings at Edwards Air Force Base until the end of the Persian Gulf War. (Daily News, Feb 22/91)
Nippon Television Network asked to borrow from the Smithsonian the Space Shuttle Enterprise, an Apollo capsule, a moon conveyor vehicle, a rocket, and a spacesuit. The Enterprise is stored at Dulles Airport and transporting it--the back of a 747 or by ship would be difficult. The space gear was to be used to celebrate the company's fortieth anniversary in Tokyo in 1993. (W Post, Feb 23/91)
Nature quoted scientists at NASA's Atmospheric Sciences Division in Hampton, Virginia, as reporting that forest fires--previously thought to be a major source of nitrous oxide--actually produce only about 7 percent of the amount in the atmosphere. The importance of the source of nitrous oxide relates to its action in the destruction of Earth's ozone layer. (W Post, Feb 25/91)
Bill Moyers, a member of a national panel of experts involved in Project Censored, a compendium of the most underreported stories of 1990, dealt with NASA and the ozone. Soviet scientists first raised environmental questions about the solid rocket fuel used by the Space Shuttles. They said it left 250 tons of hydrochloric acid eating up the ozone layer after every launch. The Earth Island Journal and the San Francisco Chronicle reported the story. On the program, environmental activist Helen Caldicott spoke of chlorine molecules that chomp up ozone molecules. (P Inq, Feb 25/91)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying 10 materials and biotechnology experiments, would be launched on March 29 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The mission was sponsored by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for Commercial Development of Space. Space Data Division of Orbital Sciences Corporation would provide rocket and launch services to lift the payload approximately 400 miles into space. In addition to UAH CMDS, four other NASA commercial development centers and two industrial firms were involved. (NASA Release 91-33)
Eugene Kranz, Director of the Mission Operations Directorate (MOD) at Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the establishment of a Space Station Mission Operation Project Office within MOD. The new office, headed by Charles R. Lewis, was to have responsibility for the development and implementation of Space Station Freedom flight operations. (NASA Release 91-35)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement between the United States and Canada to participate in a five-year RADARSAT Earth-observation satellite mission. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was one of the United States signers. RADARSAT was scheduled for launch in June 1994 using an expendable launch vehicle provided by NASA. RADARSAT would collect valuable economic and scientific data on ice and ocean surveillance and natural resource management, including surveillance of natural disasters. (NASA Release 91-34)
NASA announced that on February 21 test personnel at its John C. Stennis Space Center, Mississippi, had conducted a 1.5 second ignition test on a new turbopump developed by Pratt and Whitney for the Space Shuttle Main Engine. The company test program, underway since 1986, includes a partnership with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. The pumps use newer design technology and materials. Stennis Space Center is NASA's facility for testing all Space Shuttle Main Engines that power the orbiter during its first 8 1/2 minutes of flight. (NASA Release 91-36)
NASA managers were described as divided over whether Discovery could be safely launched on March 9 or needed to be taken off the launch pad and repaired. (UPI, Feb 27/91)
NASA announced that Administrator Richard H. Truly would present the 1990 George M. Low Trophy, NASA's Quality and Excellence Award, to Bob Minor, President, Space Systems Division, Rockwell International Corporation. The award, to be presented at company facilities in Downey, California, recognizes contractors for outstanding achievement in quality and productivity improvement and total quality management. (NASA Release N91-14)
NASA announced its award of a $38.5 million contract to RMS Associates, Linthicum, Maryland, to manage and operate the NASA Scientific and Technical Information Facility in Linthicum. (NASA Release C91-i)
William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, announced that NASA was sending Space Shuttle Discovery from the launch pad back to the hangar to repair cracked door hinges. Shuttle director Robert Crippen said Discovery should be ready to fly in late April or early May. (AP, Feb 28/91; P Inq, Mar 1/91; NY Times. Mar 1/91; WSJ, Mar 1/91; W Times, Mar 1/91; USA Today, Mar 1/91; W Post, Mar 1/91; UPI, Mar 1/91)
NASA announced its selection of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC), Fairfax, Virginia, for a contract to provide ocean color data. These data were to support research performed by the Laboratory of Hydrospheric Processes, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The contract would run for about 7.5 years, of which 2.5 years would be development time and five years of data production. The mission's scientific objective was to measure changes in ocean color that indicate where concentrations of phytoplankton and chlorophyll lie on the surface of the ocean. For global change research, measuring concentrations of phytoplankton are essential in understanding the role of oceans in the global carbon cycle. The phytoplankton's photosynthesis stores vast amounts of carbon and understanding better how oceans store and release carbon will help understand global climate.
The New York Times carried an extensive article with diagrams describing many of the proposed reductions contemplated by NASA in the cost and role of its orbiting Space Station. The mission was to study the long-term effects of space on astronauts and other living things and to see whether the nearly weightless environment offers commercial possibilities. NASA was scheduled to deliver the modified proposal to Congress March 5. (NYT, Mar 5/91; W Times, Mar 5/91)
In a commentary originally for the Christian Science Monitor, Richard Miniter cited the British television program, "The Greenhouse Conspiracy." The program highlighted the scientific uncertainties of global warming, relying on testimony from NASA experts, among others. (B Sun, Mar 5/91)
NASA selected the 49-foot Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, for seven launches worth about $56 million, with an option for three more. This contract was additional to one for about $43.5 million for ocean observation. (W Post, Mar 5/91)
Ceremonies connected with NASA Administrator Richard Truly's presentation to Rockwell International Space Systems Division, Palmdale, of the 1990 George M. Low Trophy to a contractor for outstanding achievement in quality and productivity improvement were featured at some length. About half the Palmdale work force were scheduled to be laid off after Endeavour's completion; the remaining 450 workers beginning in July would modernize the Shuttle Columbia. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 5/91)
NASA engineers studied a tiny crack on the hinge mechanism of Shuttle Atlantis but planned to go ahead with a launch in April. Atlantis was scheduled to ferry into orbit the Gamma Ray Observatory, a Hubble Space Telescope-class astronomical instrument built to study extremely high energy radiation from deep space. (NASA Release, "STS-37 Mission Advisory"; UPI, Mar 6/91)
An article pointed out that space exploration was not a short-term mission. Therefore, given the age of several existing Space Shuttles, Congress should plan ahead and appropriate funds for additional Shuttles for the 21st century. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 7/91)
NASA's Earth Observing System faced possible funding cuts as a result of questioning by Representative Ralph Hall, chairman of the House Space Subcommittee, and his colleagues. Concerns exist also within NASA regarding program costs. Tension reportedly existed between NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, over the amount of the data system to be centered at Goddard as opposed to other NASA sites. Some congressional members questioned NASA's accountability and deplored rivalry between NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
Representative Lamar Smith, Republican, Texas, wrote NASA Administrator Richard Truly expressing concern that NASA's Comet rocket program may keep new firms from entering the commercial space industry. Truly's office was preparing a reply. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator, of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, testified before the House Science Subcommittee that the redesign of Space Station Freedom had limited the scope of the laboratory, eliminating experiments in astronomy, physics, and earth sciences. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
Scientists of NASA's Magellan Project, together with the US Geological Survey, invited the public to propose names of notable women for the many impact craters and large volcanic vents being discovered on Venus. Names sent to Magellan offices at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory were to be compiled for the Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature, a committee of the International Astronomical Union (IAU). The IAU, which makes the final approval, meets only every three years and thus new names cannot be considered until 1994. (NASA Release 91-38; W Times, Mar 22/91; C Trin, Mar 27/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Ray J. Arnold as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs. He replaced Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer, who became Deputy Assistant Administrator for Policy and Interagency Coordination. (NASA Release 91-39)
An editorial commended NASA for being more realistic in its revised plans for a Space Station and particularly for decreasing its emphasis on the role of humans in space. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 8/91)
Joel S. Levine, a senior research scientist in the Atmospheric Sciences Division of NASA's Langley Research Center, commented on NASA's role in researching the contribution of fires to the "greenhouse effect." He indicated that the oil well fires in Kuwait could be the largest single contributor to this effect. However, forest fires and agricultural burning actually provided more carbon dioxide. NASA scientists studying the problem use satellite findings in their analyses. (Daily Press, Mar 10/91)
Rockwell International announced that it would lay off 450 workers assembling the Space Shuttle Endeavour after its delivery to NASA in late April. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 10/91)
NASA spokeswoman Vera Hirschberg said former American University president Richard Berenzen was working for Booz-Allen and Hamilton in investigating the societal benefits of the Space Exploration Initiative on behalf of NASA. (AP, Mar 11/91)
Bruce Bunin, manager of Advanced Commercial Programs at Douglas Aircraft Company, stated that McDonnell Douglas Corporation had won a contract for up to $8 million from NASA's Langley Research Center to conduct system studies on the next-generation commercial supersonic transport. The five-year contract was part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program aimed at resolving environmental and economic issues and developing technology for a High Speed Civil Transport (HSCT). The HSCT team was to study atmospheric effects, noise and sonic boom reduction, advanced materials and lightweight structures, supersonic laminar flow control, engine cycles, and airline economics. (PR Newswire, Mar 11/91)
An interview featured Lawrence Ross, Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, a 30-year-old facility with 3,000 civil servants. Priorities at Lewis include research in propulsion, electric power generation, and advanced communications. Ross answered various questions about the Space Station, solar dynamic power systems, nuclear propulsion research, the continuing need for maintenance funds, and the role of Lewis in the National Aerospace Plane program. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
An editorial raised the fairness issue with regard to NASA's anchor tenancy contracts to help the commercial space business. To date Spacehab, American Mobile Satellite Corporation, and Orbital Sciences Corporation have such contracts. The editorial advocated that other agencies, such as the Department of Justice in the case of mobile services and environmental and ocean agencies in the case of fish research, should reimburse NASA for these costs. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
In their column, Jack Anderson and Dale van Atta commented on the strong efforts of Texas congressmen to have NASA move Space Station Freedom headquarters from Reston, Virginia to Houston. The headquarters were moved from Houston to Reston in 1987. The cost of such a move would be at least $26 million, and it would probably delay NASA's program at least a year. (W Post, Mar 12/91)
A lengthy article discussed the work of Dr. Allan R. Sandage, a former assistant of Edwin P. Hubble and his heir. Like Hubble, Sandage is an observational cosmologist concerned with investigating the galaxies and the implications of the expanding universe. Using the Carnegie Institution, which has telescopes at Mount Wilson, as his base, he was working on a two-volume atlas of galaxies. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
Scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico developed a new technique of "clustering" to speed the analysis of satellite images. The technique was being adapted for use in crop forecasting, land-use studies, pollution monitoring, and mineral and oil prospecting. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
NASA announced that as a result of the work of its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the arcjet thruster technology had been selected for station keeping use on AT&T's Telstar 4 communications satellites. Arcjet systems offer a significant improvement in propellant use over chemical and other electrically augmented thrusters, thus increasing the satellite's on-orbit lifetime or payload mass. (NASA Release 91-40)
Fairfax County Board Chairman Audrey Moore argued that if NASA's Space Station management facility were moved from its Reston, Virginia headquarters, at least half of its highly skilled workers would quit, delaying the Space Station program for months or years. The questioning about the status of the Reston facility resulted from a congressional order to NASA in 1990 that it overhaul the management structure for the Space Station project. (W Post, Mar 14/91)
Chase Manhattan Bank granted $64 million five-year financing to Spacehab Inc. Spacehab was building a large pressurized chamber to fit into the storage bay of the Space Shuttle, giving the astronauts or technicians more room to run experiments. Spacehab planned to send its first unit aloft in December 1992. It obtained capital from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Aeritalia of Italy, which was designing and building most of the module and its thermal controls, and the Mitsubishi Corporation of Japan. (NY Times, Mar 14/91)
Grumman Corporation announced a cut of 110 more employees at its Space Station Program Support Division in Reston, Virginia. The cuts resulted from NASA's decision to reduce the scope of the Space Station project. (PR Newswire, Mar 13/91; W Times, Mar 14/91; NY Times, Mar 14/91)
Fred Gordon, spacecraft operations manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that NASA officially had retired the Dynamics Explorer-1 (DE-1) satellite on February 28, 1991, after nine years of collecting scientific data. The decision was based on an evaluation of the costs for DE-1's operations compared to the expected value of the science gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the program, the spacecraft's cameras could see an entire Auroral zone, and the quality and quantity of data produced by the two DE spacecraft far exceeded expectations. DE-2 ended operations February 19, 1983. (NASA Release 91-42)
The Synthesis Group, a White House study group, planned to recommend US development of nuclear-propelled rockets to send manned expeditions to Mars, according to Aviation Week and Space Tehcnology. NASA established the group, chaired by retired Air Force General Thomas P. Stafford, an Apollo astronaut, to gather innovative ideas for lunar and Mars exploration. (AP, Mar 15/91;
The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council stated that a smaller, simpler new design for NASA's Space Station did not meet the basic research requirements for which it was to be built. This development came as NASA was preparing to solicit Congress for its annual funding and when the European Space Agency and other international partners had accepted NASA's new plan. (W Post, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91; B Sun, Mar 16/91; NY Times, Mar 16/91; C Trin, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
Dr. Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, announced that the Space Studies Board has long opposed justifying Space Station Freedom solely on scientific merit. However, the Board recognizes, and NASA concurs, that "there are national considerations for building a Space Station other than scientific research." Congress and NASA decided to build the Station in an evolutionary way so that ultimately it would meet the principal scientific research requirements intended. The Station represents a significant part of the long-term goals for the civil space program set by the President. NASA was confident that this was the time to proceed. (NASA Editors' Note N91-17)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it was building a $337 million space robot, technically a Flight Telerobotic Servicer, to be used in constructing Space Station Freedom. The robot was to have artificial computer intelligence and video cameras on each wrist and the top of its body. (B Sun, Mar 15/91)
A tiny crack was found on one of the substitute Shuttle hinges sent from Endeavour to spaceship Discovery. Dr. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said the crack was too small to be a cause for concern. (NY Times, Mar 15/91; W Times, Mar 15/91; USA Today, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91
William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said discussion was taking place concerning the possibility of a Soviet cosmonaut flying on a US Shuttle and a US astronaut spending six months on the Russian Space Station Mir. (UPI, Mar 15/91)
NASA rolled the Shuttle Atlantis to a launch pad at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for a scheduled April 6 liftoff. (W Post, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
Later in the 1990s, NASA will launch the Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle (STEP) to compare the inertial and gravitational mass of two objects suspended in orbit. The launch relates to an international effort to study gravity and proposals for locating the National Science Foundation's $211 million Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory. (W Post, Mar 17/91)
Two military contractors, Boeing Helicopters and Bell Helicopter/Textron were test-flying models of the V-22 Osprey for the Marines. Some Congressional supporters are promoting the plane for military use as well as civilian flight. The other tilt-technology company, Ishida, based its tilt-wing plane on technology pioneered by LTV Corporation and Canadair from the 1950s through the 1970s. (C Trin, Mar 17/91)
NASA announced that the spacecraft Galileo would execute a trajectory correction maneuver on March 20 to help aim it for the first-ever flyby of an asteroid next October. To perform the maneuver, Galileo would fire its small thrusters on and off during a three and one half hour period, thus changing its speed about five miles per hour. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, manages the Galileo project. (NASA Release 91-43)
NASA issued a summary fact sheet on its earth science research programs. Past NASA satellite missions used various remote-sensing instruments to study parts of the Earth system. The Coastal Zone Color Scanner on Nimbus-7 observed the biological productivity of the oceans. The Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), on the same satellite, returned 12 years of data on global ozone levels and helped identify the Antarctic "ozone hole." In the 1990s, NASA was to study the interaction of all environmental factors air, water, land, and biological life, that make up the Earth system--to help decision makers understand global environmental trends and protect the planet.
NASA's scaled-back design for Space Station Freedom was to be considered at a National Space Council meeting at the White House. The National Space Council members include members of the Cabinet, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, the White House Chief of Staff, the presidential science adviser, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (W Post, Mar 18/91)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled the most detailed images of Mars ever taken. Scientists said the telescope made possible a long-term program to monitor seasonal climate and surface changes on Mars that previously had been impossible. According to the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore, the images revealed Martian features as small as 31 miles across. (W Post, Mar 18/91; UPI, Mar 18/91; CSM, Mar 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
Launch Box - Your TV Connection to Outer Space, a new 14-episode program, is an educational series created by teachers for classroom use. NASA, Nickelodeon, and the Astronauts Memorial Foundation joined to fund the series, whose first segment was scheduled to appear on May 9. The series includes footage of actual NASA missions as well as lesson plans for teachers. (Business Wire, Mar 18/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
NASA spokeswoman Lisa Malone said three days of torrential rain at Cape Canaveral, Florida, had failed to damage Space Shuttle Atlantis. (B Sun, Mar 19/91; USA Today, Mar 19/91)
A report cited efforts of Byron L. Dorgan of North Dakota, chairman of the new Democratic task force on government waste, to point to NASA's "Super Guppy," a large transport plane, as an example of waste to be eliminated. (W Post, Mar 19/91)
The National Research Council in its report The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics, after two years of study recommended that more modest instruments than the Hubble Space Telescope and only a few large observatories be developed. The next instrument, the $617 million Gamma Ray Observatory, was to be launched in April 1991. During the 1990s, of more than 50 proposals made, the report endorsed only four: the $1.3 billion Space Infrared Telescope Facility; an $80 million infrared-optimized telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii; the $115 million Millimeter Array, a group of telescopes to cover star-forming regions and galaxies; and a $55 million optical telescope to operate in the Southern Hemisphere. The report recommended several more modest programs including the $230 million Stratospheric Observatory for Far-Infrared Astronomy; the $250 million Astrometric Interferometry Mission to map positions of celestial bodies more precisely; the $15 million Large Earth-based Solar Telescope; and a $70 million spacecraft dedicated to the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopy Explorer satellite and increasing to five the Explorer satellites to be launched on rockets. (UPI, Mar 19/91; W Post, Mar 20/91; W Times, Mar 20/91; NY Times, Mar 20/91; LA Times, Mar 20/91; B Sun, Mar 24/91)
A dress rehearsal occurred for Atlantis's four-man, one-woman crew in preparation for the blastoff on April 5. Plans for the Columbia were uncertain after a decision to disassemble the space ship's boosters because data indicated a problem with the way the bases of the rockets were bolted to their mobile launch platform. (AP, Mar 19/91; UPI, Mar 20/91)
Pamela Clark, a former NASA employee who teaches chemistry, wrote an article criticizing the lack of support from upper management of the space program. She urged Congress to adequately finance a civilian space program that would recognize America's position of world leadership. (H Chron, Mar 19/91)
NASA announced that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel would present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly on March 22. (NASA editors' note N91-19)
NASA announced adjustments to the February 1991 Mixed Fleet Manifest as a result of the cracks discovered on Space Shuttle Discovery. Space Shuttle Atlantis was to fly in April; after repairs, Discovery (STS-39 mission) was to fly in May as was STS-40/Spacelab Life Sciences Mission aboard Columbia. The Tracking Data Relay Satellite Mission originally scheduled to fly on Discovery in July was to be on Atlantis in August. The Defense Support Program mission remained on Atlantis but was moved from August to December with the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. The International Microgravity Laboratory mission planned for December 1991 would become the first flight in 1992. The mixed cargo flight of the Tethered Satellite System and the European Space Agency's European Retrievable Carrier, originally scheduled for February 1992 on Discovery, would move to August 1992 on Atlantis. Other mid-1992 flights would remain as scheduled earlier. (NASA release 91-44; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91)
NASA announced delivery of its "restructuring" report to Congress, redesigning Space Station Freedom. William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, stated that NASA cut costs (by $8.9 million through 1999), simplified the design, and reduced the complexity of the project in accordance with Congress's directions and the Augustine Commission's recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be needed to achieve the human-tended phase when astronauts, brought by the Space Shuttle, work for two-week periods. A permanently manned configuration would be achieved in fiscal year 2000, consisting of the US laboratory and habitat, and European and Japanese laboratories; the Canadian Mobile Servicing System; accommodations for a live-in crew of four; and three sets of solar arrays providing 65 kilowatts of electric power. Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return Vehicle must be available to evacuate crew in emergency; this phase requires 17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scaling back some plans and resulting in some layoffs by contractors and subcontractors. (NASA release 91-45; B Sun, Mar 21/91; W Post, Mar 21/91; WSJ, Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM, Mar 22/91; W Post, Mar 22/91; B Sun, Mar 22/91; NY Times, Mar 22/91; W Times, Mar 22/91; UPI, Mar 22/91; The Citizen, Mar 24/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, for the contract to design, develop, and operate a science support center for the space-based Advanced x-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). AXAF was scheduled to be launched in 1998 as the third of NASA's Earth-orbiting Great Observatories. The center is to serve the international scientific community with an observation program for the x-ray telescope and the data it collects. (NASA release 91-46)
A group advising the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that a 10-year delay in taking action to curb global warming would mean little further increase in the level of warming predicted by the end of the 21st century. Michael E. Schlesinger, a climatologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Xingjian Jiang authored a study indicating this. Meanwhile, William K. Reilly, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, echoed this stance by saying "It's better to get it right than to act too precipitously." Scientists disagreed on the subject, and Senator Al Gore strongly opposed the Bush Administration's position. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
George Rhee, an astronomer at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, in an article in Nature, discussed the observed rate at which space is expanding in all directions, known as the Hubble constant. Rhee stated that new measurement had produced the relatively low value of 50 kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light-years) for the Hubble constant, agreeing with the estimate of Allan R. Sandage of the Carnegie Institution's observatories in Pasadena, California. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
The Council on Competitiveness in its report found the United States leading the world or holding its own in 61 of 94 technologies considered crucial to future economic progress, including rocket engines, computer software, biotechnology, and advanced welding techniques. However, it deemed the United States trailing in 33 other fields including laser technology and semiconductor chips. International competition and joint efforts to develop a supersonic plane with a new "hypersonic engine" are discussed. Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget Project, commented that although most such research would be global, many US firms still did not see themselves as part of a global industry. (W Post, Mar 21/97; P Inq, Mar 21/97)
Major General Jeremiah Pearson III appeared before the House Armed Services research and defense subcommittee to testify on behalf of the value of the V-22 Osprey. He said the plane would have been valuable in the Persian Gulf War in facilitating POW rescues. (W Times, Mar 22/97)
Physicists at Los Alamos National Laboratory discovered that huge parts of the sun's magnetic field break away and are propelled into space by the constantly blowing solar wind. This explains how the sun's magnetic field remains in balance while new magnetic field lines are formed, according to Los Alamos physicist John Phillips. (W Times, Mar 22/91)
Smithsonian officials scaled back plans for a National Museum of Air and Space annex from $325 million to $162 million. The site must be within one hour's drive of Washington and would be used largely to store airplanes. In other testimony, officials said the Space Shuttle Enterprise would not be leased to a Japanese television network. (W Post, Mar 22/91)
The Carnegie Institution of Washington assembled a group of leading scientists to honor the memory of Vannevar Bush, responsible for the creation of the National Science Foundation. The scientists deplored lagging US investment in materials, equipment, and research related to science and the fierce competition among corporations and research groups that led to secrecy. James S. Langer of the Institute for Theoretical Physics of the University of California called for "a less adversarial" National Science Foundation to restore more sense of inquiry and adventure to scientific research. (NY Times, Mar 22/91)
A pressurized laboratory to be used on Space Shuttle Columbia's late May mission was damaged when a technician removed a latch and the module tilted, making a slight tear in the module's insulating thermal blanket. NASA spokesman Mitch Varnes said damage appeared minor and should not delay the mission. (AP, Mar 22/91)
UPI stated that Columbia's launch in late May would be delayed five to 11 days by work to realign the spaceship's twin boosters. (UPI, Mar 22/91)
An independent government panel, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, praised NASA for grounding the Space Shuttle fleet in 1990 to fix fuel leaks and not sacrificing flight safety to meet a demanding launch schedule. (UPI, Mar 22/91)
Hughes Communications Galaxy is suing NASA because it refused to launch Hughes' satellites from the Space Shuttle after the Challenger accident. Edward Frankle, NASA general counsel, said the contract foresaw that Hughes might not get the service it signed up for. (B Sun, Mar 23/91; AP, Mar 25/91; W Times, Mar 26/91; W Post, Mar 26/91; P Inq, Mar 26/91; AP, Mar 26/91)
Astronaut Mark Lee said a Space Shuttle flight in Endeavour, scheduled for August 3, 1992, in which his wife Jan Davis would also participate, would be just another work assignment. The media featured them as the first married couple in space. (AP, Mar 24/91; H Post, Mar 25/91; LA Times, Mar 27/91)
Japan's space agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Development Agency (NASDA), plans to have three NASDA astronauts, including one woman doctor, participate in NASA Space Shuttle flights. (NY Times, Mar 24/91)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle stressed the importance of US space activities, including the fact that "A permanent U.S. Space Station is vital to our future technological development and economic prosperity." (H Chron, Mar 24/91)
The oldest B-52 bomber, which serves as a test-bed aircraft for the NASA Ames-Dryden facility at Edwards Air Force Base, and was built in 1952, may be facing retirement. Difficulties in obtaining spare parts were a major consideration according to Jack Levine, director of NASA's Flight Projects Division. NASA would like to substitute a newer B-52, such as the G model delivered in the early 1960s, for which spare parts are readily available. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 24/91)
An article about the 900 telephone area code cited the use of a 900 number by the National Space Institute in 1982, allowing callers to listen in on conversations between mission control and Space Shuttle crews. (AP, Mar 25/91)
Cort Durocher, executive director of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Washington and a former combat pilot and space engineer, wrote in the Houston Chronicle that while working to minimize risks, space exploration involves occasional failures and possible loss of life. (H Chron, Mar 25/91)
William Paciesas, research professor of Physics at the University of Alabama, Huntsville, is co-investigator of an experiment on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory to be carried by Space Shuttle Atlantis in April. The Burst and Transient Source Experiment was to study the origins of gamma ray bursts. Gamma rays are at the upper end of the energy spectrum, carrying more energy at higher frequency than visible light, ultraviolet light, or x-rays. (Hntsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
A space policy analyst for a major aerospace company in California questioned the lack of activity concerning the Strategic Environmental Research Program (SERP). Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat from Georgia, sponsored the program in 1990 to bring vital data and skills from the Defense and Energy departments to bear on problems of environmental research and global warming. The proposal was to select some classified defense satellite data with potential usefulness in global change research, declassify them, and make them available to researchers in global warming. Congress authorized $200 million for SERP in the 1991 Defense Authorization Act, but nothing further was heard. (SP News, Mar 25/91)
The Test Technique Demonstrator program at Langley Research Center, Langley, Virginia, provided hypersonic data on airframe/engine integration applicable to design of the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The program involves an industry consortium, which includes North American Aviation division of Rockwell International, General Dynamics, and McDonnell Douglas for airframe design, and Pratt and Whitney and Rocketdyne for the propulsion system. C. Larry Edwards, manager, NASP Aerodynamics Technology Program, said the hypersonic testing phase should be completed by 1992. (AvWk, Mar 25/91)
Several prominent scientists said NASA's revised plans skimped on research equipment, such as a large centrifuge, to study the debilitating effects of weightlessness adequately. Life science research is minimized in the new program. (NY Times, Mar 26/91)
Lieutenant General Donald Cromer, commander of the Air Force Systems Command Space Systems Division, told a Space Expo '91 audience that the next generation of rockets would lift payloads into near-Earth orbit for $300 a pound instead of the $3,600 per pound it now costs a Titan 4 launch vehicle. Cromer worked with NASA to develop an advanced launch system (ALS). The goal was to develop engines ready for testing in 1995-96 with a first flight by 1999-2000. (AP, Mar 26/91)
NASA broke ground at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a $56.2 million facility to prepare pieces of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Mar 26/91; USA Today, Mar 27/91; W Times, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; CSM, Mar 28/91)
Two Soviet cosmonauts who were running low on food and water left Space Station Mir in their Soyuz TM-11 capsule and flew to the port of their astrophysics lab, Kvant. Their cargo ship, Progress M-7, had failed twice to dock with Kvant. They linked their capsule with the port when the balky antenna was located. Another attempt will be made to attach Progress to Mir. (AP, Mar 26/91; W Times, Mar 27/91)
Marshall Space Flight Center Director Jack Lee told the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce that the news media were to blame for NASA's bad image during the preceding year. In discussing Marshall's economic impact on the area, Lee cited increases in its budget, which had risen from $1.8 billion in 1983 to a requested $3.6 billion in fiscal 1992. Of this amount, an estimated $1.08 billion would be spent in Alabama. Moreover, Marshall civil service and contractor employees represented about 12 percent of the total Huntsville population. (Hntsv Tms, Mar 26/91)
NASA's exhibit at the 39th Paris Air Show, June 13-23, was to feature a full-scale mockup of a Space Station Freedom module. The exhibit would also feature NASA programs Mission to Planet Earth and aeronautics research. (NASA Release 91-47)
NASA cleared Space Shuttle Atlantis for launch on April 5 and said the mission would include the first US walk in space in five and one half years. The five-member crew was to deploy the 17-ton Gamma Ray Observatory. (AP, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; P Inq, Mar 28/91; USA Today, Mar 28/91; W Times, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 31/91)
A solar flare, a strong release of energy from a small area of the sun, created the most intense geomagnetic storm on Earth since 1989. Such events increase radiation levels near Earth and affect electrical power systems, satellites, space missions, and communications and navigation systems. (UPI, Mar 27/91)
The European organization EUTELSAT selected the Ariane launch vehicle of Arianespace, Inc. for the fifth telecommunications second generation satellite EUTELSAT II-F5. This satellite is a Spacebus 100 spacecraft developed by Aerospatiale and MBB in Germany, with a payload provided by Alcatel. The satellite would provide full coverage of the European continent, parts of North Africa and the Middle East. (PR newswire, Mar 27/91)
A NASA scientist, in a commentary accompanying a paper published in the journal Nature, warned against interpreting the breaking apart of the Wordie Ice Shelf in the Antarctic as a foreshadowing of widespread melting of the polar ice cap. He maintained that this was a regional warming trend not observed elsewhere in Antarctica. (UPI, Mar 28/91)
An editorial criticized expenditures by Congress and the administration on Mission to Planet Earth with its environmental concerns, as opposed to spending larger sums on space exploration. (W Times, Mar 28/91)
An alert ground controller noticed that the Progress-7 cargo module was on a collision course with Soviet Space Station Mir and deflected the module. The two cosmonauts succeeded in docking the module and obtaining the food supplies. (AP, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 29/91; W Post, Mar 29/91)
NASA stated that a computer glitch temporarily put the $1.5 billion Galileo Jupiter probe into an electronic state of hibernation. Galileo is in an elliptical orbit around the sun and was scheduled to orbit Jupiter for two years in 1995. The computer problem caused the spacecraft computers to order the "safing mode" but no damage was apparent. Engineers said Galileo should be back in full operation by the time of the next computer commands in late April. (UPI, Mar 28/91)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems awarded Hercules Aerospace of Magna, Utah, a contract to continue production of graphite epoxy solid rocket motors (GEMS) for the Delta II expendable launch vehicle. (PR newswire, Mar 28/91)
Ellen Stofan, a Magellan scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said the planet Venus may be venting interior heat through giant hot spots called coronae, a form of volcanism. She indicated that Magellan data had revealed many exciting new aspects of coronae. (NASA Release 91-48)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly held a press conference during his visit to Marshall Space Flight Center for its Honors Day. Truly commended the work on Space Station design performed at Marshall and defended the Hubble Space Telescope, a Marshall-managed project. Fred Wojtalik, manager of Marshall's Hubble Space Telescope, was given NASA's Distinguished Service Medal. (Htsvl Tms, Mar 29/91)
Dr. Paul Clark, who formerly engaged in cardiovascular research for NASA, two years ago began organizing The Mandate, a grassroots movement that seeks to collect at least 100 million signatures worldwide to create a World Environmental Court of Justice. Individuals also are asked to act responsibly in an environmental sense. (UPI, Mar 31/91)
A cover story feature article on Mars dealt at length with NASA and the Bush Administration's plans for a "New Age of Exploration" that was intended to result in the "terraformation" of Mars. Life on Mars was described at length and as was planned launching of the Mars Observer. Various stages of terraformation were discussed, beginning with the first (2030-2080), which is to raise the mean temperature of the planet. The final stage (2150-2170) is conceived as having achieved a breathable medium, when Earth's vast investment would begin to pay off. (Life, Apr/91)
The media discussed the forthcoming launch of Atlantis and the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) it will set in orbit. Gamma rays have the highest of all forms of radiation and are born deep inside atomic nuclei. GRO was to canvass the entire sky over a two-year period, scanning the whole sky during the first year and concentrating on the most intriguing objects the second year. GRO was to be controlled by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists from Germany's Max Planck Institute, which supplied GRO's imaging telescope, were to assist. GRO's Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer Experiment was to be the main instrument for examining the material enveloping supernovas to look for gamma rays. University of Washington astronomer George Lake believed GRO would find in the dark matter, strange particles called "wimps" (weakly interacting massive particles) in a Milky Way object called Geminga. The Soviet spacecraft Granat, carrying a French gamma-ray detector, found an object that accretes surrounding matter, generating antimatter that in turn creates gamma rays. (P Inq, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; UPI, Apr 1/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; UPI, Apr 2/91; CSM, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; USA Today, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; AP, Apr 3/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; P Inq, Apr 5/91)
A NASA crew hauled the Shuttle Discovery to its launch pad to prepare for takeoff approximately April 25. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; W Times, Apr 2/91)
An experimental rocket motor being tested for the Air Force Titan 4 rocket exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California. No one was injured in the explosion. The Titan 4, the largest unmanned rocket in the US fleet, was scheduled to replace NASA's manned Shuttle in flying photo reconnaissance spy satellites and other heavy military payloads. (UPI, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91)
The Soviet Union launched a large new space satellite, Almaz-1, using a giant Proton booster rocket. Tass said Almaz-1 was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. The radar satellite would survey territory of the Soviet Union and other countries "in the interest of geology, cartography, ecology, and agriculture." The Almaz-1 was the first Soviet satellite to provide commercial services for the American market under long-term contracts. One of its principal customers was to be the US Defense Mapping Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed images of the Earth. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; LA Times, Apr 2/91)
News editor Budd McLaughlin of the Huntsville News denied the blame placed on the media by Jack Lee, director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, for NASA's poor public image. (Huntsville News, Apr 1/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center was testing a beta version of Com's newest OSI routing software. The software was comparable to that known as Open Shortest Path First, which allows intermediate systems to talk to each other and figure out the best way to send information on the network from point A to point B. (Government Computer News, Apr 1/91)
The newspaper summarized the controversy over the revised NASA plans for Space Station Freedom between NASA and the National  Research Council, which maintained that the scaling back had gone too far to be valuable. (San Jose Mercury-News, Apr 2/91)
Grumman Corporation announced it would eliminate 1,900 jobs by the end of 1991. The major cause was reduced US government defense spending, which included reductions in NASA's budget, leading to a scaling down of Grumman's Space Station Support Division. (AP, Apr 2/91)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
Daniel S. Greenberg, editor of Science and Government Report, a Washington newsletter, questioned the redesigned Space Station and expenditures to date on the station, citing the views of the Space Studies Board of the National Academy of Sciences. (P Inq, Apr 3/91)
The Pentagon was secretly developing a nuclear-powered rocket for boosting heavy military payloads into space as part of the Strategic Defense Initiative, known as "star wars." The program was disclosed by the Federation of American Scientists and was confirmed by government documents obtained by the New York Times. NASA reportedly was quietly evaluating the program. The Federation opposed the program because of the risk of radiation release. (B Sun, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; WSJ, Apr 3/91; W Times, Apr 4/91)
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore announced that for financial reasons it was ending its participation in the Magellan Telescope project in Las Campanas, Chile as of June 30. It cited an inability to raise the $15 million, which was its project share. The role of the Astronomy Department at Johns Hopkins was enhanced through its space participation. The Hopkins Ultaviolet Telescope was successfully flown aboard the Space Shuttle and Johns Hopkins contains on campus the Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA's center for astronomy programs with the Hubble Space Telescope. (B Sun, Apr 3/91)
Researchers at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration found that the atmospheric lifetime of methane, a key "greenhouse gas," is about 25 percent longer than previously thought. The gas is short-lived compared to other greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons so reductions in methane would ease the greenhouse effect. (UPI, Apr 3/91)
Navy Commander Ken Reightler, a Marylander, was scheduled to fly on September 19 on the Shuttle Discovery. A Naval Academy graduate and a test pilot, Reightler will be a pilot on the five-day mission that was to deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. (B Sun, Apr 4/91)
NASA's goal was to deploy two Space Shuttle missions during April: Atlantis on April 5 and Discovery on April 25. The last two-launching month was January 1986. In addition to launching the Gamma Ray Observatory, the Atlantis flight would feature a spacewalk by Jerry Ross and Jap Apt. (NY Times, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; LA Times, Apr 4/91; B Sun, Apr 5/91;  W Post, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91)
Magellan project manager Tony Spear at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the spacecraft had completed its objective for the primary phase of the Venus mission more than one month before the end of the first 243-day mapping cycle. Magellan mapped 70 percent of the planet by April 3, and would have mapped 84 percent by May 15. The mission was to be extended to allow Magellan to map the remaining 14 percent, including the south pole. Toward the latter part of its mission it will also acquire gravity data. Magellan's findings, as described in Science magazine, indicated Venus was volcanic and geologically active. (NASA Release 91-49; AP, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; AP, Apr 5/91; NASA Release 91-53)
NASA announced that its newest Space Shuttle, Endeavour, would be rolled out April 25 at a ceremony at Rockwell International's Space Division Facility, Palmdale, California. (NASA Editor's Note N-91-25)
NASA satellite observations indicated that Earth's protective ozone layer was thinning twice as fast as previously believed. The Environmental Protection Agency made the announcement. Richard S. Stolarski, a research scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, found a 4 percent to 5 percent average decrease over the 11-year period he studied. During the winter, the depletion was 8 percent to 9 percent of the layer. Several scientists have stressed the importance of the public developing "good sun habits" in relation to the ozone depletion and reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).(B Sun, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; WSJ, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; CSM, Apr 9/91)
Brief biographies appeared of each Atlantis astronaut. (UPI, Apr 5/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, has selected Hughes/Santa Barbara Research Center, Goleta, California as its contractor for the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer-Nadir (MODIS-N) instrument for the Earth Observing System (EOS) program. EOS is central to NASA's Mission to Planet Earth Program. MODIS-N is the key research instrument to fly on a series of EOS unmanned polar spacecraft. Over a 15-year period, it would measure terrestrial, oceanographic, and atmospheric parameters to assess environmental changes. (NASA Release C91-1)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that based on a recent policy review, NASA's Space Flight Participant Program would be kept in abeyance until 1992. NASA previously had indicated that when the program resumed, first priority would be given to a teacher in space in fulfillment of space education plans. (NASA Release 91-50; UPI, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 6/91)
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)
Astronaut Manley Lanier "Sonny" Carter, who flew on the Shuttle Discovery in 1989, was one of those killed in the crash of the commuter plane carrying former Senator John Tower. Biographic data were given. (UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 6/91)
Thousands of people watched Atlantis take off from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The external fuel tank from Space Shuttle Atlantis broke off after takeoff and was seen over Hawaii streaking toward Earth. Some accounts gave biographic data of crew members. (AP, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 6/91; LA Times, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; P Inq, Apr 6/91; B Sun, Apr 6/91; LA Times, Apr 7/91)
The crew of Atlantis talked with American schoolchildren while in orbit over the United States. (AP, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 7/91; B Sun, Apr 7/91; NY Times, Apr 7/91)
The crew of Atlantis photographed the oil well fires burning in Kuwait as they passed over. (UPI, Apr 7/91)
The Orlando Sentinel Star published two special reports on NASA and Space Shuttles. The first was a review of the first ten years of space flight: the dreams in contrast with the reality of costs and delays experienced. The conclusion was that "The price of a rushed design on a shoestring budget has meant, for the Shuttle, unreliability." The second article dealt with NASA's plans for the next decade with reference to such items as the Personnel Launch System, a small capsule or space plane on top of an expendable booster rocket to carry astronauts and some cargo to a Space Station; the Advanced Manned Launch System, a reusable vehicle combined with a reusable booster, capable of carrying more persons and cargo; and the National Aerospace Plane (NASP), which would burn a "slush" mixture of liquid and solid hydrogen. Most research funds to date went into the development of the NASP. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/91)
Jerry Ross and Jay Apt fixed a stuck satellite antenna in NASA's first unscheduled repair in space, showing the value of the human element in space flight. Thereafter they remained outside for three more hours to test equipment. A further spacewalk was scheduled before return to Earth. (USA Today, Apr 8/91; B Sun, Apr 8/91; AP, Apr 8/91; UPI, Apr 8/91; C Trin, Apr 8/91; CSM, Apr 9/91; W Post, Apr 9/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 9/91; Birmingham News, Apr 12/91)
Chairman Leon Panetta, Democrat from California, of the House Budget Committee, proposed to cut President Bush's requested increase for space spending from 12 percent to 4.2 percent over the present level--enough to keep pace with inflation. (UPI, Apr 8/91)
Ham radio operators in Long Beach, California, made history when they successfully transmitted a television picture to the Space Shuttle Atlantis. (LA Times, Apr 8/91)
The General Services Administration (GSA) and NASA were at odds over the timing and method of moving NASA's main voice and data network to the mandatory FTS 2000 contract. GSA was pressuring NASA to move all of its Program Support Communications Network (PSCN) to FTS 2000 by September 30. PSCN provides long distance communications between NASA centers and its contractors and NASA planned to move to FTS 2000 over a two-year period. Details of services to be provided remained to be worked out. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 8/91)
Ross and Apt made a second spacewalk, this one of six hours, testing a cart running on a monorail along one side of the Shuttle's cargo bay. They also tested different manual, mechanical, and electrical systems for moving safely and efficiently in weightlessness. (LA Times, Apr 9/91; B Sun, Apr 9/91; W Post, Apr 9/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; W Times, Apr 9/91; USA Today, Apr 9/91; P Inq, Apr 9/91; AP, Apr 9/91; UPI, Apr 9/91)
Astronomers Joss Bland-Hawthorn of Rice University, Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland, and R. Brent Tully of the University of Hawaii, using the telescope atop Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii have found a huge object. It might be a "supermassive black hole," but if so it would be more than 100 million times larger than the largest black hole thought to exist. It might also be a dead or dormant quasar. Astronomers hoped that the Gamma Ray Observatory of Atlantis would help to resolve the mystery. (NY Times, Apr 9/91; AP, Apr 9/91; P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Post, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 15/91)
Former astronaut Michael Collins in his new book, Mission to Mars, said that he believed homosexuals and lesbians should be barred from space exploration because they would be likely to create interpersonal problems. NASA never considered sexual orientation in hiring. (AP, Apr 9/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, Apr 9/91)
Peenemunde, Germany was the place where the first self-propelled rocket left the Earth's atmosphere. This occurred on October 3, 1942 when the Nazis launched a 5 1/2 ton V-2 rocket to a height of more than 50 miles. A museum was scheduled to open on the site. (LA Times, Apr 9/91)
Atlantis made six passes by Soviet Space Station Mir as it prepared to land. The astronauts finished experiments and tested a manual system for chasing down targets in orbit. (P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Times, Apr 10/91; B Sun, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; NY Times, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 10/91; C Trin, Apr 10/91; AP, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91)
NASA announced the naming of astronaut Colonel Guy S. Gardner as Commandant of the USAF Test Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, California. He was to leave the astronaut corps in June 1991 to assume his new post, which is part of the Air Force Systems Command. (NASA Release 91-52)
NASA postponed the landing of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of high winds at Edwards Air Force Base in California and bad weather at the alternate landing site of Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (P Inq, Apr 11/91; B Sun, Apr 11/91; W Post, Apr 11/91; W Times, Apr 11/91; NY Times, Apr 11/91; USA Today, Apr 11/91; AP, Apr 11/91; UPI, Apr 11/91)
A panel on global warming of the National Academy of Sciences urged the Bush administration to take various anti-pollution and energy efficiency steps to slow global warming. The study was initiated in 1988 when Congress asked the Environmental Protection Agency to commission the academy to study the subject and recommend actions. The panel's central concern was to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, especially the "aggressive phase-out" of chlorofluorocarbons in accordance with the timetable in the 1990 London Protocol. It also recommended energy conservation measures and increased research into alternative energy supplies as well as new-generation nuclear reactors. (B Sun, Apr 11/91; P Inq, Apr 11/91; W Post, Apr 11/91; USA Today, Apr 11/91; NY Times, Apr 11/91; LA Times, Apr 11/91)
The Hubble Space Telescope proved more useful than expected despite the flaw in its mirror. The congressional appropriation of an additional $30 million in NASA's 1991 budget allowed some repairs to be made from the ground using computer processing and radio control. NASA plans additional repairs by astronauts in 1993, attaching new mirrors to the outside of the telescope. (W Times, Apr 11/91)
NASA revised its Space Station plan to include a centrifuge. The absence of a centrifuge in the scaled-down plan was criticized by a number of scientists, who considered it essential for the study of the effects of weightlessness. (NY Times, Apr 11/91)
The Soviet Union used the name of Yuri Gagarin, the first human in space 30 years ago, to boost its emerging commercial space program. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at an opening ceremony in Moscow said Soviet space science and technology were open to international cooperation and called for joint space research with the United States, European countries, China, India, Japan, and others. (AP, Apr 11/91)
Four Israeli high school students paid a two-week visit to the United States after winning an astrophysics contest in Israel. The competition was sponsored by the National Museum of Science, Planning, and Technology in Haifa to encourage Israeli youth to focus on technology and the sciences.  The students visited Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland and NASA's headquarters. (Washington Jewish Week, Apr 11/91)
Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California, one day late. It was to be flown to Cape Canaveral atop a modified Boeing 747. The astronauts appeared in excellent condition. (P Inq, Apr 12/91; B Sun, Apr 12/91; W Times, Apr 12/91; USA Today, Apr 12/91; NY Times, Apr 12/91; WSJ, Apr 12/91;  W Post, Apr 12/91; LA Times, Apr 12/91; AP, Apr 12/91; UPI, Apr 12/91)
General Thomas S. Moorman, Jr., commander of Air Force Space Command at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado, said orbiting satellites were integral to mid-air and ground operations in the Persian Gulf War. He spoke at a conference at Tufts University on "The United States Air Force: Aerospace Challenges and Missions in the 1990s." (CSM, Apr 12/91)
The Soviet Union observed Cosmonaut Day, marking the thirtieth anniversary of the space flight of Yuri Gagarin. (P Inq, Apr 12/91; USA Today, Apr 12/91; AP, Apr 12/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax, Virginia, made a reputation for fast, frugal flights into space that won it a number of contracts with NASA and the Air Force. It developed the Pegasus rocket, which was launched from under the wing of a B-52 in 1990. Since then it has developed various other rockets designed to boost Shuttle payloads. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
An article on interactive computer graphics and the virtual reality system they involve stated that NASA's Visualization for Planetary Exploration project might use such technology. It would enable the creation of environments of the moon and planets that would use data gathered by space probes and satellites to allow users to feel they were visiting those bodies. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
Final approval was given for the construction of a new visitors' center at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The Manned Space Flight Education Foundation helped raise funds for the $60 million structure. (AP, Apr 12/91)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that a Soviet spacecraft carrying supplies for the two cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station almost collided with the station during a docking attempt. (AP, Apr 12/91; C Trin, Apr 14/91)
The Marshall Islands commemorated the tenth anniversary of US Space Shuttle flights by issuing a block of four stamps. (AP, Apr 12/91)
An editorial commended the Space Shuttle record as remarkably positive over the past 10 years. (Fla Today, Apr 12/91)
A $40 million communications satellite was launched by a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The satellite was owned by GTE Spacenet Corporation of McLean, Virginia. The satellite was scheduled to take over the work of the present Westar spacecraft in June and increase GTE's transponder capacity for relaying information. (AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; CSM, Apr 15/91)
The Los Angeles Air Force Base at El Segundo was omitted from the list of proposed base closings of the Department of Defense. The base houses the Air Force Space Systems Division, a 3,200-employee unit that oversees military contracts for procurement of space hardware. (LA Times, Apr 13/91)
The two astronauts on NASA's first Shuttle flight 10 years ago, John Young and Robert Crippen, returned to Cape Canaveral for an anniversary celebration. The 20,000 workers at Kennedy Space Center and their families were invited for the occasion. (AP, Apr 13/91; B Sun, Apr 14/91)
NASA engineers worried over data indicating that the critical 16-foot main antenna of Galileo, essential for the Jupiter probe, may have failed to unfold properly. Such a failure would limit the speed of transmitting data from Jupiter to Earth and reduce the number of photographs that could be sent. Galileo was unique among spacecraft launched to date in that it has a "dual spin" design with the antenna being located on the spinning section. Efforts were underway to see how the situation could be remedied. (LA Times, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 15/91; NY Times, Apr 17/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91; W Times, Apr 18/91; USA Today, Apr 18/91)
An internal memorandum signed by four NASA officials as well as interviews with staff at the Reston, Virginia, facility indicated a strong opinion that moving the headquarters now would disrupt development of the $30 billion Space Station. At a recent meeting three-quarters of NASA staff were said to oppose a move. Despite this fact, NASA Assistant Administrator William B. Lenoir was said to have decided to recommend moving the headquarters. (H Chron, Apr 13/91)
Following the Flight Readiness Review, NASA announced April 23 as the launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery, with a seven-man crew commanded by Navy Captain Michael L. Coats. (NASA Release 91-54; W Times, Apr 16/91; AP, Apr 16/91; UPI, Apr 16/91; B Sun, Apr 17/91; NY Times, Apr 18/91)
Edward Stone, new director of the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which manages planetary missions for NASA, commented on present and future plans. He stated Magellan was sending back pictures of Venus; Galileo, on its way to explore Jupiter and its moons, would view the asteroid Gaspra in October; and Mars Observer was being prepared for a September 1992 launch. He spoke of the preliminary unmanned research necessary before any exploration of Mars could be undertaken. (CSM, Apr 15/91)
Astronomer Vera Cooper Rubin discussed dark matter in the universe in the first of a six-part public television series, "The Astronomers." Rubin, a scientist at the Carnegie Institution for the past 26 years, concentrated on the study of dark matter, which is thought to account for the mass of nine-tenths of matter in the universe. (W Post, Apr 15/91; NY Times, Apr 15/91)
NASA and the Defense Department were expected to present the National Space Council with a proposal to build a new, heavy unmanned booster for the late 1990s. It would be based on a Space Shuttle external tank equipped with oxygen/hydrogen engines, using strap-on solid rocket motors. Jack Lee, director of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, told the US Space Foundation Symposium in Colorado Springs that the belief was that the new device could achieve a payload cost to orbit as low as $500-$1,000 per pound. (AvWk, Apr 15/91)
The House Government Operations Committee asked NASA to reinstate the third bidder, Convex Computer Corporation, for the Operations Automatic Data Processing contract. Convex was disqualified for filing its bid nine minutes late. The request was made, according to committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, in order to encourage competition. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 15/91; Government Computer News, Apr 15/91))
Construction of NASA's Ames-Dryden Integrated Test Facility at Edwards Air Force Base was 18 months behind schedule and $3.1 over its original cost estimate because three successive contractors pulled out of the job, NASA said. Efforts were underway to find a new contractor. NASA spokesman Don Haley asserted that the construction delays had not hindered aircraft tests. (Los Angeles Daily News, Apr 15/91; Californian, Apr 19/91)
NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, an independent group of industry and academic experts, was pressuring NASA to consider automated landings that would minimize the need for humans and increase the safety factor. (NY Times, Apr 16/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, launched its first Firebird suborbital vehicle from a NASA flight center in Wallops Island, Virginia. The launch was conducted under contract to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln Laboratory in support of the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. The Firebird deployed ballistic missile re-entry targets that were used in tracking experiments conducted on the ground. (W Times, Apr 16/91)
NASA requested proposals to establish six Regional Technology Transfer Centers (RTTC), each funded at about $1 million annually. These would replace 10 Industrial Applications Centers, whose contracts expire in 1991. The restructuring was intended to broaden geographical coverage to include all contiguous states by establishing a regional structure similar to the six Federal Laboratory Consortiums for Technology Transfer. The intent also was to establish close ties with NASA's Centers for the Commercial Development of Space in various regions and to encourage partnerships with universities and state organizations as well as promote local businesses. (NASA Release 91-55)
Sherwood Rowland, a scientist from the University of California-Irvine, told Congress that winter ozone depletion over the northern United States and Canada was about one-third greater than the already alarming declines detailed in new NASA studies. Rowland in 1974 was one of the first to warn of the dangers of ozone-depleting industrial compounds like chlorofluorocarbons. (UPI, Apr 16/91)
Atlantis began its piggyback jet ride to Florida atop its Boeing 747. (AP, Apr 16/91)
While commending Jay Apt's and Jerry Ross's work in freeing the jammed antenna of the Gamma Ray Observatory during their Atlantis mission, an editorial commentator advocated a rethinking of spaceflight goals and greater realism. (CSM, Apr 17/91)
Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on Commerce, Space, and Transportation, questioned the cost figures in NASA's revised Space Station plans. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight, conceded that the $30 billion cost did not include such items as $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build an emergency crew return vehicle. The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council told the Senate subcommittee that it supported its earlier March statement about spending Space Station funds differently. (W Times, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91; AP, Apr 17/91; Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AP, Apr 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
Stormy weather prevented Space Shuttle Atlantis from landing at Kennedy Space Center so it landed instead at MacDill Air Force Base; the flight would resume when the weather cleared. (AP, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91)
The Sunnyvale, California City Council approved a position paper prepared by the Moffett Field Committee, composed of representatives of NASA's Ames Research Center, and several neighboring city councils and chambers of commerce. The paper proposed that if Congress approved closing the Moffett Field Naval Air Station, NASA operate the field instead to ensure that research and transport activities continue. (San Jose Mercury News, Apr 17/91; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 18/91)
The House of Representatives rejected President Bush's proposed budget, allowing only a 4.2 percent increase in the space program to keep pace with inflation, instead of the recommended 12 percent increase. (UPI, Apr 18/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91)
NASA announced that its Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resource Information Services, Inc., both of Mountain View, California, would jointly develop a system to allow firefighters to merge elevation and vegetation data with live pictures of forest fires. This would enable firefighters quickly to "see" through a smoky forest fire and plan their strategy. The three-year, $600,000 project called for NASA to expand existing remote sensing technology and for Terra-Mar to develop portable computer work stations and advanced software. (NASA Release 91-56)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, awarded a $112 million contract to General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc. in San Diego, California, for launch services connected with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). SOHO is part of a cooperative effort among NASA, the European Space Agency, and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science to conduct an examination of the sun and various solar phenomena through launches in 1992 through 1995. (NASA Release C91-m)
Atlantis returned to Kennedy Space Center from MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa. (AP, Apr 18/91)
NASA selected Ball Corporation of Muncie, Indiana, to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. (C Trin, Apr 18/91)
Business, county, and NASA officials met in Reston, Virginia, to announce a new hotline for anyone who wanted to keep the NASA Space Station Program in Reston. The Coalition for Space Station Continuity set up the hotline, following reports that the Texas Congressional delegation urged that NASA move to Houston. (McLean/Great Falls Connection, Apr 18/91)
A study by the University of Southern California found that space exploration was viewed as "frivolous" by the average American. These results were disclosed at the 7th annual National Space Symposium. A space journal commented that NASA needed to find new ways of communicating its message more effectively. (Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
The upper stage of a commercial Atlas rocket made by General Dynamics Corporation carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation failed after liftoff from Cape Canaveral. Ron Maehl of General Electric Aerospace Group, which made the satellite, refused to state the cost for the spacecraft and the launch, saying only that the rocket cost slightly more than the satellite. The accident was described as a major setback for General Dynamics whose Atlas program lost $300 million in 1990. Details of the stages of the Atlas-Centaur rocket and its intended use to replace the satellite destroyed in the explosion of a European Ariane rocket in February 1990 were given. (NY Times, Apr 19/91; B Sun, Apr 19/91; WSJ, Apr 19/91; UPI, Apr 19/91; AP, Apr 19/91; NY Times, Apr 20/91; W Post, Apr 20/91; P Inq, Apr 20/91)
NASA announced crew assignments for the International Microgravity flight, scheduled for February 1992 and the Spacelab D-2 mission, the second German Spacelab flight, scheduled for February 1993. Lt. Col. David C. Hilmers was to be mission specialist on the microgravity flight and Lt. Col. Jerry L. Ross was to serve as Payload Commander on the spacelab flight. (NASA Release 91-57)
NASA solicited proposals for establishing additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These centers were to specialize in the commercialization of advanced satellite communications technologies and other space-based telecommunications technologies. NASA's current CCDS specialize as follows: materials processing, 5; life sciences, 3; remote sensing, 2; automation and robotics, 2; space propulsion, 1; space structures and materials, 1; and space power, 2. (NASA Release 91-58)
NASA announced that it was conducting intensive analysis of the problem that prevented deployment of the Galileo spacecraft's high-gain antenna. Even if the antenna should only be partially deployed, the planned flyby of the asteroid Gaspra on October 29 would take place. (NASA Release 91-59)
The subcommittee of NASA's Office of Astronautics and Exploration Technology said the redesign of the Space Station would still enable all proposed experiments to be handled. However, two major experiments might not be able to be conducted simultaneously because of power limitations. (Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
NASA prepared to begin countdown for Shuttle Discovery, despite predicted bad weather. (P Inq, Apr 20/91; W Post, Apr 21/91; B Sun, Apr 21/91; USA Today, Apr 22/91; W Post, Apr 22/91; AP, Apr 22/91; UPI, Apr 22/91)
The New York Times featured a lengthy article on robots that might be used in Martian exploration as well as in industrial activities. The designer of the principal robot under consideration was William L. Whittaker, a Carnegie-Mellon University professor. He demonstrated to government officials the Ambler, a 19-foot tall, six-legged robot that could step over high boulders and avoid holes. Named Attila, the robot has 25 motors and 150 sensors and develops its behavior from the interaction of dozens of independent processors. The robot represents a combination of electrical and mechanical engineering and computer science. In addition, Whittaker  demonstrated a computer and laser vision system that could steer a vehicle in a straight line. (NY Times, Apr 21/91)
Co-workers at Rockwell International organized a farewell party for some 400 workers, who would be laid off when Shuttle Endeavour rolls out. (Los Angeles Daily News, Apr 21/91)
A columnist compared NASA's cutting the plans and cost for the Space Station at congressional request with proposed programs of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). Whereas NASA cut its projections, to the point that some questioned the viability of the result, SDI appeared to have an undiminished appetite for funds. (LA Times, Apr 21/91)
John W. "Jack" Russell, a crack aviation mechanic and retired NASA employee, was scheduled to be the first member of the aviation support sector to be enshrined in the Amherst Museum's Niagara Frontier Aviation Hall of Fame. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/91)
The Defense Department lifted military secrecy from Shuttle missions, not because of decreased Soviet threat or the nature of the payload but because of the cost of security. The move was expected to save the government $80 million. Security would be applied more selectively because the Soviet Union and the American public were considered to be familiar with the nature of most space flights to date. Discovery would carry a payload known as Cirris, for Cryogenic Infrared Radiation Instrumentation for Shuttle, designed to determine the feasibility of the space-based detection of enemy aircraft and missiles. (NY Times, Apr 22/91; P Inq, Apr 23/91)
A Soviet commentator castigated the United States for its refusal to return to Moscow a display model of a spacecraft nuclear reactor Topaz 2 brought to a scientific convention in January. The US Nuclear Regulatory Commission said the Soviets had unwittingly exported it to the United States and returning it would be an illegal export under the Atomic Energy Act. Soviet news agency described the act as a "regrettable breach of agreements" that would lead to questioning Soviet-US nuclear cooperation. (AP, Apr 22/91)
An editorial in a space publication stressed the need for space flight to gain some Congressional advocates and for NASA's new launcher plan to be salvaged before it was too late. (SP News, Apr 22-28/91)
Republican Congressman from California Tom Campbell said he would not object to the closing of a military installation in his district provided that it was "fair." In this connection he would not oppose the proposed closing of Moffett Field, from which NASA tests aircraft and spacecraft in wind tunnels and simulators and the Navy flies its P-3 Orion antisubmarine warfare missions over the Pacific. Local officials and business people argued that closure of the field would cause Lockheed Missiles and Space Company to move elsewhere, taking its 25,000 employees, in addition to the some 12,200 jobs lost from the Navy. (W Post, Apr 22/91)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, awarded a $145 million contract to Loral Infrared and Imaging Systems, Lexington, Massachusetts to design and build the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS). This instrument would fly on NASA's first Earth Observation System (EOS) satellite flights in 1998. AIRS would be a global thermometer in space to study the effects of increased greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. The main goal of EOS-A satellites is to study the effects of potential global warming through long-term observations. AIRS would operate continuously for five years. (NASA Release 91-61; WSJ, Apr 23/91)
An editorial summarized the achievements of 10 years of Shuttle flights. (B Sun, Apr 23/91)
A British woman, Helen Sharman, was tentatively selected for the next international space flight with two Soviet cosmonauts to the Mir Space Station. (UPI, Apr 23/91)
NASA indicated that the Shuttle Atlantis had landed 200 yards short of its lakebed runway at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The reason was that astronauts were unaware of the wind shift, of which ground controllers did not inform them because they thought the information was not needed. Measures have been taken to prevent similar incidents in the future by installing more efficient brakes and a drag chute to help slow the aircraft after touchdown. (O Sen Star, Apr 23/91)
Gerald Fishman, principal investigator of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, said so far the experiment on the Gamma Ray Observatory was working as planned. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 23/91)
The media in a series of articles anticipated the launching of Shuttle Discovery, discussed preparations for blast off, and outlined tasks to be performed. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; W Post, Apr 23/91; USA Today, Apr 23/91; CSM, Apr 23/91)
NASA was considering repairs costing at least $50 million to the Hubble Space Telescope. In addition to the telescope proper, the question was whether to compensate for flaws in three other instruments: two spectrographs and the faint-object camera. Such repairs would involve Costar (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement) and cost $30 million to $40 million, while the telescope repair cost would be $14 million. To test the feasibility of performing such repairs, mock spacewalks inside a huge water tank at Marshall Space Flight Center would determine whether the work could be accomplished in the estimated 16 hours required. Despite the need for such repairs, Edward Weller (Wiler?), NASA program scientist for the observatory, stressed the achievements the Hubble telescope had made in revealing the universe. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; B Sun, Apr 23/91; Birmingham News, Apr 23/91; AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91)
Hours before Space Shuttle Discovery was to blast off on its "Star Wars" mission, NASA canceled the launch because of the failure of an electrical sensor that measures pressure on an oxidizer turbopump on the engine. (AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91; NY Times, Apr 24/91; W Post, Apr 24/91; W Times, Apr 24/91; USA Today, Apr 24/91; LA Times, Apr 24/91; C Trin, Apr 24/91; AP, Apr 24/91)
NASA announced the rescheduling of the launch of Discovery for April 28. (NASA Release - Launch Advisory; B Sun, Apr 25/91; NY Times, Apr 25/91; USA Today, Apr 25/91; AP, Apr 25/91; UPI, Apr 25/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the ceremony that would take place on April 25 on the occasion of the rolling out of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour. The ceremony was scheduled for Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, where the orbiter was assembled by Rockwell International Corporation's Space System Division. Truly praised the efforts of all those in NASA and industry who had cooperated on the program. Part of the ceremony would involve the presentation to NASA by Robert Duce, Dean of the University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography, of Endeavour's first "payload," a sternpost remnant recovered from the orbiter's namesake, the first ship commanded by British explorer Captain James Cook in 1768-71. During the ceremony Truly announced the creation of the NASA Endeavour Teacher Fellowship Program  with the gifts donated to NASA by the public for the replacement orbiter. The program would award scholarships to American undergraduates studying to be teachers. (NASA Release 91-62; UPI, Apr 24/91; NASA Release 91-64)
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology approved a $14.27 billion space program for the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly 6 percent over 1991 but $488 million less than President Bush had requested. Included was $1.9 billion for the Space Station with $128.9 million to be added when the National Academy of Sciences comments on NASA's plans to reduce the size of the station. The committee specified that NASA spend $25 million of the Space Station money on developing a return emergency vehicle for Space Station astronauts. It also called for spending $30 million to develop advanced propulsion systems, including the first new Shuttle engine in more than 20 years. Closer scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union and continuation of the Landsat earth-monitoring program were also specified. (AP, Apr 24/91)
The Magellan spacecraft was into the second mapping of Venus, causing scientists to hope the second set of images might reveal changes in the landscape showing volcanic or other activity. (LA Times, Apr 24/91)
The Christian Science Monitor reviewed environmental challenges facing scientists worldwide. Commenting on greenhouse gases, it stated that the international program of Canada, the European Space Agency, Japan, and the United States would help fill knowledge gaps. Within this framework, NASA's Mission to Planet Earth formed a major part. This included the need to analyze the hydrological cycle over the oceans, represented in part by the use of a spectrometer supplied by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The lower atmosphere also needed study as pointed out by Jack Fishman of the NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia. Such study would include investigation of the "self-cleaning ability" represented by the hydroxyl radical. (CSM, Apr 25/91)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had completed one year of operation on April 25. Joseph H. Rothenberg, Associate Director of Flight Projects for Hubble Space Telescope at Goddard, summarized the Hubble's achievements. These included the taking of various images and presentation of data from observations at key scientific meetings. Scientists planned to compensate for the spherical aberration by modifying the telescope's replacement instruments. These included the placement of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II in 1993 and further servicing plans during astronaut space walks. (NASA Release - Hubble Space Telescope; LA Times, Apr 29/91)
NASA Project Scientist Steve Saunders stated that Magellan scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were studying the surface features on Venus caused by wind. Soviet landers and the US Pioneer probes measured wind speeds near Venus at two to four miles per hour, or about the speed needed to move sand grains. The Magellan images indicated wind streaks. Project Manager Tony Spear said that a new strategy to protect Magellan from the heat of direct sunlight has successfully cooled the spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-63)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce as Deputy Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. He had served as Director of Aerospace Technology at Lewis since 1984. (NASA Release 91-65)
The media covered the unveiling of the Shuttle Endeavour at some length, including its new features outlined by NASA Administrator Richard Truly: "The latest avionics navigation equipment, the finest mechanical systems, a new drag chute, and equipment for longer duration flights." Endeavour has more fuel cells, which generate electricity, allowing it to stay in orbit as long as 28 days. (P Inq, Apr 26/91; W Times, Apr 26/91; NY Times, Apr 26/91; W Post, Apr 26/91; USA Today, Apr 26/91; WSJ, Apr 26/91; B Sun, Apr 26/91; Daily News, Apr 26/91; H Chron, Apr 26/91; AP, Apr 26/91; UPI, Apr 26/91)
Preparations for the launching of Discovery were discussed at the beginning of a three-day countdown. The Discovery's mission was described as mimicking the movements of a ballistic missile to help scientists working on the antimissile defense system. (NY Times, Apr 26/91; AP, Apr 26/91; UPI, Apr 26/91; LA Times, Apr 26/91; W Post, Apr 28/91; B Sun, Apr 28/91; NY Times, Apr 28/91)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, feared it might be necessary to send a communications satellite to Jupiter to relay Galileo's discoveries to earth. It would take three years for such a satellite to reach Jupiter, assuming funding were available. However, the engineers still hoped to resolve the problem of the failure of Galileo's high-gain antenna to open properly. Six nearly identical antennas were used on NASA's primary communications satellites without encountering problems. (LA Times, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 28/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; NY Times, Apr 30/91)
The California Institute of Technology and the University of California, with funding from the W.M. Keck Foundation, were preparing to build a new $93.3 million Keck II telescope in 1992 on top of Hawaii's Mauna Kea volcano, adjacent to the Keck I being completed. Foundation chairman Howard B. Keck announced that the foundation would pay $74.6 million for the second telescope. Edward C. Stone, director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said scientists were sure NASA would get Congressional approval to finance the remainder. The linked telescopes, according to Stone, "can explore the origin of the visible universe by peering back to the first 1 billion to 2 billion years after the Big Bang, when we believe that galaxies began to form out of the residue of the Big Bang." (C Trin, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 27/91; NY Times, Apr 27/91; LA Times, Apr 27/91; W Post, Apr 27/91; CSM, Apr 29/91)
As the thirtieth anniversary of his trip as America's first space pioneer approached, Alan Shepard reminisced about his vivid recollections of that flight on May 5, 1961 as well as the 33 hours he spent on the Moon 10 years later. Since that day in 1961, NASA has launched 70 manned flights with 161 individuals. (LA Times, Apr 28/91)
NASA stated that Endeavour would not be convoyed through Lancaster as previous Shuttles were, but instead would fly via a 747 jet to Houston's Johnson Space Center. There a dedication ceremony would be held before Endeavour was flown to Florida to prepare for its mission. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 28/91)
Space Shuttle Discovery blasted off in what mission director Ronald D. Dittemore said was "probably the most complex flight flown to date." More than 60 Shuttle maneuvers were planned and 17 instruments were to be used to study the Shuttle's exhaust plumes, chemical releases, and the Earth's atmosphere. A problem with a tape recorder delayed the launch half an hour; after the launch further problems were experienced with two tape recorders. (NY Times, Apr 29/91; USA Today, Apr 29/91; W Post, Apr 29/91); B Sun, Apr 29/91; CSM, Apr 29/91; P Inq, Apr 29/91; LA Times, Apr 29/91; AP, Apr 29/91; C Trin, Apr 29/91; UPI, Apr 29/91)
The rocket-launching site at Poker Flat, Alaska, is near the North Pole, has a high success rate for suborbital, scientific launches, and lacks military red tape, being university owned. These factors caused commercial ventures to inquire about possible commercial satellite launches into polar orbits from Poker Flat. Glenn Olds, Commissioner of the state Department of Commerce and Economic Development, believed a launch might occur in 1993. (AP, Apr 29/91)
An editorial in a space journal commented on the work of cosmonauts in the Soviet Mir Space Station who are conducting advanced materials and fluids experiments in at least five processing systems. In addition, Soviet engineers were preparing several evolutionary unmanned materials spacecraft that would provide Soviet scientists more processing time in unmanned spacecraft than their US counterparts. Whereas these Soviet facilities presented opportunities for use by American researchers for experimental purposes, which they were doing increasingly, a challenge was also presented to the United States. NASA bureaucracy and deficiencies in the US microgravity program, for example, resulted in it taking some researchers two years to book commercial processing flights on the Shuttle. Although NASA planned microgravity budget increases from $125 million in FY 1992 to $225 million in FY 1995, this would require White House and congressional support. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
Representative Barbara Boxer, Democrat from California, chair of the House Government Operations subcommittee on government activities and transportation, announced a hearing about the Space Station. Boxer said the General Accounting Office report and the analysis of her staff revealed "astronomical" differences between NASA cost estimates for the Space Station and "more objective, independent analyses." (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
A policy paper by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington think tank, said defense and national security should be top priority for the US space program. Exploration of the moon and Mars should occur as a result of "market incentives" or interest of research organizations. Environmental research should be the province of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or the Department of Energy. If NASA's functions could be performed by other agencies, it should be closed. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
Daniel DeVito, manager of the Central Data Handling Facility (CDHF) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, commented on the way the use of CDHF in the forthcoming NASA Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite mission might lead to similar systems on larger NASA projects. CDHF was a new concept that both the International Solar Terrestrial Physics project and the Earth Observing System mission were looking at to handle data more efficiently and distribute data to scientists through a multiple network. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
Tom McGlynn, a Computer Sciences Corporation software scientist for the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) Science Support Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, described four data analysis systems developed for GRO. The GRO launched by Atlantis carried four instruments designed to study overlapping portions of gamma rays, the highest energy radiation in the electromagnetic spectrum. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
The crew of Shuttle Discovery prepared for a 38-hour "space ballet" with a satellite that will study Discovery's exhaust plumes. With two recorders not working, the astronauts turned to other instruments. The satellite launch was delayed to allow the crew to complete as many observations as possible of Earth's aurora before the coolant for the telescope ran out. (B Sun, Apr 30/91; W Times, Apr 30/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; USA Today, Apr 30/91; LA Times, Apr 30/91; AP, 30 Apr 91; UPI, 30 Apr/91)
The Department of Energy requested $30 million to create a new space exploration program relating to civilian space activities. The new request brought the Energy Department's 1992 budget request for space exploration to $142 million, compared with NASA's $94 million. Some experts and officials saw the Energy Department's role in space as desirable, both to prevent NASA's monopoly and because the Department maintained active technology development programs whereas NASA allowed its technology research and development to wither as it struggled with existing programs. (W Post, Apr 30/91)
A proposal that $211 million be spent on the chance that gravity waves could be exploited to fathom black holes and other cosmic enigmas divided scientists and faced Congress with a quandary. Involved was possible Federal funding of two proposed gravity wave observatories, a joint project of the California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. American supporters of the project, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), admitted there was no guarantee of success but believed its scientific potential was gigantic if it succeeded. (NY Times, Apr 30/91)
Charles A. Bowsher, comptroller general of the General Accounting Office, estimated that NASA had underestimated by $10 billion the construction cost of the Space Station because it did not include the costs of flying the Shuttle during station construction, developing the crew lifeboat, conducting scientific projects, and installing certain equipment. NASA underestimated operations costs by $24 billion because it omitted Shuttle flight costs, salaries of ground-based personnel, the cost of research, and added electrical power. (AP, Apr 30/91)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, for a $140 million support service contract for center operations. (NASA Release C91-n)
According to the media, in a General Accounting Office (GAO) report to be submitted to Congress, NASA underestimated the cost of building the redesigned Space Station by $10 billion and the cost of operating it through the year 2027 by about $24 billion. GAO is to submit the report, its first since the Space Station restructuring, to the House Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation. Comptroller General Charles A. Bowsher in the report questioned the cost value because only one of the original eight Space Station uses, that of a research outpost, was being met. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
Discovery astronauts captured amazing aurora observations and continued to try to fix the two faulty recorders. After releasing the retrievable SPAS-2 satellite, using Discovery's 50-foot robot arm, the astronauts had difficulties getting the satellite oriented properly to observe the Shuttle. Discovery was to play the role of an enemy missile, repeatedly firing one of its two orbital maneuvering system rockets as instruments on the SPAS-2 recorded visible light, infrared, and ultraviolet emissions. (W Times, May 1/91; P Inq, May 1/91; AP, May 1/91; UPI, May 1/91; LA Times, May 1/91)
President Bush barred the export to China of parts for a domestic communications satellite, known as Dong Fang Hong 3, citing concerns about possible proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Bush approved export of components for two Western projects, an Australian communications satellite and a Swedish weather satellite, to be launched from China, for which the United States was assured of strict safeguards. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
Galileo, the Jupiter survey spacecraft, was scheduled to fly-by the asteroid Gaspra on October 29. Such an encounter would be a first and was complicated by the failure of Galileo's antenna to deploy completely so that communications were minimized. (CSM, May 1/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to Discovery's maneuvers as it conducted missile-detecting experiments for the Pentagon. The scientific satellite, which it launched previously, captured with infrared sensors and television cameras engine exhaust plumes and plumes from smaller steering jets. (B Sun, May 2/91; W Post, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; USA Today, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91 AP, May 2/91; UPI, May 2/91; CSM, May 3/91)
The press reported hearings of the Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation at which NASA Administrator Richard Truly defended NASA against charges by the General Accounting Office (GAO) that it understated the cost of the planned Space Station and its operations through 2027 by at least $34 billion. Truly questioned GAO figures and stated it was time to begin building the station rather than submit it to further study or audit. (W Post, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; WSJ, May 2/91; B Sun, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91; Plain Dealer, May 5/91)
Space Shuttle Columbia, according to AP, began its trip from an assembly building at Kennedy Space Center to the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, a four-mile journey. (AP, May 2/91)
NASA announced the selection of Lawrence J. DeLucas of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and Eugene H. Trinh of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to fly as payload specialists on the first U.S. Microgravity Laboratory mission, scheduled for June 1992. (NASA Release 91-66)
NASA announced it was seeking applications from new astronaut candidates with a cut-off date of July 1, 1991. The next class of candidates was scheduled for July 1992. Two types of positions were available: mission specialist for those with significant scientific backgrounds and pilot for those with extensive piloting experience in jet aircraft. (NASA Release 91-67; H Chron, May 3/91)
NASA announced that astronaut Mary L. Cleave would become Deputy Project Manager for Sea Viewing Wide Field Sensors at the NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Her work would involve supervising a joint NASA and commercial project to learn about the biological mass in the ocean by studying the chlorophyll content to determine how much plankton is produced. (NASA Release 91-68; H Chron, May 3/91)
David Webb of the White House National Commission on Space, speaking at a U.S. Space Foundation National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, said that the commission in 1985 had recommended increased NASA spending for research and development. However, Admiral John Poindexter, then National Security Adviser, opposed it, with the result that no action was taken. (Washington Technology, May 2/91)
The House of Representatives voted to authorize NASA to spend $14.9 billion in the next fiscal year, about $500 billion less than President Bush had requested. The approval included the full $2 billion Bush sought for Space Station Freedom. Concurrently, the House directed the National Academy of Sciences to study whether the goals of the Space Station could be achieved more cheaply by other means. (W Post, May 3/91; W Times, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91
Astronauts on Space Shuttle Discovery aimed a research satellite at rocket fuel spewed in space, then captured the satellite and put it back in the Shuttle's cargo bay. (W Post, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91; LA Times, May 3/91; AP, May 3/91; UPI, May 3/91)
The media reported that Discovery astronauts had succeeded in getting data from three scientific instruments to the ground by splicing wires and rearranging cables in a complicated operation. In this way they bypassed the nonfunctioning recorders, based on procedures worked out from the ground. The astronauts earlier had performed additional tests involving fuel canisters hurled from the Shuttle. (AP, May 4/91; UPI, May 4/91; NY Times, May 4/91; C Trin, May 4/91; LA Times, May 4/91; NY Times, May 5/91; P Inq, May 5/91; W Post, May 5/91; CSM, May 6/91)
The wire services commemorated astronaut Alan B. Shepard's flight 30 years ago on May 5 as the first American in space. (AP, May 4/91; UPI, May 4/91)
The Discovery astronauts conducted final experiments, celebrated the 30th anniversary of U.S. space flight on May 5, and prepared to return to Earth. (P Inq, May 6/91; W Times, May 6/91; USA Today, May 6/91; B Sun, May 6/91; C Trin, May 6/91; AP, May 6/91; UPI, May 6/91)
UPI reported that new Space Shuttle Endeavour was delayed an additional day in its trip from the factory in California to Kennedy Space Center in Florida because of stormy weather. (UPI, May 6/91)
According to UPI, an extraordinarily sharp picture of Jupiter taken by the Hubble Space Telescope showed the planet's turbulent atmosphere and the telescope's capabilities. (UPI, May 6/91)
An editorial in a trade journal commended Rockwell International for completing Space Shuttle Endeavour on time and under budget, stating that NASA should expect the same standards of performance with regard to the Space Station. (SP News, May 6-12/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that Mae Jemison, the first black female astronaut, who was scheduled to be a member of the crew of Endeavour in August 1992, had received an honorary doctor of science degree from Lincoln University. (P Inq, May 6/91)
The media reported that because of high winds in California, Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The right tire was severely damaged on landing, but the new stronger brakes worked well. In addition, twice as much fiberglass thermal tile filler would have to be replaced than was customary after a flight. The astronauts accomplished 32 of 33 planned primary observations, 18 of 21 secondary observations, and 41 of 44 category-3 experiments. (P Inq, May 7/91; W Post, May 7/91; NY Times, May 7/91; USA Today, May 7/91; B Sun, May 7/91; WSJ, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; P Inq, May 8/91; AP, May 8/91; UPI, May 9/91)
The media reported on the failure of Orbital Science Corporation's Prospector rocket to take off from the NASA launch pad at Cape Canaveral. The rocket, produced by the Fairfax, Virginia firm, contained 500 pounds of scientific experiments. The flight was sponsored by NASA's Commercial Space Development Center at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. (W Post, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91)
An editorial in the Christian Science Monitor commended the "modest, sober plan" of NASA for the revised Space Station, saying that it would enable the United States to make progress in space and should not be judged simply on its cost. (CSM, May 7/91)
Engineers began a practice countdown for Space Shuttle Columbia, and the four-man, three woman crew prepared to begin dress rehearsal for a planned May 24 launching. The purpose of the nine-day 11th flight of Columbia was the Spacelab Life Sciences mission, the first spacelab dedicated to life sciences research. The crew were to perform experiments to evaluate the adaptation of humans to space flight as well as to conduct some experiments on animals in a gravity-free environment. The planned experiments were to be conducted in the Spacelab module. (NASA General Release 91-69; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; UPI, May 13/91; AP, May 13/91; B Sun, May 14/91; W Times, May 14/91; USA Today, May 14/91)
Space Shuttle Endeavour arrived at Kennedy Space Center. Considerable work remained to be done on the Shuttle, including the installation of the three main engines. (AP, May 7/91)
NASA announced that its mobile teacher resource center, LASER, would be on display and open to the public and Washington metropolitan area teacher during Publis Service Recognition Week, May 9-11. (NASA Release N91-31)
NASA announced the names of eight firms chosen as finalists in competition for the 1991 George M. Low Trophy for quality and excellence. The final selections were to be announced in November after validation of performance achievements. (NASA Release 91-70)
President George Bush received the crew of Space Shuttle Atlantis. (UPI, May 8/91)
The Washington Times reported that the Smithsonian Institution had decided to keep the National Air and Space Museum Annex at Dulles International Airport and scale down the project, which is to include the Space Shuttle Enterprise. The cost at Dulles would be $8 million less than at Baltimore-Washington International Airport, and Virginia could make a larger contribution than Maryland to total costs. (W Times, May 9/91)
A giant black granite "space mirror" at Cape Canaveral, Florida, honoring America's 15 fallen astronauts was prepared for dedication, five years after the Challenger disaster. The monument was dedicated by Vice President Dan Quayle on May 9, in the presence of relatives of the astronauts killed. (UPI, May 9/91; B Sun, May 10/91; P Inq, May 10/91; W Times, May 10/91;  USA Today, May 10/91; C Trin, May 10/91; AP, May 10/91; UPI, May 10/91; Newsweek, May 13/91)
NASA announced that based on satellite observations of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, researchers from NASA and Geo Eco Arc Research in La Canada, California, had located a "nearly perfect" semicircular ring of sink holes forming a crater more than 125 miles in diameter. The scientists believed that this evidence of an impact crater formed by a comet or asteroid might have caused the extinction of dinosaurs and other species about 65 million years ago. The findings were being published in Nature magazine. (NASA Release 91-71; UPI, May 9/91: LA Times, May 10/91; San Francisco Examiner, May 10/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, May 11/91; LA Times, May 27/91; W Times, May 31/91)
The press cited concern over "millions of pieces of trash zooming around in space" and the fear that they might hit the Hubbell Space Telescope or some orbiting astronauts. The concern caused work on new debris-monitoring devices and a system to warn astronauts of impending collisions with space junk so they could take evasive action. The U.S. Space Command's space surveillance network already kept track of about 6,700 pieces of larger litter at least four inches in diameter that might damage a Space Station. (AP, May 10/91; W Times, May 24/91)
UPI reported that the NOAA-D spacecraft developed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA was scheduled for launch on May 14. The satellite, which was to measure temperatures on Earth's surface, including oceans, and gathering data on solar radiation, might help scientists better predict floods and understand the causes of droughts. (UPI, May 10/91)
The Washington Post carried a lengthy article describing the need for a new cheaper, dependable space launch system and work being done to develop a new family of rockets. The proposed new National Launch System was to be a hybrid of old and new technology to reduce costs. The booster shell would derive from the Shuttle's external fuel tank, topped by a Titan 4 cargo housing. The core would be a newly developed oxygen-hydrogen engine. The rockets would use from one to several engines and for heavy payloads could strap on advanced solid fuel boosters being developed. (W Post, May 13/91)
U.S. News and World Report contained a feature article on the planet Venus that included findings of NASA's Magellan about the surface of Venus as well as earlier Pioneer-Venus mission mapping data. (U.S. News and World Report, May 13/91)
NASA announced that NASA 816, a modified Convair F-106B, had been retired after more than 30 years of flight research. It was to be moved to the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton. (NASA Release 91-73)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the creation of a new Systems Analysis and Concepts Office at NASA Headquarters, in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. James D. Bain, who served as executive secretary of that committee, was appointed Director of the new office. (NASA Release 91-74; SP News, May 20-26/91)
The Magellan spacecraft temporarily lost contact with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, when its antenna was misdirected toward Earth. Contact was restored, and only 0.3 percent of the mission's scheduled surface mapping was lost. (C Trin, May 14/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that Johns Hopkins University astrophysicist Sam Durrance, who flew with Shuttle Columbia's Astro flight in December 1990, lobbied for an Astro-2 flight to continue use of the telescopes and other equipment that made significant scientific discoveries. Some NASA and other officials were giving the possibility serious consideration. (B Sun, May 14/91)
A feature article in the New York Times discussed the impact of space rockets on the ozone layer. Reportedly, NASA estimated that each Shuttle flight injected some 75 tons of chlorine into the stratosphere. Dr. Michael J. Prather, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute in New York City, calculated that the lifting of nine Shuttles and six Titan 4s every year would add 0.3 percent to stratospheric chlorine, which in turn would destroy much less than 1 percent of the ozone there. This made the Shuttle a large source of pollution but small by comparison to any other industry such as refrigeration or solvents. (NY Times, May 14/91)
The New York Times reported that although the weather satellite known as GOES-NEXT (from next generation of geostationary operational environmental satellite) was flawed and would not gather all the data it was designed to collect, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration planned to launch it anyway because the existing main U.S. weather satellite, GOES-7, was nearing the end of its life. The GOES-NEXT program was more than three years behind schedule and was now scheduled for launch in October. (NYT, May 14/91)
NASA announced its launching of the NOAA-D environmental satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The satellite was to collect meteorological and environmental data and ultimately would replace NOAA-10, which was nearing the end of its life. (NASA Release N91-36; W Times, May 15/91; USA Today, May 15/91)
NASA announced it would test a structural component made of advanced carbon-carbon composite material as part of the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) program. The material took years to develop and was stronger and lighter than metal. (NASA Release 91-75)
NASA announced the selection of IBM Federal Sector Division, Houston, for a contract to provide as many as 48 ground-based, mission operations main frame computer systems, peripheral equipment, and services. (NASA Release C91-o)
NASA announced the selection of PacificCorp Capital, Inc., Reston, Virginia, for a contract for Institutional Automatic Data Processing (IADP). IADP was to support the Johnson Space Center, Houston, and the White Sands Test Facility, New Mexico. (NASA Release C91-p)
USA Today featured an article on Challenger Centers for Space Science Education, which use simulated space missions to teach elementary and middle school students science, mathematics, teamwork, and technology. More than 10,000 fifth graders a year use the Greenbelt, Maryland center. (USA Today, May 15/91)
According to AP, a General Accounting Office report stated that NASA improperly managed hazardous wastes, creating pollution problems that must be corrected at some of its nine centers. (AP, May 15/91)
PR Newswire reported that Loral Space Information Systems awarded Control Data a $6.5 million contract for a Flight Analysis and Design System to modernize mission planning for NASA's Space Shuttle program. (PR Newswire, May 15/91)
According to AP, the Magellan space probe completed its main nine-month radar survey of Venus, mapping 84 percent of the surface. In the second phase, the remaining surface was to be covered. (AP, May 15/91)
The media reported that the House Appropriations Subcommittee, by a six to three vote, had agreed to cut all but $100 million of the projected $2 billion Space Station budget for the fiscal year beginning October 1991. The $100 million was to be used to close the project and study two alternative space science projects. (W Post, May 16/91; WSJ, May 16/91; W Times, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
UPI reported that workers at Baikonur Cosmodrome had rolled a Soyuz TM-12 rocket into place to take two Soviet cosmonauts and a British woman to the Mir Space Station in a commercial mission. (UPI, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
Washington Technology conducted an interview with Representative F. James Sensenbrunner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking Republican on the House Space Subcommittee. He predicted NASA would face cost-overrun scandals in the coming years because when NASA lacked funds to pay contractors it tended to stretch out project completion. (Washington Technology, May 16/91)
According to Washington Technology, Citizens Against Government Waste had prepared a study indicating that NASA's proposed Earth Observing System was to double in cost to $60 billion but would not be able to meet its technical objectives because its key sensors were not "fundamentally different" from previous sensors. (Washington Technology, May 16/91)
The press carried accounts of administration statements, led by Vice President Dan Quayle, vowing to fight to save the Space Station despite the Appropriations Subcommittee action. (P Inq, May 17/91; W Post, May 17/91; B Sun, May 17/91; AP, May 17/91; UPI, May 17/91)
UPI reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had detected gas clouds that appear to be from the universe's early day much nearer Earth than previously thought possible. NASA also released pictures taken by Hubble of an unusual jet spouting from a massive, unstable star called Eta Carinae, which upset existing ideas about how the star spewed out matter. (UPI, May 17/91)
The media reported that a British woman, Helen Sharman, went into space in a Soyuz TM-12 rocket with two Soviet astronauts, destined for Space Station Mir. The astronauts were to remain on Mir to do repairs while Sharman was to return with the two Soviet astronauts now on Mir. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; NY Times, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91)
The media carried extensive coverage of the preparatory stages for the mission of Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew. The four medical specialists were to conduct tests on human body functions while the three astronauts flew the Shuttle and were subject to some of the tests. Scientists hoped to learn why astronauts return to Earth with weakened immune systems, reduced bone mass, a decrease in body fluid or blood, fewer red blood cells, and less muscle protein, as well as space motion sickness. The 30 white rats and 2,478 tiny jellyfish being carried were to be analyzed after the flight. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91; W Post, May 20/91; AP, May 20/91; UPI, May 20/91; CSM, May 20/91; NY Times, May 21/91; USA Today, May 21/91; UPI, May 21/91)
According to the press, Al Boggess, an astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, at a news briefing at the Spce Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had observerd that a gas disk that ringed the star Beta Pectoris appeared to include large clumps of matter spiraling in toward it at speeds of up to 120 miles a second. This was a "new phenomenon, not seen around any other star." (NY Times, May 18/91; C Trin, May 19/91; CSM, May 22/91)
The Baltimore Sun commented at length on an article on galactic studies appearing in the April 20 issue of The Astrophysical Journal. The article described work done by a group of scientists using the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), a scientific satellite operated by NASA and the European Space Agency. The yearlong work required 60 observations with the IUE studying the cores of rare galaxies. (B Sun, May 19/91)
NASA announced that the second Astro mission, dedicated to astrophysics, would fly aboard the Space Shuttle. The success of the first Astro mission and the ability of the instruments to acquire high-quality scientific data were major reasons for the decision. The following instruments were to fly on Astro-2 to observe the ultraviolet part of the electromagnetic spectrum: the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope, which performs spectroscopy; the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope, which produces images of components of nebulae, stars, and galaxies; and the Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photopolarimeter Experiment, which measures light polarization. (NASA Release 91-76; AP, May 20/91; B Sun, May 21/91)
The media carried comments by William B. Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, that if the congressional appropriations process did not restore the cut in the Space Station funding, it would kill the project and signal that the United States "was going out of the manned space business." In addition, some media articles commended Congress for its action or raised serious questions about NASA's new design or its education of the public about the need for a Space Station. (NY Times, May 21/91; AP, May 21/91; B Sun, May 21/91; SP News, May 20-26/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, rescheduled its launch of the Joust 1 rocket at Cape Canaveral for June 5, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, May 21/91)
USA Today carried an article concerning the large growth of communities and companies along the "Space Coast" of Florida as a result of the success of the Shuttle program. Figures of population increases, numbers of workers, and firm incomes were given. (USA Today, May 21/91)
USA Today reported that five years later NASA was still tracking down debris from Challenger in the hands of collectors because the Space Shuttle was government property. (USA Today, May 21/91)
According to UPI, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev hailed the crew members of Mir on their successful docking of the TM-12 capsule. (UPI, May 21/91)
The press reported that the panels of the astronaut memorial monument that developed jagged cracks, which are being investigated. (AP, May 21/91; USA Today, May 22/91; LA Times, May 22/91)
NASA announced the postponement of the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia because of last minute problems discovered: two computer devices and nine four-inch temperature sensors. The flight was to be delayed at least 11 days. Reasons for the delay in finding the flaws were discussed. (P Inq, May 22/91; NY Times, May 22/91; W Post, May 22/91; USA Today, May 22/91; AP, May 22/91; UPI, May 22/91; LA Times, May 22/91; P Inq, May 23/91; NY Times, May 23/91; W Post, May 23/91;  USA Today, May 23/91; AP, May 23/91; UPI, May 23/91)
According to the New York Times, Japan was reassessing its decision that preserving good trade relations with the United States was more important than quickly developing a competitive space industry. Because its own heavy-lift rocket program ran into endless problems and delays, Japan turned to foreign companies to launch its satellites. But the two satellite accidents, of which the most recent was the loss of the Atlas Centaur rocket launched from Cape Canaveral by General Dynamics Corporation earlier in 1991, caused considerable Japanese concern. The loss had major impact on Japan's high-definition television projects, which were developing rapidly.(NY Times, May 22/91)
Queen Elizabeth visited Johnson Space Center in Houston. (AP, May 22/91; W Times, May 23/91; LA Times, May 23/91; UPI, May 23/91)
The media reported that President Bush had informed two senators, Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, both on the Senate space subcommittee, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly that he would actively campaign to reverse the congressional panel's decision to scuttle the Space Station. (AP, May 23/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91)
NASA announced it would hold the first Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) Post-Retrieval Symposium June 2-8, 1991, in Kissimmee, Florida. LDEF exposed 57 science and technology experiments to the space environment for almost six years until Shuttle Columbia returned it to Earth in January 1990. The conference was planned to examine the results of LDEF and the effects of a long-term space environment on materials and systems. (NASA Release N91-38)
According to the Wall Street Journal, Telesat Canada planned to file a $240 million insurance claim because of the failure of its Anik E2 communications satellite launched in April to deploy one of its two antennae. (WSJ, May 24/91)
The Washington Times reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center near Houston had 842 pounds of moon rocks brought back by 12 moonwalkers on six Apollo flights between 1969 and 1972. The rocks are loaned to scientific groups for study. Each nation in the world also has a small piece of moon rock, sent at President Nixon's instruction in the early 1970s. (W Times, May 24/91)
The media reported that NASA engineers had debated whether to remove additional sensors in Columbia that might be cracked. NASA planned to create a new investigative team to review the process of flaw detection. (NY Times, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Times, May 24/91; USA Today, May 24/91; AP, May 24/91; UPI, May 24/91)
NASA announced that David Reasoner, Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would chair the May 28 meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. At the session, results of the CRRES artificial Earth auroras experiment would be discussed. (NASA Release 91-77)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced, following a senior management meeting, that NASA would conduct a thorough review of the recent discovery that a fuel sensor removed from Space Shuttle Columbia last fall was cracked. However, Truly indicated that the sensor problem on Columbia had been corrected and the Shuttle was now tentatively scheduled for launch on June 1. (NASA Release 91-79; AP, May 25/91; UPI, May 25/91)
The Washington Post cited the Synthesis Group unpublished report stating that although a Space Station in Earth orbit was preferable, if such could not be built in timely fashion and with the desired capabilities, one could consider using the moon as a preparatory environment for a Mars mission. (W Post, May 25/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA personnel were warning elected officials across the country that the killing of the Space Station would mean lost jobs in their districts. (LA Times, May 25/91)
Major articles in the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times raised questions about NASA's proposed Space Station with regard to its cost, the functions it was supposed to perform, and the need for such space ventures in relation to other needed expenditures. The Los Angeles Times stated that Soviet Space Station experience showed that "at current levels of technology, reusable spaceships were more expensive than throwaway models." (NYT, May 26/91; LA Times, May 26/91)
Tass announced that the first British astronaut and two Soviet cosmonauts had returned safely from Mir Space Station, landing on the steppes of Kazakhstan. Soviet space officials considered British participation valuable in terms of Soviet-British cooperation, although commercially the mission failed to gain British sponsorship. (UPI, May 27/91)
A space journal editorial advocated that the Space Station be judged by Congress on its own merits and that space exploration was also a social need, medically, environmentally, and agriculturally. NASA did what Congress requested and the committee needed to explain its failure to approve the revised Space Station plans. (AvWk, May 27/91)
NASA announced that a new Crew Transport Vehicle (CTV) had been developed to allow the crew efficient egress after Shuttle flights to facilitate life science or medical investigations. The CTV was a renovated "people mover." (NASA Release 91-80)
Gerald Fishman, a NASA astrophysicist at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced at a conference of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle that the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) carried on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory was detecting gamma-ray bursts with greater sensitivity than previously. (NASA Release 91-81; UPI, May 28/91)
Officials of the European Space Agency and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that scientific teams concerned with the Ulysses mission to the poles of the sun were preparing for physics investigations during Ulysses's forthcoming encounter with Jupiter. Ulysses was expected to reach Jupiter and its satellites on February 8, 1992, and make a two-week sweep past the planet. (NASA Release 91-82)
NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced that it had selected Johnson Controls World Services, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, for a JSC plant maintenance and operation support contract. (NASA Release C91-q)
According to the press, the Japanese government was angry that its participation in the proposed Space Station was threatened by congressional budget cuts. Reportedly, it issued a warning that it might refuse to contribute to U.S.-led major scientific projects in the future unless plans to build the Space Station remain intact. (NYT, May 28/91; UPI, May 28/91)
UPI reported that ground had been broken for the $70 million Space Center Houston being built just outside Johnson Space Center. The center is to be an "experience center" providing visitors with a sense of daily Space Station life. (UPI, May 28/91)
The media covered the completion of sensor repairs, the beginning of the second countdown for Columbia's medical research mission, continuing preparations for the launch, and final clearance for the launch. (W Post, May 29/91; W Times, May 29/91; USA Today, May 29/91; AP, May 29/91; UPI, May 30/91; AP, May 30/91; USA Today, May 31/91; W Times, May 31/91; AP, May 31/91; UPI, May 31/91)
At a press conference associated with the American Astronomical Society meeting in Seattle, Ted Stecher, Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (UIT) Principal Investigator, announced that UIT team members had identified hundreds of newly found young stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud. Several of these hot stars might eventually become supernovas. (NASA Release 91-84)
NASA announced that at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, at Edwards, California, simulator research showed that multi-engine aircraft with specially programmed flight control systems could touch down safely using only the engines to turn and land. (NASA Release 91-85)
According to AP, a communications satellite needed to transmit long-distance telephone calls made in Alaska was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. (AP, May 29/91; W Post, May 30/91)
AP reported that The Save Our Wetlands environmental group had filed suit against NASA to stop the testing of an advanced solid fuel rocket motor for Space Shuttles on the Mississippi Gulf Coast. The group also asked that the Environmental Protection Agency make NASA comply with clean air and water laws. NASA officials maintained that NASA received the needed state and federal permits to test the boosters. (AP, May 29/91)
Nationally syndicated economics columnist Warren Brookes questioned the administration's efforts to rescue NASA's Space Station and the new space program represented by the National Aerospace Plane. Brookes stated that possibly national security concerns justified both these programs but their economic justification was dubious. (W Times, May 29/91)
According to the Fairfax Journal Weekly, C. MCClain Haddow, a Herndon, Virginia, lobbyist, asserted that if NASA were to leave Reston for Houston, probably other federal offices would move from Northern Virginia as well. (Fairfax Journal Weekly, May 29-30/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to Magellan's completion of its initial nine-month mapping of Venus and the amazing discoveries made. To date 84 percent of Venus was mapped and in the second phase chief project scientist Stephen Saunders stated that 95 percent of Venus's surface was expected to be covered. Magellan's powerful radar system enabled it to penetrate the clouds of carbon dioxide that cover Venus. (NY Times, May 30/91; USA Today, May 30/91; B Sun, May 30/91; UPI, May 30/91; AP/May 30/91; CSM, May 31/91)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle, research physicist Michael S. Briggs reported finding a second huge source of gamma rays in the Milky Way. The Soviet satellite Granat and a gamma detector aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory were to be used to observe the new source. (LA Times, May 30/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer carried an article about the new issue of Science magazine and its reports on the likely creation of hole in the Arctic ozone. The article quoted Robert Watson, head of NASA's atmospheric ozone program, as saying that Earth's ozone layer was declining as much as 8 percent each decade; scientists previously thought it was only 2 to 4 percent. Also NASA research found that losses occurred in the spring as well as winter, raising concern that ultraviolet radiation might threaten crops, forests, and ecological processes. (P Inq, May 31/91)
NASA officials George Rodney, the agency's top safety official, and Robert Crippen, head of the Shuttle program, said a special investigating team would spend the summer reviewing the way NASA approved Shuttle components for flight. (W Post, May 31/91)
NASA announced that astronaut John M. Lounge would leave NASA June 21 to become Director of Houston Operations for Spacehab, Inc., which is providing a pressurized module for future space flights. (NASA Release 91-86)
In an article on the budget proces, the Christian Science Monitor stated that despite it being a Bush Administration priority, the Space Station may go in the budget because of the deal to bring the federal deficit under control. (CSM, May 31/91)
The media reported that the launch of Shuttle Columbia was again postponed because of problems with the navigation equipment. (UPI, Jun 1/91; AP, Jun 1/91; P Inq, Jun 2/91; W Post, Jun 2/91; NY Times, Jun 2/91; LA Times, Jun 2/91; CSM, Jun 3/91; USA Today, Jun 3/91)
According to AP, NASA began its third countdown for the launch of Columbia, rescheduled for June 5. (AP, Jun 3/91)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket, would be launched from Cape Canaveral on June 7. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
The press reported on Bush administration efforts to save Space Station Freedom in the light of actions of the House Appropriations Committee as well as the protests of participating nations that were angered at Congressional action, such as Japan, Canada, and the European Space Agency. (B Sun, Jun 3/91; W Post, Jun 3/91)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
Newsweek carried a feature article about NASA's discoveries regarding the heavens: quasars, galaxies, black holes, dark matter, and the like, as presented at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society. Special credit was given to the instruments NASA developed to explore space. The mysteries remaining to be explored were highlighted and the new telescopes being installed to catch infrared rays to help solve some of the mysteries. (Newsweek, Jun 3/91)
NASA announced the award of an avionics systems engineering and analysis support contract to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The work was to include work on Space Station Freedom as well as Space Shuttles and advanced spacecraft, manned and unmanned. (NASA Release C91-s)
NASA issued a release indicating that as a result of Apollo data findings NASA scientists and other researchers had a revised theory of the origin of life on earth. Life may have begun more than once and been wiped out several times by rare, planet-melting superimpacts on the Earth. Evidence of such early solar system impacts is well-preserved on the moon. (NASA Release 91-87; UPI, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 6/91)
The press reported the House Appropriations Committee action voting to kill NASA's Space Station and ignoring a White House veto threat in that regard. (W Post, Jun 4/91; B Sun, Jun 4/91; USA Today, Jun 4/91; W Times, Jun 4/91; P Inq, Jun 4/91; WSJ, Jun 4/91; AP, Jun 4/91; UPI, Jun 4/91; SP News, Jun 3-9/91; LA Times, Jun 4/91)
The media covered preparations for launching by the crew of Shuttle Columbia. (AP, Jun 4/91; UPI, Jun 4/91; NY Times, Jun 5/91; W Times, Jun 5/91;  USA Today, Jun 5/91; W Post, Jun 5/91; B Sun, Jun 5/91; P Inq, Jun 5/91)
According to the media, the Bush Administration was pressuring Congress to retain the appropriation for the Space Station. (NY Times, Jun 5/91; W Times, Jun 5/91; USA Today, Jun 5/91; W Post, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; UPI, Jun 5/91)
Extensive coverage was given to the launch of Columbia on June 5 and the astronauts' biomedical studies. (B Sun, Jun 6/91; P Inq, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; W Post, Jun 6/91; W Times, Jun 6/91; C Trin, Jun 6/91; LA Times, Jun 6/91; AP, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
The media reported on Administration efforts to have the elimination of funding for the Space Station reversed in the House of Representatives. In this connection, the New York Times carried a major editorial urging that the Space Station not be funded. In response to that editorial, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter of support for the Space Station from Thomas Stafford, Chairman of the Synthesis Group, to Representative George Brown, Chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. (USA Today, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; NASA Release N91-42; WSJ, Jun 6/91; CSM, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
An article in the Washington Post commented that the House Appropriations Committee's decision to delete funding for NASA's Space Station from the 1992 budget represented a setback for a number of defense and space-related contractor companies that were counting on the project. (W Post, Jun 6/91)
A Christian Science Monitor editorial commended NASA's work with regard to the Magellan spacecraft's survey of the surface of Venus. However, the editorial deplored the indecision and delays in the U.S. space program resulting from Congressional ambivalence and stressed the need for the administration to achieve a sustainable program. (CSM, Jun 6/91)
AP reported that researchers had found that the seeds, spores, and shrimp eggs flown on the Long Duration Exposure Facility for five years by NASA  experienced some bizarre mutations but space radiation had a less serious effect on the life forms than expected. (AP, Jun 6/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement following action by the House of Representatives to continue the development of Space Station Freedom. Truly commended the bipartisan vote in the House, expressed his confidence that Freedom would win support in the Senate, and expressed his commitment to shape the final NASA FY 1992 budget in a way that balanced the various research and project areas. (NASA Release 91-88)
Nature magazine contained an article by its associate editor David Lindley that was extremely laudatory of the findings of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its flaws. He referred specifically to data obtained from the two spectrometers, designed to operate primarily at ultraviolet wavelengths to which the Earth's atmosphere is opaque. (Nature, Jun 6/91)
The media covered the House vote of 240 to 173 overturning the House Appropriations Committee action halting the Space Station program and authorizing $1.9 billion to keep the program going. The role of the White House in pressuring Congress to support the project was stressed. Several articles also commented that the action was a boon to aerospace firms. The importance of the United States maintaining its space leadership and having a permanent presence in space, despite the high costs entailed, also were emphasized. (P Inq, Jun 7/91; WSJ, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 7/91; B Sun, Jun 7/91; W Times, Jun 7/91; USA Today, Jun 7/91; LA Times, Jun 7/91; W Post, Jun 7/91; C Trin, Jun 7/91; AP, Jun 7/91; UPI, Jun 7/91; Htsvl Tms, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 8/91; Birmingham News, Jun 10/91)
Prior to the House vote, Thomas M. Donahue, Professor of Planetary Science at the University of Michigan, wrote an article published in the Christian Science Monitor. In it he sharply criticized NASA for making the Space Station its priority rather than scientific inquiry and urged Congress not to support the Space Station. CSM, Jun 7/91)
The press reported that NASA was considering having two astronauts engage in a spacewalk to fix a cargo-door seal of Columbia that could prevent a safe return to Earth. The seal apparently shook loose during launch. It was later reported that NASA ground personnel determined the seal posed no re-entry problems so no spacewalk was needed. This allowed the astronauts more time to pursue their scientific experiments and medical research. (P Inq, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 7/91; W Post, Jun 7/91; W Times, Jun 7/91; LA Times, Jun 7/91; AP, Jun 7/91; UPI, Jun 7/91; B Sun, Jun 8/91; NY Times, Jun 8/91; W Post, Jun 8/91; AP, Jun 8/91; UPI, Jun 8/91; NY Times, Jun 9/91; W Post, Jun 9/91; C Trin, Jun 10/91; LA Times, Jun 10/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that thanks to a NASA program to establish a super computer network among black universities, Morgan State University had received a super computer. The university planned to make the super computer the foundation of a new Center for Applied Space Science and Engineering. (B Sun, Jun 7/91)
NASA announced that as part of its Planetary Astronomy Program of the Office of Space Science and Applications, a team of radar astronomers had identified a near-Earth metal asteroid for the first time. Their discovery, observed from the giant Arecibo radar/radio telescope in Puerto Rico, was published in Science magazine. The object, called 1986 DA, was observed and analyzed by a team under Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The asteroid contains mostly iron but also 8 percent nickel as well as some platinum-group metals and gold. (NASA Release 91-89; NY Times, Jun 11/91)
NASA gave an update about the launching of Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket being launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Because of bad weather, the launch was postponed to June 9. (NASA Joust 1 Update, Jun 7/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, NASA's Advisory Council met following the House of Representatives vote to discuss plans for the Space Station and how to put the "A" for aeronautics back into NASA. Edward Starke Jr., chairman of the ad hoc committee on the High Speed Research Program reported on plans for a new supersonic jet to be used by the commercial aviation industry. (Htsvl Tms, Jun 8/91)
The Huntsville Times published a history of NASA in connection with its Marshall Space Flight Center and the Army Ballistic Missile Agency Development Operations Division in Huntsville. Reference was made to the early days of the Redstone Arsenal as well as to statistics of employment and various Shuttle launches.  (Htsvl Tms, Jun 9/91)
Robert F. Sekerka, Dean of the College of Science at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh and Chair of the Committee on Microgravity Research of the Space Studies Board, wrote an article in the Wall Street Journal sharply criticizing the appropriation for the Space Station. He questioned the purpose of the Space Station and its cost-effectiveness. (WSJ, Jun 10/91)
Peter J. Wylie, professor of geology at the California Institute of Technology, commended NASA's mapping of Venus but stated that only 29 percent of the Earth's surface has been mapped in detail. He suggested that NASA's Mission to Planet Earth take the form of an integrated space-borne and ground-based mission that could map the remaining 71 percent of the surface beneath the ocean. (LA Times, Jun 10/91; P Inq, Jun 22/91)
A space publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard Truly would forgo attendance at the 1991 Paris Air Show in order to remain in Washington to keep close watch on the congressional fight to keep the Space Station appropriation in the budget. In an editorial in the same journal, it was stated that maintaining the Space Station "at the cost of nearly everything else NASA does would be a major mistake." Subsequently, an editorial in the San Jose Mercury News expressed similar concern that NASA's other important programs would be sacrificed for the sake of the Space Station. (SP News, Jun 10-16/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 11/91)
Encore Computer Corporation filed an agency protest of a $191 million award by NASA Johnson Space Center to IBM Corporation for a mainframe requirements contract. NASA officials were to meet with Encore representatives over the disagreement, which involved pricing information submitted. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 10/91)
Federal Computer Week reported on NASA's plans to award contracts for up to 13,700 Unix-based work stations spanning seven classes. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 10/91)
According to the media, the Columbia astronauts were ahead of schedule on their experiments after spending 16- to 18-hour days working and planned to ease off and enjoy space more. On June 12 and 13, the press reported the continuing scientific experiments of the astronauts, culminating in efforts to fix two malfunctioning freezers in order to preserve experiment samples prior to final preparations for a landing on June 14. (P Inq, Jun 11/91; NY Times, Jun 11/91; B Sun, Jun 11/91; W Post, Jun 11/91; USA Today, Jun 11/91; UPI, Jun 11/91; USA Today, Jun 13/91; W Post, Jun 13/91; AP, Jun 13/91; UPI, Jun 13/91; LA Times, June 13/91; P Inq, Jun 14/91; NY Times, Jun 14/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; W Times, Jun 14/91; B Sun, Jun 14/91; Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 14/91; UPI, Jun 14/91)
The New York Times carried a major article stating that to shave costs aerospace experts have broken some of the rules about specifications and testing, resulting in significant flaws. Unless NASA were given more generous funding so it could stop "corner cutting" compromises, more serious problems were likely to arise. Norman R. Augustine, head of Martin Marietta Corporation, was quoted with regard to the importance of testing that should not allow it to be affected by budget reduction. (NY Times, Jun 11/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
NASA announced that the application of its sensor technology led to the development by a Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia team, headed by Allan J. Zuckerwar, of a portable fetal heart monitor. The marketing of this monitor was to be part of the NASA program to transfer the agency's space age technology to the private sector. (NASA Release 91-90)
The press reported that NASA had staged a mock emergency landing in preparation for Columbia's touchdown at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (USA Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 14/91)
NASA announced that its Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) was maneuvered to point at its first scientific target of opportunity, the sun, on June 7. Controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, repositioned the observatory to gather data from two X-class solar flares. All four GRO instrument teams reported receiving good data on solar activity as a result. (NASA Release 91-91)
The media covered the flawless touchdown of Shuttle Columbia on June 14. The Shuttle apparently suffered no major damage. After a night's sleep, four of the astronauts remained to undergo a series of medical and physical tests of their readjustment to gravity. Tests also were to be performed on the animals that traveled on Columbia. (UPI, Jun 14/91; W Post, Jun 15/91; P Inq, Jun 15/91; AP, Jun 15/91; UPI, Jun 15/91; W Post, Jun 16/91)
NASA's next Shuttle mission is to be that of Atlantis, scheduled for launch in July to release a giant Tracking and Data Relay Satellite intended to link Shuttles and other low-orbiting spacecraft with the ground. Conrad Nagel, the NASA manager responsible for the launch preparation, raised the possibility that Atlantis might be launched earlier than July 25. (Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 15/91)
An editorial in the Sarasota Herald-Tribune, charged that NASA historically sought to cut corners in space as a result of underfunding, accepting the cheapest bids, and skipping safety checks. Putting engineers in charge and greater discipline were factors advocated. (Sarasota Herald-Tribune, Jun 15/91)
According to Florida Today, a group of Florida universities hoped to attract a five-year, $5 million NASA grant to set up a commercial space development center. The center would focus on the commercial potential of advanced satellite communicatios technology. (Fla Today, Jun 16/91)
Astronaut Guion Bluford Jr., in a commencement speech at Drexel University's 100th anniversary, called for a new national commitment to "scientific literacy."
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
An article by Charles Krauthammer of The New Republic  discussed arguments by foes of the Space Station and concluded that a bold new initiative in the form of a moon base was a preferable next step in space. (P Inq, Jun 18/91)
A lengthy account in the New York Times dealing with asteroids and the threat they posed to early life as well as the continuing possibility they might destroy Earth, referred to NASA's findings about early life forms based on a survey of impact craters on the moon. Several scientists' findings, discussed in the journal Cell, were also reported. The newspaper also published an article citing NASA's expenditure of somewhat less than $1 million a year to search for Earth-crossing asteroids. NASA reportedly was also studying the feasibility of nudging asteroids aside and in this connection is to help sponsor the first International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids. (NYT, Jun 18/91)
According to the media, a small Prospector rocket, launched by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, was blown up shortly after liftoff when it veered off course. This was Orbital's third attempt to launch the rocket for the University of Alabama in Huntsville, one of 16 NASA commercial space development centers. (AP, Jun 18/91; NYT, Jun 19/91; USA Today, Jun 19/91; W Times, Jun 19/91; WSJ, Jun 19/91; B Sun, Jun 19/91; W Post, Jun 19/91; C Trin, Jun 19/91; LA Times, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91; UPI, Jun 19/91; H Chron, Jun 20/91)
AP reported that Japan planned to start developing a small unmanned Space Shuttle in 1992 and wanted to launch it by 2000. (AP, Jun 18/91)
Lewis Schiff, program coordinator for NASA's High Alpha Technology Program, a cooperative research program at NASA's Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers, announced that tests were underway on an F/A-18 fighter aircraft in the world's largest wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California. (NASA Release 91-92; LA Times, Jun 24/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the National Weather Service's one weather satellite was nearing the end of its life. However, NASA's next generation of satellites, one of which was to replace it, were three years behind schedule and $500 million over budget. The atmospheric sensor of the new model reportedly tested poorly, but NASA planned to launch it nevertheless. AP quoted Joan A. Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as saying that meanwhile there were contingency plans to use both NOAA and Defense Department polar orbiting satellites and a European weather satellite to watch hurricanes in the Atlantic and Caribbean.(P Inq, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91)
According to AP, the Shuttle Columbia left California on a piggyback jet ride to its home at Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (AP, Jun 19/91)
UPI reported that NASA managers reviewed plans to resume routine Shuttle landings at the Kennedy Space Center. The unpredictability of Florida's coastal weather was at issue but it was felt that improvements NASA made in the Shuttle fleet were such that routine landings could now occur. (UPI, Jun 19/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the selection of TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California, for one Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer/Earth Probe Spacecraft (TOMS/EP). The contract was to provide for the design, development, fabrication, assembly, test, integration, launch, and post-launch support of the aircraft. (NASA Release C91-t)
According to Reuters, as reported by the Orlando Sentinel Star, Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency, said at a news conference at the Paris Air Show that plans to launch a European Space Shuttle were proceeding despite cost overruns and technical problems. (O Sen Star, Jun 19/91)
The media reported NASA's announcement that henceforth the Kennedy Space Center in Florida would be a prime Shuttle landing site beginning with Atlantis's mission in July. However, because of Florida's temperamental weather, Shuttles were expected to return to California 60 percent of the time, according to Robert L. Crippen, director of the Space Shuttle program. (AP, Jun 20/91; UPI, Jun 20/91; NYT, Jun 21/91; B Sun, Jun 21/91; LA Times, Jun 21/91)
NASA announced it was scheduled to launch a $3 million U.S. Air Force Radiation Experiment (REX) Scout rocket June 28 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The REX was designed to test sophisticated communications in a high-radiation environment. (NASA Release 91-93)
In an article written for the Houston Post, Republican Congressman Jack Fields strongly advocated Senate support of NASA's Space Station. Referring to various uses of the Space Station program in the fields of medicine, industrial production, and basic science, he stressed the United States commitment to space exploration. (H Post, Jun 20/91)
An article by S. Fred Singer, guest scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars at the Smithsonian Institution, where he is completing a book on space policy, discussed the Space Station and the Stafford committee report. He advocated Martian moon exploration as NASA's best solution. (H Post, Jun 20/91; W Times, Jun 25/91)
According to UPI, in a paper submitted to the journal Science, J. Fishman of NASA's Atmospheric Sciences Division and three other scientists, satellite monitoring data and ground-based pollution measurements indicated that air pollution from burning forests in tropical and subtropical Africa was wafting throughout the Southern Hemisphere, previously considered relatively clean compared to the heavily industrialized North. (UPI, Jun 21/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Assistant Administrator for the Office of Procurement. The highest ranking woman career executive in Air Force contracting, she served previously as Principal Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff for Contracting, Headquarters Air Force Systems Command, Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-94)
A Journal of Commerce editorial analyzed the factors relating to NASA and the Federal Communications Commission's licensing of a private communications consortium joint venture to develop a mobile satellite to provide clear voice communications in remote U.S. areas. In early 1991, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia challenged the FCC's authority to form the joint venture and license it, with the result that Congress cut NASA's proposed $56 million contribution to the project. The companies feel cheated and the editorial advised that NASA should not be involved. (Journal of Commerce, Jun 21/91)
According to AP, Space Shuttle Columbia returned home to Florida after a one-week trip from the West Coast. Reportedly, NASA would save $1 million, in addition to travel time, by landing a Shuttle in Florida. (AP, June 21/91)
The media reported engineers were studying a possible problem connected with a $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) to be launched by Shuttle Atlantis. The problem involved the motor that deployed a boom carrying a six-foot-wide antenna. The main TDRS antennas are folded for launch, but once the satellite is in orbit, the antenna booms rotate outward and the antennas open up like umbrellas. On June 24, NASA manager of the project Nicholas Chrissotimos, stated that the problem was resolved. (UPI, Jun 21/91; AP, Jun 22/91; C Trin, Jun 25/91)
According to UPI, reporting from Soviet television, a small satellite launched from Mir Space Station had not operated since it was lifted one week previously. (UPI, Jun 23/91)
The Christian Science Monitor carried a descriptive article about programs of the Howard B. Owens Science Center in Prince Georges County, Maryland. Schoolchildren spend two hours there simulating either landing on the moon or rendezvousing with Halley's comet. The program is part of the Challenger Center for Space Science Education, founded by the families of astronauts killed in the Challenger disaster and to which NASA contributed.
NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, announced that it had selected BAMSI, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a $140 million preventive and remedial maintenance and services contract. (NASA Release C91-u)
A space journal article discussed the likelihood of NASA's taking over Moffett Field in California in order to keep the Ames Research Center, which it shares with the Navy, going. Reportedly, NASA was considering such a move if the Defense Department closed the naval air station. The result would be operating a 1,000 acre airfield with two runways more than 8,000 feet long, the largest airfield complex operated by NASA. (AvWk, Jun 24/91)
Two articles in a space journal described the software devised by NASA research pilot C. Gordon Fullerton that enabled control of a disabled aircraft with engine thrust alone. The journal reported that NASA funded McDonnell Aircraft research on implementing the software. (AvWk, Jun 24/91)
NASA announced that the first mirror for its Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) space observatory was successfully completed at Hughes Danbury Optical System, Danbury, Connecticut, and shipped on June 12 to Eastman Kodak, Rochester, New York, for assembly. The AXAF observatory was to consist of six nested pairs of mirrors to obtain high resolution x-ray images of the universe. (NASA Release 91-95)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced its selection of Fairchild Space, Germantown, Maryland, for a contract to provide engineering support services for the Space Technology Division. (NASA Release C91-w)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the NIMBUS-7 satellite, indicated that a 4,800-mile-long cloud of sulfur dioxide was spread across the tropical Northern Hemisphere from the major eruption of Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines. (NASA Release 91-96; UPI, Jun 26/91)
The media reported the successful efforts of two Soviet cosmonauts outside the Mir Space Station to replace a damaged antenna. (AP, Jun 25/91; UPI, Jun 25/91)
According to the media, engineers waited out the storm at Cape Canaveral and then hauled Shuttle Atlantis to its launch pad. The Shuttle was scheduled to launch a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite to replace the Indian Ocean relay station. (UPI, Jun 25/91; NY Times, Jun 26/91; W Times, June 26/91; USA Today, Jun 26/91; C Trin, Jun 26/91)
NASA announced the selection of Taft Broadcasting Company of Houston for a contract providing television support services for the Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-x)
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) had discovered a new, distant object that astronomers described as the most luminous object ever seen in the universe. Findings were published in the British science journal Nature, indicating it was a massive dust cloud that radiated 99 percent of its light in  the infrared part of the spectrum. Astronomers speculated it might be a massive galaxy in the process of formation or a quasar in a massive galaxy. (NASA Release 91-98; P Inq, Jun 29/91)
NASA announced information about the flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis scheduled for launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center. The Shuttle was to deploy NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) into orbit to update the satellite tracking network. Details of the TDRS, its size, capacities, and capabilities, were provided. (NASA Release 91-97)
The media reported that a private study by American scientists concluded that an international manned mission to Mars could be done within 21 years for less than $60 billion. These figures represented faster and cheaper estimates than those of a proposed United States-only project. (USA Today, Jun 27/91; UPI, Jun 27/91; AP, Jun 27/91; H Post, Jun 30/91)
In a letter to the editor, Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, and John N. Bahcall, Professor of Natural Science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, declared that "There is strong national support for both a vigorous manned space program and a strong science program." Believing that both were essential, they pointed out that to maintain its space leadership position, the United States must continue such programs as the Advanced X-Ray Astrophysical Facility, missions to a comet and to Saturn, and the Earth Observing System. (W Post, Jun 27/91)
UPI reported that General Dynamics concluded from its investigation that a piece of debris sucked into a pump apparently triggered an engine failure April 18 that sent a commercial Atlas-1 rocket tumbling out of control. The rocket was carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation. (UPI, Jun 27/91)
According to UPI, a jammed antenna crippling NASA's $1.4 billion Galileo Jupiter probe might pop free after its support structure contracts in the cold of space. (UPI, Jun 27/91)
NASA announced that its Galileo spacecraft would turn and fire its on-board thrusters on July 2 to set its course for an encounter with the asteroid Gaspra in October 1991. This would be the first flyby of an asteroid. (NASA Release 91-99)
James Head of Brown University, a geologist on Magellan's NASA science team, announced that the Magellan spacecraft that was mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar, had discovered a lava flow that might represent a volcanic eruption similar to those currently occurring in Japan and the Philippines. (NASA Release 91-100)
The Washington Post quoted John Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which includes the National Weather Service, as saying that "We can no longer assume that a NASA-built satellite will serve our needs." The statement referred to NASA's plans to launch GOES-NEXT, the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites. NASA tests indicated that two of the main instruments to be used on the satellites: an imager and a temperature-humidity sensor called a sounder, were defective. UPI indicated that Knauss announced the appointment of a task force to consider alternative courses of action regarding a weather satellite, such as leasing a Japanese or European satellite. (W Post, Jun 28/91; UPI, Jun 28/91; NY Times, Jun 29/91; Time, Jul 1/91)
NASA announced that astronaut Bryan D. O'Connor would leave NASA July 29 to become Commander of the Marine Air Detachment at the Naval Air Test Center, Patuxent River, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-101; UPI, Jun 28/91)
According to Tass, two Soviet cosmonauts in a long spacewalk installed two panels on the surface of Mir to study the generation and distribution of super-heavy nuclei in the galaxy as well as a set of detectors to measures streams and spectra of charged particles of space origin. (UPI, Jun 29/91)
According to the Washington Post, as part of U.S.-Soviet discussions leading to a summit, was the possible exchange of American astronauts flying on Mir and Soviet cosmonauts being launched on a U.S. Space Shuttle. (W Post, Jun 29/91)
The New York Times reported that fuel cells, first developed for use in space in the 1960s, were being used increasingly in commercial plants. A fuel cell is a device that converts the energy of a fuel directly to electricity and heat, without combustion. The United States had developed an experimental plant in San Ramon, east of San Francisco, and other plants were considering use of the new technology. (NYT, Jun 30/91)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
NASA announced that on June 29 its 114th Scout launch vehicle placed an Air Force Radiation Experiment into a 450 nautical mile polar orbit. The launch occurred from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, and was delayed one day by bad weather. (NASA Release 91-102)
A number of NASA scientists participated in the International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids held in San Juan Capistrano, California, and jointly sponsored by NASA and The Planetary Society. At congressional request, a NASA committee headed by David Morrison, space science chief at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, was to recommend how to improve the search for asteroids. Another committee was to advise how best to divert threatening asteroids. At the end of the conference July 3, a statement advocated construction of several sophisticated new telescopes to find all significant asteroids and learn if any were on a collision course with Earth. (AP, Jul 1/91; AP, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; P Inq, Jul 6/91; Oakland Tribune, Jul 8/91)
Time published an interview with NASA Administrator Richard Truly in which various questions were asked about the Space Station. Truly justified proposed expenditures by stressing the payoff in such areas as environmental control, life-support research, power generation, and health care technologies as well as the discoveries themselves. He also stated that Mission to Planet Earth was poorly understood but promised "unbelievable benefits." (Time, Jul 1/91)
In an article in the Science section, Time discussed the theory that a giant comet that struck the earth was responsible for killing off dinosaurs. In this connection, the findings of a team of scientists led by Charles Duller at NASA's Ames Research Center were mentioned. The team discovered from satellite photos of Yucatan the semicircle that might indicate a huge buried crater of an asteroid. (Time, Jul 1/91)
The Huntsville Times quoted the General Accounting Office as saying that contrary to earlier concerns, a survey revealed that potential retirements of skilled NASA scientists and engineers would not be a problem. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 1/91)
The media reported on NASA's plans to install corrective lenses on the Hubble Space Telescope in order to correct the faulty lens and at the same time to make other repairs. Details remained to be announced. (AP, Jul 2/91; NY Times, Jul 3/91; W Times, Jul 3/91)
NASA announced that as a result of the huge outpouring of volcanic material from Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, a research team of NASA atmospheric scientists was being sent to the West Indian island of Barbados to gather data to help evaluate the global atmospheric effects of this event. Several NASA scientists subsequently commented on Pinatubo's plume and its spreading. (NASA Release 91-103; W Post, Jul 8/91)
According to the media, spacecraft Galileo successfully fired its thrusters to alter its course, enabling it to flyby the asteroid Gaspra on October 29. (AP, Jul 2/91; UPI, Jul 2/91; USA Today, Jul 3/91
NASA announced that astronaut Michael L. Coats would retire from the Navy and leave NASA August 1 to become Director of Advanced Programs and Technical Planning at Loral in Houston. (NASA Release 91-104; AP, Jul 3/91)
NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected RMS Technologies, Inc., of Landover, Maryland, for a contract for the computing, communication, and network mission needs of the center. (NASA Release C91-y)
Per Gloersen, a senior scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was quoted by the media as reporting in the British publication Nature findings concerning the shrinking of the polar ice cover. Global warming might be the cause, but Gloersen said 30 years of records would be needed for a definite conclusion. (UPI, Jul 3/91; B Sun, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; W Post, Jul 8/91)
UPI reported the practice countdown of the crew of Shuttle Atlantis for its flight July 23. NASA announced that Atlantis would put NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite into orbit on its mission in order to update the satellite tracking network. (UPI, Jul 3/91; unnumbered NASA General Release, undated)
According to the Cleveland Plain Dealer, the Ohio EPA ordered an investigation and cleanup of contamination at NASA's Lewis Research Center. NASA officials stated voluntary cleanup efforts were underway and Peter W. McCallum, NASA's chief of environmental safety said most of the sites had been cleaned up or soon would be; he was confident no contamination was leaving NASA's property. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Jul 3/91)
The media reported that the Air Force had launched an unmanned Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral July 3. The rocket contained a $65 million satellite that joined 10 advanced Global Positioning System spacecraft already circling the globe in order to assist military forces on the ground, at sea, and in the air to determine their location. (UPI, Jul 4/91; W Times, Jul 5/91)
According to the Washington Times, Orbital Science Corporation announced it planned to launch the state's first privately funded orbital flights from the NASA base on Wallops Island by 1993. Orbital was pressuring the governor of Virginia to make the area a tax-free foreign-trade zone, comparable to legislation that has declared Cape Canaveral, Florida, tax-free in order to reduce the launch cost. (W Times, Jul 5/91)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected the team of General Electric Corporation, Cincinnati, and United Technologies Pratt and Whitney Divsion, West Palm Beach, Florida, for a contract for propulsion materials to be used on a 21st century High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C91-z)
NASA announced that a 15-member delegation of Soviet space officials, headed by Oleg N. Shishkin, Minister of General Machine Building, would be visiting NASA headquarters and space centers July 9-16. (NASA Release 91-105)
The press reported that NASA agreed on July 5 to seek new bids on the $191 million mainframe computer contract awarded IBM but protested by the Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based Encore Computer Corporation. (NY Times, Jul 6/91; H Chron, Jul 6/91)
The Antelope Valley Daily News reported that NASA might be flying one of the Advanced Tactical Fighters, namely the F-23 prototype, about which it was negotiating with Northrop Corporation. The aircraft would be used for aeronautics research at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Jul 7/91)
PR Newswire reported that engineers from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company would meet with representatives of NASA and its international partners from July 8 to 25 to review changes to the basic design of Space Station Freedom. Discussion is to center on Work Package 2 dealing with such factors as the propulsion assembly, resource node design, external thermal control, data management, communication and tracking, extravehicular systems and guidance, and navigation and control systems. (PR Newswire, Jul 8/91)
According to a space publication, NASA's cost estimate for its Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program had increased to about $3 billion, and NASA formally announced that the main ASRM goal was to aid the construction of the Space Station. The ASRM was intended to launch an extra 8,000 pounds of Space Station equipment on each Shuttle flight carrying Space Station hardware. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91)
The Space Propulsion newsletter commented on the report of the Stanford University professors who, together with Soviet aerospace engineers, projected that at a cost of $60 billion (about one-eighth NASA's estimate) a joint venture using the Soviet Energia heavy-lift rocket could land humans on Mars by 2012. In contrast, the Stafford Synthesis Group estimated 2014 as the earliest date to reach Mars, using lunar bases established in the interim. Some civilian space experts found flaws in the Stanford study. In line with comments on the Stanford report, the New York Times featured a lengthy article on the designer of the Energia rockets, currently visiting New York and seeking a U.S. buyer for the rocket. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91; NY Times, Jul 9/91)
NASA announced that spacecraft Ulysses had fired two small thrusters to set the final course for its early February 1992 rendezvous with Jupiter. Many of Ulysses' science experiments were expected to yield new data about Jupiter's magnetic field and particle environment. (NASA Release 91-106; AP, Jul 8/91; P Inq, Jul 9/91; W Post, Jul 9/91; USA Today, Jul 9/91; W Times, Jul 9/91)
NASA announced it would resume active space physics experiments by conducting several chemical releases in July and August with the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite. Barium vapor releases in the Caribbean area were involved. (NASA Release 91-107)
The New Republic carried a seven-page article entitled "The Case Against NASA" by Gregg Easterbrook, contributing editor of Newsweek and the Atlantic. The author asserted that NASA needed to be "truly reformed" and outlined under 25 headings, ranging from "Boosters" to "What Is To Be Done?," the failures he perceived in NASA, together with some suggestions for improvement. (New Republic, Jul 8/91)
The Washington Post carried an article about the difficulties Spacehab Inc. was having commercially. NASA said there was a need for its product: a 10-foot-long pressurized module that fits in the cargo area of the Space Shuttle, expanding the cramped living and storage quarters. Problems arose, however, over NASA's ability to cancel contracts unilaterally (which might occur if Congress in its annual appropriations cut NASA's funds) and Congress's ability to cut funds for Spacehab in spite of any commitments NASA made to it. The lengthy article reviews the history of Spacehab and its operations. (W Post, Jul 8/91)
NASA announced its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would participate in two experiments to study the July 11 solar eclipse from the ground and from space. A new cryogenic instrument attached to NASA' Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was to test a theory about the sun's atomic processes in its infrared regions. Also, an x-ray telescope in a sounding rocket, to be launched from White Sands, New Mexico, was to study the solar corona. (NASA Release 91-108)
ST Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, announced its selection by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center to provide support for the High Energy X-Ray Telescope Sounding Rocket Program. (PR Newswire, Jul 9/91)
The media reported that 14 major scientific organizations were joining forces to warn of the "excessive cost" of the planned $30 million Space Station that would "threaten the vitality" of essential scientific research programs and imperil U.S. leadership in world technology. The organizations urged a "balanced" space program but did not call for the Space Station to be killed. (LA Times, Jul 9/91; P Inq, Jul 10/91; W Post, Jul 10/91; NY Times, Jul 10/91; Science, Jul 19/91)
The Wall Street Journal criticized NASA's decision  to drop a proposed instrument to detect environmental change, the High-Resolution Imaging Spectrometer, or HIRIS and to substitute a Japanese instrument being offered NASA at no cost. The Japanese instrument to be built by Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, is the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer, or Aster, to detect minerals and geological formations that may contain oil. Criticism of the decision, which NASA said was based on Hiris being too risky and too expensive, centered on the boost Aster would give Japanese technology as well as the Japanese oil industry and the lost U.S. ability to detect environmental change. (WSJ, Jul 9/91)
NASA announced that the second mission of the Pegasus air-launched space booster was scheduled for July 17. Pegasus was to be launched from below the wing of a NASA B-52 aircraft based at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Pegasus was to carry seven small Defense Department satellites for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and put them into low Earth orbit. (NASA Release N91-49)
Former astronaut Thomas Stafford, head of the Synthesis Group, told Congress it would not require much start-up money to set the U.S. on a course to Mars in the next century. He said funds could come in savings from the Department of Defense and Department of Energy budgets. (AP, Jul 10/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that volunteers in a water taste test at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center had difficulty or were unable to distinguish recycled from regular water. The recycled water came from perspiration collected in a test chamber, and in which the salts, oils, and microorganisms were subsequently removed. The recycling process was designed to be used on the Space Station to minimize need for additional water. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 10/91; W Times, Jul 19/91)
The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
According to the press, Senate budget leaders expressed concern over NASA's ability to launch the GOES-NEXT weather satellite in time to meet weather monitoring needs. They urged that the National Weather Service buy a $100 million backup satellite, possibly obtaining one from Japan. NASA Administrator Richard Truly said NASA accepted responsibility for the delays and cost overruns in the construction of the new satellites. (W Post, Jul 11/91; NY Times, Jul 11/91; C Trin, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91)
NASA announced that the U.S. and Spain had signed a space cooperation agreement providing for the use of Spanish bases and installations as alternative landing sites for the U.S. Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 91-109)
NASA announced that it would display a new exhibit, "NASA: Expanding the Frontiers of Flight," at the 39th Annual Experimental Aircraft Association International Fly-In Convention July 26 - August 1, in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. (NASA Release 91-110)
The press quoted the official Notimex news agency as reporting that the rocket that was to provide data about the sun during the total eclipse on July 11 failed to send back any data. The project was jointly sponsored by the Florida Institute of Technology and the National Autonomous University of Mexico. (AP, Jul 11/91; B Sun, Jul 12/91)
The media reported on the "spectacular" nature for some viewers but confusing for some telescopes of the total solar eclipse. Drake Deming of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt said his team was up most of the night but succeeded in time in solving a problem with one of their instruments. (AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 12/91)
According to AP, the National Research Council endorsed NASA's planned Earth Observation System, which it called "the largest single component of the most ambitious scientific enterprise ever undertaken." The Council stated it had some concern over the program's management, however, and urged the earth science and space research community to keep a close eye on the program. (AP, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 13/91)
The wire services reported that NASA managers reaffirmed their previous decision to resume routine Florida Shuttle landings. This occurred prior to the start of a two-day review to clear Atlantis for blastoff around July 23. (UPI, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 12/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that Boeing's top space scientist, Harvey Willenberg, who had returned from a trip to the Soviet Union, was convinced from the Mir experiments he saw that NASA needed to build Space Station Freedom. The experiments in the area of microgravity were especially impressive. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 11/91)
The media gave a detailed report on plagiarism involving students of professor Walter Frost, and a private for-profit research firm of Frost's that did work for NASA. NASA's Office of Inspector General was currently investigating the apparent extensive plagiarism, which involved at least one NASA staff member. (WSJ, Jul 12/91; AP, Jul 12/91; Htsvl Tms, Jul 14/91; WSJ, Jul 15/91; NYT, Jul 15/91; AP, Jul 15/91; AP, Jul 18/91; W Post, Jul 22/91; Htsvl Tms, Jul 24/91)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company announced it has teamed up with Japanese architectural and engineering firm Shimizu Corporation to develop space exploration technologies for the proposed U.S. lunar/Mars initiative. Each company was to fund its own research, which included applying solar energy on the lunar surface to process materials into useful resources such as oxygen and creating closed system that would recycle most of the products needed for a lunar base or long-term expedition to Mars. (WSJ, Jul 12/91; LA Times, Jul 12/91)
NASA announced that July 23 would be the launch date for Space Shuttle Atlantis, which was to deploy the fifth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. (NASA STS-43 Launch Advisory)
An article in Congressional Quarterly described the careful trimming of various programs performed by Senator Barbara Mikulski in order to provide sufficient funds for the Space Station. (Congressional Quarterly, Jul 13/91)
Parade Magazine contained a feature article on Barbara Morgan, who following the death of Christa McAuliffe in the Challenger disaster, was her designated successor as NASA's teacher in space. NASA Administrator Richard Truly was quoted as saying that after NASA's annual review of the subject, it was determined that it was not yet appropriate to send another teacher on the Shuttle although it was only a matter of time. Morgan stated she recognized the risks of space flight but was nevertheless eager to go ahead with a flight mission. (Parade, Jul 14/91)
According to the New York Times, the Space Studies Board of the National Research Council recommended that NASA move quickly to develop and deploy a system of Earth-monitoring satellites with the intention of studying climate. The proposed Earth Observing System called for six large, heavily instrumented orbiting platforms and smaller supplemental satellites, to cost $30 billion over the next 30 years. (NYT, Jul 14/91)
NASA announced that the last of three SR-71 aircraft, loaned to NASA by the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to arrive at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, in late July. The Antelope Valley Press earlier reported the successful check flight of the Blackbird on July 10, prior to delivery to the NASA facility. The "Blackbirds" were to be used for high-speed, high altitude research in such areas as aerodynamics, propulsion, structures, and thermal protection materials. (NASA Release 91-111; Antelope Valley Press, Jul 11/91)
An article in the Washington Post pointed out NASA's policy of spreading out its contracts for the Space Station and other space projects among numerous states, which helped gain the support of congressional figures for NASA funding. (W Post, Jul 16/91)
NASA announced that the Aviation Safety Reporting System ASRS), which it manages for the Federal Aviation Administration, had prevented many air accidents and saved lives over the past 15 years. ASRS also identified safety issues for the aviation community and released research papers on aviation safety. FAA and NASA celebrated the 15-year anniversary of the program. (NASA Release 91-112; Inside DOT, Jul 25/91)
NASA announced some of the results of its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), built by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. The LDEF was in a space environment from April 1984 to January 1990, with various materials samples and experiments on board. The 57 science and technology experiments gathered data on space radiation, atomic oxygen, meteoroids, contamination, space debris, space systems, and life sciences. Implications of LDEF results were being used in the design of lunar bases and Mars-bound aircraft. (NASA Release 91-113)
According to UPI, a French Ariane rocket successfully boosted the first in a new series of advanced European environmental remote sensing satellites into orbit from the European Space Agency's jungle complex on South America's northern coast. The satellite, with a three-year life, had a radar system and other equipment to study Earth's oceans, ice packs, and land areas in great detail. (UPI, Jul 16/91; P Inq, Jul 18/91)
AP reported that the Council of Engineers and Scientists Organization, whose member unions represent 80,000 scientists, engineers, technical, and professional staff sent a letter to each senator endorsing the Space Station. (AP, Jul 16/91)
The Los Angeles Times quoted National Hurricane Center director Robert C. Sheets as being concerned about the "precarious situation" with regard to hurricane forecasting. The GOES-7, the only U.S. weather satellite in orbit, was nearing the end of its five-year life expectancy and no replacement was available in the near future. Among possibilities were buying a satellite from Japanese or European makers. (LA Times, Jul 16/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, wrote a guest column stressing the importance of the Space Station to manned flight and the opportunity it provided not only for space leadership but also for the development of weightless materials sciences and biotechnology. (Fla Today, Jul 16/91)
The media reported a problem with an electronic component in Space Shuttle Atlantis but it was not expected to delay the launch. However, another power supply problem with the data processor might cause difficulties. (AP, Jul 17/91; UPI, Jul 17/91; USA Today, Jul 17/91)
NASA announced a contract with Thiokol Corporation of Ogden, Utah, to manufacture 68 additional flight sets (136 motors) of redesigned Solid Rocket Motors and six additional motors for flight support for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release C91-bb)
According to UPI, an Orbital Sciences Corporation winged Pegasus rocket, carrying seven Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency "Microsat" research satellites, was launched on July 16 from a B-52 jet. However, controllers lost track of the payload after a possible malfunction. On July 18 Orbital Sciences heard signals from space and learned that the satellites were functioning but had entered a flawed orbit, limiting their lives to less than three years but sufficient to test a new military communications system. (UPI, Jul 17/91; USA Today, Jul 18/91; WSJ, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; W Post, Jul 19/91; USA Today, Jul 19/91; P Inq, Jul 19/91; W Times, Jul 19/91; LA Times, Jul 19/91)
The Senate on July 17 voted 64 to 35 to approve President Bush's $2.03 million request for the Space Station in the new fiscal year, $100 million more than the House appropriated. (W Post, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; UPI, Jul 18/91)
AP cited a NASA statement that despite engineers cooling and shrinking of spacecraft Galileo's stuck main antenna, the antenna remained stuck, threatening the ultimate exploration of Jupiter. (AP, Jul 18/91)
The media reported an article in the journal Science, indicating that despite reports of global warming and African drought, the Sahara desert shrank markedly since 1984, following a substantial expansion over the preceding four years. Two NASA scientists, Compton J. Tucker and William W. Newcomb, at NASA's Laboratory for Terrestrial Physics in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Tech University's International Center for Arid and Semi-Arid Land Studies, conducted the research. Satellite measurements of vegetation on the ground were used to calculate the extent of the desert. (AP, Jul 18/91; NASA Release 91-114; W Post, Jul 21/91; P Inq, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91)
UPI quoted Krasnaya Zvesda (Red Star), the official Soviet armed forces daily, as saying that the Soviet Union would cancel one manned space mission, launch another without a flight engineer, and leave a cosmonaut on the Mir Space Station beyond his planned six-month stay to save money. (UPI, Jul 18/91)
According to the wire services, discovery of trouble in a circuit used to separate the orbiter from the external fuel tank would delay the launch of Atlantis until July 24. (AP, Jul 19/91; UPI, Jul 19/91)
AP quoted Guy Brasseur, director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, as stating that his research indicated the eruption of Mount Pinatubo could lead to reduced levels of protective ozone over North America and Europe in the winter of 1991-92 and the summer of 1992, possibly increasing the risk of skin cancer. Richard Stolarski, ozone researcher at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said the projections were plausible but based on ozone depletion from El Chichon, a Mexican volcano that erupted in 1982, the thought there would be less ozone depletion than predicted. (LA Times, Jul 20/91; P Inq, Jul 20/91)
The press reported that NASA began its countdown for the launch of Atlantis, now postponed until July 24. (AP, Jul 21/91; W Times, Jul 22/91; USA Today, Jul 22/91; UPI, Jul 22/91)
NASA announced that seven of its sounding rockets would be part of an international campaign to study polar Noctilucent Clouds, the highest and coldest clouds on Earth, from Kiruna, Sweden, July 25 through August 12, 1991. (NASA Release 91-115)
The media covered the final countdown preparations of the astronauts for the scheduled launch of Atlantis on July 24. Mission managers were satisfied with the completion of all necessary repairs. Then a storm on July 23 threatened to delay the blastoff, followed by the discovery early the morning of July 24 of trouble with a critical main engine computer. The discovery forced launch cancellation and postponement of the flight by at least one week to install a new unit. UPI reported on repair efforts and attempts to discover the source of the problem. (AP, Jul 22/91; C Trin, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91; AP, Jul 23/91; UPI, Jul 23/91; NY Times, Jul 24/91; USA Today, Jul 24/91; W Post, Jul 24/91; W Times, Jul 24/91; AP, Jul 24/91; LA Times, Jul 24/91; CSM, Jul 24/91; UPI, Jul 24/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; AP, 25 Jul/91; UPI, 25 Jul 91)
The Huntsville Times quoted Aerospace America as saying that Soviet officials confirmed reports that the Soviet military was preparing a manned space fighter with a crew of two to use against the U.S. Space Shuttle. The story cited a visit by General Dynamics technology analyst Richard Ward with Soviet designers. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 22/91)
NASA announced that its In-Space Technology Experiments Program would pass a major milestone when the Tank Pressure Control Experiment went into orbit aboard Atlantis. Transfer and control of very cold (cryogenic) fluids in microgravity is critical to plans for several future U.S. space efforts. This experiment was to demonstrate how cryogenic storage tank pressures could be controlled. (NASA Release 91-116)
Members of NASA's Project Viking, the group that put the first two spaceships on Mars 15 years previously, gathered at the Langley Research Center to commemorate that event on July 20, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, Jul 23/91)
NASA announced the selection of Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, to provide institutional and programmatic support services for Space Station Freedom Program and Operations Office, Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release C91-cc)
RMS Technologies, Inc., Marlton, Pennsylvania, announced it had received a contract from NASA to provide operational support for workstations, other computers, and peripheral equipment at NASA's Lewis Research Center. (P Inq, Jul 24/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, speaking as chairman of the National Space Council, said the U.S. would not buy or build more Space Shuttle orbiters. It is to continue to use the four existing orbiters into the next century but planned to develop a new family of rockets to replace the current fleet of unmanned vehicles. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said he helped devise the policy's wording and was "totally in support" of it.(P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; B Sun, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; USA Today, Jul 25/91; WSJ, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; Washington Technology, Jul 25/91; Htsvl Tms, Jul 26/91; Peninsula Times Tribune, Jul 30/91 quoting San Diego Tribune; B Sun, Jul 31/91)
The media reported on hearings of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology regarding the U.S. weather satellite. The General Accounting Office (GAO) found that the program for a new satellite, GOES-Next, was more than three years behind schedule and costs more than doubled because of mismanagement by NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and poor workmanship by contractors. The GAO report considered the problem originated when NASA neglected to have a critical engineering review of the feasibility of the program's objectives at the beginning of the project. (UPI, Jul 25/91; AP, Jul 25/91;  NY Times, Jul 26/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, an Air Force-funded research center in El Segundo, California, was to begin in the fall to study the effect of rocket launches on the Earth's fragile ozone shield. Aerospace Corporation planned to investigate the role of solid rocket fuel combustion in the destruction of the zone. These studies would supplement studies of ozone depletion done by NASA and would likely influence the types of fuels to be used in the National Launch System, a new generation of rockets scheduled for use after the year 2000. (LA Times, Jul 25/91)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center's Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), an instrument aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory, had detected "the most distant and by far, the most luminous gamma-ray source ever seen." The EGRET team, led by Carl Fichtel, reported to the International Astronomical Union, Cambridge, Massachusetts, that a source of intense gamma radiation was detected between June 15 and June 28. The source was identified as the variable Quasar 3C279, located in the constellation Virgo. (NASA Release 91-117; W Post, Jul 29/91)
NASA announced that a developmental Space Shuttle main engine sustained extensive internal damage while it was undergoing ground testing July 24 at NASA's Stennis Space Center, near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi. The engine differed from engines used in Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 91-118)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly and Secretary of Energy James D. Watkins signed an interagency agreement on cooperation in areas relating to space isotope power. The agreement updated an earlier 1965 pact and delineated authorities of NASA and DOE on research, technology development, design, production, delivery, spacecraft integration, and launch support for radioisotope power systems. (NASA Release 91-119)
NASA announced its release of new Magellan radar images of Venus representing coverage of 90 percent of the planet. The images highlighted the continuing volcanism and tectonism on Venus. (NASA Release 91-120; AP, Jul 27/91; C Trin, Jul 28/91)
The Chicago Tribune reported that Northwestern University scientists had discovered a process called sputtering that can coat hardened steel with titanium nitride films a few microns thick and double its hardness. The computer-controlled system was built for Northwestern's Basic Industrial Research Laboratory (BIRL) in a project that also involved funds from NASA and the Department of Energy. (C Trin, Jul 28/91)
The media covered NASA's go-ahead to proceed toward launch of Atlantis on August 1. The countdown began on July 29. (NASA STS-43 Launch Advisory; P Inq, Jul 30/91; W Times, Jul 30/91; NY Times, Jul 30/91; USA Today, Jul 30/91; UPI, Jul 30/91; P Inq, Jul 31/91; UPI, Jul 31/91; C Trin, Jul 31/91)
The New York Times reported on the work of W.C. Wolverton, who formerly worked for NASA in research on plants that help clean indoor air. He left NASA to establish his own firm to research the use of houseplants in countering air pollution. Wolverton indicated that NASA was continuing its research in this area. (NY Times, Jul 30/91)
NASA announced that contrary to a news report that appeared, NASA was not planning a mission to visit the Hubble Space Telescope any earlier than late 1993. The science community had discussed this possibility because of some observed erratic behavior of the Hubble in one of the maneuvering gyros. Alternative servicing strategies were being evaluated. The announcement contradicted a Washington Post article. (NASA Release 91-121; W Post, Jul 31/91; AP, Jul 31/91; UPI, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91; P Inq, Aug 1/91; USA Today, Aug 1/91)
According to AP, the House subcommittee on Science, Space, and Technology planned to examine NASA's "midlife crisis," referring to the agency's "management failures" and "loss of leadership." The report mentioned NASA's recent series of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, the GOES weather satellite, the postponements in the Space Shuttle launch, and the Galileo space probe's jammed antenna. (AP, Jul 31/91)
NASA announced that as part of the agreement between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev during the July 30-31 Summit in Moscow, the U.S. and the Soviet Union had agreed to expand space cooperation. This is to consist of flying a U.S. astronaut on a long-duration Soviet Space Station Mir mission and a Soviet cosmonaut on a U.S. Space Shuttle mission, increasing cooperation in monitoring the global environment from space, and initiating annual consultations between the two governments on civil space issues. (NASA Release 91-122; P Inq, Aug 1/91; NY Times, Aug 1/91; AP, Aug 1/91; W Post, Aug 1/91)
A column by Robert C. Cowen cited variances in figures for global warming among NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and the University of Alabama at Huntsville from those of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, the Climate Research Unit of East Anglia in England, and the Soviet Union's Hydrometerorological Scientific Research Center. According to the British and the Goddard Institute, 1990 was the warmest year on record globally but according to the Marshall Center, using different data, the hottest years in descending order were 1987, 1988, 1983, and 1990. (CSM, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91)
The scheduled launch of Atlantis on August 1 was delayed by false alarm over a pressure valve and then by bad weather, the media reported. The launch was rescheduled for August 2. The astronauts' first task after takeoff was to launch the $120 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, which was done successfully. Various onboard experiments were begun, together with some medical research experiments designed to test the effects of weightlessness. (B Sun, Aug 2/91; USA Today, Aug 2/91; NY Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; UPI, Aug 2/91; P Inq, Aug 3/91; NY Times, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 3/91; AP, Aug 3/91; UPI, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 4/91; NY Times, Aug 4/91; UPI, Aug 4/91; C Trin, Aug 4/91; B Sun, Aug 5/91; W Times, Aug 5/91; USA Today, Aug 5/91; P Inq, Aug 5/91; C Trin, Aug 5/91; LA Times, Aug 5/91; AP, Aug 5/91; UPI, Aug 5/91)
The press reported that the subcommittee on investigations and oversight of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on August 1 examined NASA's functioning at a hearing entitled "NASA's Midlife Crisis." The chairman of the subcommittee, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, cited the need for NASA to be a "prudent steward" and expressed a lack of confidence in NASA's ability to carry out its mission. Various industry representatives testified about NASA's operations and its contracting. NASA inspector general Bill D. Colvin said NASA had failed to keep a sharp eye on its programs, operations, and contractors, resulting in the waste of millions of dollars. (W Post, Aug 2/91; B Sun, Aug 2/91; LA Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; AvWk, Aug 5/91)
An article about the colorful sunsets along the California coast referred to the effects of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo. According to Francisco Valero, chief of atmospherics research at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, Pinatubo probably spewed some 16 million tons of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, causing the spectacular sunsets. However, the aftereffects were that the cloud of sulfuric acid droplets could further accelerate the depletion of the ozone layer. (P Inq, Aug 3/91)
According to AP, antennas on six major spacecraft had malfunctioned during the preceding 17 months, threatening the crucial flow of information from missions. Accordingly engineers conducted extra reviews of antennas on Atlantis. Henry Hoffman, guidance and control chief at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said part of the problem was that antennas were increasingly large and complex, requiring folding for launch and problems arose when they were extended or unfolded. (AP, Aug 4/91)
Gregg Easterbrook wrote an article entitled "Space Agency Lost its Edge in Technology Long Ago," in which he criticized NASA's technology on the Atlantis. As an example, the computer system had only one megabyte of random-access memory in contrast to laptop computers available at Radio Shack with two to four megabytes of memory. The author attributed much of the loss of a technological cutting edge to overstaffing and government paperwork requirements as opposed to the rapid and creative activity of NASA's early days. (LA Times, Aug 4/91)
NASA announced a number of contract arrangements. A contract extension was awarded to Vitro Corporation of Silver Spring, Maryland, to continue safety and support services at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. NASA further selected Nichols Research Corporation, Huntsville, Alabama, and BDM International, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to compete for a support contract for the Earth Observing System Program Office in Washington. In addition, NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, contracted with Johnson Controls, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida to provide maintenance and operational services at Johnson. (NASA Releases C91-dd, C91ee, C91ff)
NASA announced that on July 15 at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, NASA's F/A-18 High-Alpha Research Vehicle maneuvered in flight for the first time using a specially designed thrust vectoring system. Such research flights were to continue over the next two years and were designed to make future jet fighters safer. (NASA Release 91-123)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, commended U.S. government-sponsored educational displays at the Experimental Aircraft Association's exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin. It specifically complimented NASA's Space Station and Space Shuttle displays and astronaut Steve Nagel's presentations as effectively communicating U.S. space leadership. (AvWk, Aug 5/91)
Extensive media coverage of experiments performed by the astronauts aboard Atlantis continued. Among such experiments were testing of equipment to be used on the Space Station, such as fiber optic cables to transmit signals, a cooling system, and modifications in controls for computers. Another experiment involved lighting a small fire to learn how flames propagate in the absence of gravity. In addition, a NASA optometrist tested eye drops on himself and astronauts performed treadmill tests and blood experiments. Astronauts commented on the large amount of haze around the Earth, possibly from the Kuwaiti oil field fires or from the volcanic eruptions of Mount Pinatubo. (P Inq, Aug 6/91; NY Times, Aug 6/91; W Times, Aug 6/91; W Post, Aug 6/91; USA Today, Aug 6/91; AP, Aug 6/91; UPI, Aug 6/91; P Inq, Aug 7/91; W Times, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91; USA Today, Aug 7/91; AP, Aug 7/91; UPI, Aug 7/91; P Inq, Aug 8/91; NY Times, Aug 8/91; W Post, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 8/91; AP, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91; B Sun, Aug 9/91; W Times, Aug 9/91; AP, Aug 9/91; UPI, Aug 9/91)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had made a supplemental agreement to the contract with McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California. The modification included the changes made in Space Station Freedom Program review activities. (NASA Release 91-124)
Randy Berridge of the Astronauts Memorial Foundation stated that the memorial to American astronauts killed in the line of duty was closed for inspections after strange noises were heard coming from the monument. After engineers checked the structure, it reopened on August 17. Subsequently, Representative Vernon Peeples, chairman of the Florida House Transportation Committee, questioned whether money for the monument had been misused. (UPI, Aug 6/91; P Inq, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91; USA Today, Aug 7/91; LA Times, Aug 19/91; P Inq, Aug 20/91)
According to AP, two congressmen, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, and Sherwood Boehlert, Republican of New York, urged that the United States "borrow" or buy a GMS-5 weather satellite being built by the U.S. firm Hughes for Japan. This would allow NASA time to fix the problems with the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-Next. In connection with GOES, Washington Technology reported in some detail on the "troubled history" of the weather satellite and its contractors and congressional criticism of the program. The Christian Science Monitor reported on lessons learned from GOES-Next, including not to cut corners in developing sophisticated technology and the importance of sharing weather data globally. (AP, Aug 7/91; Washington Technology, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 20/91; H Post, Aug 21/91)
NASA announced that results from a NASA flight test program showed that new sensor technology might provide airline flight crews with advance warning of "microbursts" that sometimes harbored potentially dangerous windshears. (NASA Release 91-125)
The media reported a study contained in the British journal Nature, written by Brian Toon, senior researcher at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, California, Christopher P. McKay, who also worked at Ames, and James F. Kasting, associate professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State University. The authors concluded it would be relatively easy to alter Mars' atmosphere to make it suitable for plants. Making the planet fit for people, however, would take about 100,000 years. (P Inq, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; C Trin, Aug 8/91; LA Times, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement in Buenos Aires by Vice President Dan Quayle and Argentine President Carlos Menem on cooperation in the civil uses of space. A framework for future cooperative space projects between NASA and the newly created Argentine National Commission on Space Activities was established. NASA Release 91-126)
Washington Technology carried two articles on NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS). The first discussed the possibility of the EOS instrument payload being divided among three launch vehicles while still maintaining its "simultaneity." The second quoted NASA officials Lennard Fisk and Shelby Tilford as addressing the EOS Engineering Review Panel in La Jolla, California. They said NASA had devised a restructured plan to remove several of the EOS satellite sensors and replace them with "ballast" of thousands of pounds of lead to maintain payload balance. (Washington Technology, Aug 8/91)
The Washington Post reported on growing congressional hesitations about supporting NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program. Legislators recently realized the mission would cost almost as much as the Space Station although it would carry only robots, not people. The Senate recommended cutting $50 million from the administration's 1992 Earth Observing System (EOS) budget request. The EOS, which would involve a series of large, sophisticated satellites, is to be the centerpiece of the mission. The House cut $145 million from the proposed budget request. Meanwhile, a panel of aerospace experts is reviewing the EOS engineering design and posing difficult questions. (W Post, Aug 9/91)
According to the Washington Times, Eosat, based in Lanham, Maryland, a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Company and General Electric Company, defeated its competitor and gained the contract for distributing images from the new Soviet Almaz satellite. (W Times, Aug 9/91)
The New York Times cited a report by Jean O. Dickey, a geodesist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and Raymond Hide, a geophysicist at Oxford, published in the journal Science. They analyzed the rotation of the earth, which is fitfully and almost imperceptibly slowing. More accurate measurements than in the past were possible by bouncing laser signals off quartz reflectors left on the moon by Apollo astronauts. (NY Times, Aug 9/91)
Several media articles dealt with attempts to rescue spacecraft Galileo's mission. The Los Angeles Times described Galileo's flight, which was functioning perfectly toward Jupiter, apart from its malfunctioning antenna. Engineers sought both by heating and cooling the craft to unstick the antenna. The New York Times reported in detail on efforts by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, operated by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, to free the antenna, thus salvaging the mission. If efforts failed, Galileo would be unable to communicate discoveries to scientists because the craft's small antennas could not transmit recorded pictures until returning to the vicinity of Earth. The third attempt to fix the antenna was pronounced a failure on August 20. Other possible courses of action were discussed. (LA Times, Aug 9/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; W Post, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91;  NY Times, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; UPI, Aug 21/91; AP, Aug 28/91)
The Antelope Valley Press quoted John Young, special assistant for engineering, operations, and safety at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston as saying that for NASA to land Shuttles at Kennedy Space Center instead of Edwards Air Force Base in California posed an increased risk. Although the Florida landing saved NASA the cost of ferrying a Shuttle back from California and the five to seven days involved, Florida weather was more problematic. Furthermore, Edwards had more runway alternatives whereas Kennedy had only one. John E. Pike, space policy analyst for the Federation of American Scientists said NASA should wait on Florida landings till all Shuttles were equipped with drag chutes to slow them down. (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 9/91)
AP reported that Space Shuttle Columbia was bolted atop a jumbo jet and flown from Cape Canaveral to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, before proceeding on August 11 to Rockwell International's Shuttle assembly plant in Palmdale, California. The arrival of Columbia in Palmdale on August 13 was enthusiastically greeted by the inhabitants. (AP, Aug 10/91; Antelope Valley, Aug 14/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
A Business Week article on attempts to make the commercial space-launch business profitable, quoted NASA Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson Jr. He stressed the need for "real, nongovernmental customers" in order to make the program a success. The article summarized the work of various commercial firms and mentioned a number of instances of unsuccessful rocket launches. (Bus Wk, Aug 12/91)
NASA announced that the first flight of a NASA ozone instrument on a Soviet spacecraft would occur in August. NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) was to be flown on a Soviet Meteor-3 meteorological satellite to be launched August 15 from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Soviet Cylone rocket. (NASA Release 91-127; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
The media discussed plans for NASA's next Shuttle flight, that of Discovery in September to deploy a satellite to study the ozone layer in Earth's upper atmosphere. Discovery was moved to the launch pad, and various systems were connected to prepare for a practice countdown. (UPI, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91)
According to the wire services, two of three generators on Space Shuttle Atlantis were inadvertently left running after the landing. As a result, the generators were flooded with water, a byproduct of the power-generating process, and were being checked. (AP, Aug 13/91; UPI, Aug 14/91; O Sen Star, Aug 15/91; Fla Today, Aug 15/91)
NASA announced the opening of the new Biocomputation Center at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The center, under Muriel Ross, had the task of studying the neural network to understand how nerves are organized and function. (NASA Release 91-129)
According to Patrick McCormick of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines might cool global temperatures by a few tenths of a degree for as long as five or 10 years. (W Post, Aug 14/91)
NASA announced that its Soft X-Ray Telescope, which is designed to study solar flares, was scheduled to be launched aboard a Japanese spacecraft on August 26, under a cooperative agreement with the Japanese. (NASA Release 91-130)
An article citing Technology Review, referred to the system developed by NASA's Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resources Information Services to fight fires by enabling firefighters to "see" through the fire. (San Francisco Examiner, Aug 14/91)
The media reported the launch of the Soviet Meteor-3 weather satellite carrying the NASA-built Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS). The Meteor was to view the hole in the ozone over Antarctica in September and October; the United States and the Soviet Union were to share ozone information gained. (AP, Aug 15/91; UPI, Aug 15/91; P Inq, Aug 16/91; W Post, Aug 16/91; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
NASA announced that investigations of the sun's fiery outer atmosphere would intensify when the Ulysses spacecraft passed behind the sun on August 21. Edward J. Smith, Project Scientist for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that at conjunction (when the spacecraft and Earth are on opposite sides of the sun), radio waves transmitted from the spacecraft would travel through and become distorted by the innermost region of the corona. (NASA Release 91-131)
NASA announced the granting of three study contracts to Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, Sunnyvale, California; McDonnell Douglas Corporation, Huntington Beach, California; and TRW, Redondo Beach, California. The contracts were intended to support the definition of the new National Launch System, a modular family of launch vehicles to support NASA and Department of Defense missions into the 21st century. (NASA Release C91-gg; UPI, Aug 16/91; Business Wire, Aug 19/91)
An editorial commended NASA for considering a plan to decrease the risk of space experiments by using a larger number of small satellites, with smaller numbers of instruments. This would increase flexibility in the space program, making it more efficient and possibly cheaper. (SF Chron, Aug 16/91)
The Washington Post discussed the success of NASA engineers in fixing the computer software "bug" that caused spacecraft Magellan, after its arrival at Venus, to lose contact with Earth. Magellan mission director James Scott of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California confirmed that the problem was solved and possible similar flaws in other space programs were being eliminated. (W Post, Aug 18/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA researchers produced various vegetables in their imitation space garden, free from soil or sun, at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The experiment, designed to prepare for Space Station existence, could not, however, reproduce weightlessness. (LA Times, Aug 18/91)
Gregg Easterbrook, contributing editor for Newsweek and Atlantic Monthly, wrote a lengthy article criticizing NASA's slow response to the need for various reforms. He particularly faulted the formation of commissions as being easier than correcting errors and discussed the U.S. lack of a "throwaway space booster." (W Post, Aug 18/91)
The media covered the destruction after launch of Orbital Sciences Corporation's Aries rocket carrying secret Pentagon experiments for Star Wars. The rocket went out of control soon after liftoff and had to be destroyed. (AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91; NY Times, Aug 21/91; WSJ, Aug 21/91; W Post, Aug 21/91; USA Today, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; W Times, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; C Trin, Aug 21/91; LA Times, Aug 21/91)
NASA's Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Experiments Program Manager Dean Olmstead expressed NASA's pleasure that the U.S. Army had joined NASA to conduct various ACTS experiments. ACTS forms the center of NASA's satellite communications research and development efforts. (PR Newswire, Aug 20/91)
NASA announced that researchers from its Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, would use satellite and airborne instruments to measure the surface elevation of polar glaciers. The program was designed to aid scientists determine ice buildup or melting resulting from global climate change. The program is to occur in Greenland between August 23 and September 16. (NASA Release 91-133)
NASA announced that its Joint Program Office, consisting of NASA and the Department of Defense, was sponsoring a competition for the nations's undergraduate engineering schools to design and build a mock-up of the X-30 National Aero-Space plane. (NASA Release 91-134)
NASA announced that subsequent to the failure of its attempt the preceding week to release the antenna of spacecraft Galileo, it would try again in December 1991 when Galileo would be farther from the sun and thus cooler. (NASA Release 91-135; AP, Aug 20/91; LA Times, Aug 21/91; UPI, Aug 21/91; CSM, Aug 22/91; Htsvl Tms, Aug 28/91)
AP reported that astronaut John Blaha, commander of the Atlantis mission, said he used the post-flight news conference to express his views on the space program and the importance of the Space Station, after reading criticism of the latter. (AP, Aug 21/91)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch on September 12, would deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) 350 miles above Earth. The UARS is to study humankind's effect on the planet's atmosphere and its shielding ozone layer and is the first major flight element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 91-136)
According to the Washington Post, the Hubble Space Telescope discovered evidence that dying stars can rejuvenate themselves when they collide with each other. The violent collision enables them to be reborn as a younger, brighter star. (W Post, Aug 22/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91)
NASA announced crew members for eight future Space Shuttle missions, of which the first, a Microgravity Laboratory mission, is scheduled for May 1992. (NASA Release 91-137; AP, Aug 23/91; UPI, Aug 23/91; LA Times, Aug 24/91; AvWk, Aug 26/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of General Spence M. Armstrong, USAF (Retired) for the newly established position of Associate Administrator for Human Resources and Education. (NASA Release 91-138)
Concurrently, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Michael D. Griffin for the new position of Associate Administrator for Exploration. (NASA Release 91-139; SP News, Aug 26-Sep 8/91)
NASA program scientist Edward Weiler said in a telephone interview with UPI that an emergency Shuttle mission to replace faulty gyroscopes and solar panels aboard the Hubble Space Telescope was not needed before a flight already set for 1993 or early 1994. As a precaution, however, NASA engineers were perfecting computer control software that would stabilize the telescope if all its gyroscopes were to fail, until a Shuttle repair mission were mounted. (UPI, Aug 23/91)
The media carried the discovery, announced on August 23, by three astronomers, Donald P. Schneider of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Maarten Schmidt of the California Institute of Technology, and James E. Gunn of Princeton University of the oldest and most distant object yet found, a 900 million year-old quasar. The discovery resulted from the use of a supersensitive digital camera, developed by Gunn for the Hubble telescope. The camera was attached to Mount Palomar's Hale telescope and special filters were used. (B Sun, Aug 26/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91)
An editorial in a space publication urged the Bush Administration to put pressure on NASA to implement the recommendations of the Augustine panel with regard to NASA's structure, management, and priorities, and the Synthesis Group, or Stafford report on exploration missions. (SP News, Aug 26-Sep 8/91)
Space Propulsion newsletter carried a discussion of NASA's 1993 budget plan, scheduled to be submitted to the White House August 30. In view of budget limitations, and an inflation rate of 4.1 percent, the article highlighted the call in the Senate report for NASA to submit a budget that assumed only a 5 percent annual increase through 1995. (SP News, Aug 26-Sep 8/91)
Michael Griffin, deputy for technology at the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, said that the reason the Aries rocket of Orbital Sciences Corporation had to be destroyed when it went off course on August 20 was that a technician loaded the wrong computer program into the rocket's guidance unit. The matter would be investigated. (P Inq, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; W Post, Aug 27/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; USA Today, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91; AP, Aug 27/91)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute announced the cosponsorship of a conference on Advanced Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Technologies at the Cleveland Convention Center September 4-6. The conference is to be part of the Lewis Center's 50th anniversary celebration. (NASA Release 91-140)
The Wall Street Journal featured two inventors, of whom one, Khanh Dinh of Vietnamese origin, with NASA's assistance developed an innovative heat pipe technology. His company won a NASA contract to work on the heat-removal system for the Space Shuttle and also won a federal award for helping to commercialize space technology. (WSJ, Aug 27/91)
NASA announced the selection of BDM International Inc., McLean, Virginia, as the mission advisory and assistance contractor for the Earth Observing System Program Office in Washington. (NASA Release C91-ii)
NASA announced that September 12 was set for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery and its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. The announcement followed completion of the Flight Readiness Review. (NASA Launch Advisory, Aug 28/91; CSM, Aug 28/91; UPI, Aug 28/91; DPA, Aug 28/91; P Inq, Aug 29/91; W Times, Aug 29/91; NY Times, Aug 29/91; USA Today, Aug 29/91; LA Times, Aug 29/91; AP, Aug 29/91)
Bob MacMillan, public information manager for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said scientists had ordered the Magellan spacecraft to reduce its mapping of Venus and stay in the shade to prevent recording equipment from overheating. (AP, Aug 28/91)
James R. Thompson, NASA Deputy Administrator, was quoted as praising NASA's preeminence in space and aeronautics technology but admitting its recent difficulties. In view of these, Thompson indicated he thought NASA should slow its push for the Space Station and instead adapt the Space Shuttle to fly longer missions to demonstrate why a Space Station would be valuable.  (Birmingham News, Aug 29/91)
NASA announced that the Magellan spacecraft, mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar, had discovered the longest channel known in the solar system, 4,200 miles long. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, said it was not known what formed the channel. (NASA Release 91-141; LA Times, Aug 30/91; UPI, Aug 30/91)
Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science announced that Japan had successfully launched a solar flare observation satellite, designed to analyze X-rays and gamma rays from solar flares. (DPA, Aug 30/91)
Exploring the Moon and Mars, a report by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment, was quoted. The report advocated the need for the United States to take the development and use of robotic technology more seriously if robots are to be used in a mission to Mars. Furthermore, the report projected that robots would be considerably cheaper than human exploration that NASA appeared to favor. (W Times, Aug 30/91)
Robert C. Cowen, a science writer for the Christian Science Monitor, wrote of a recent article in the journal Science by Compton J. Tucker and Wilbur W. Newcomb of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Technical University in Lubbock. They used American polar-orbiting weather satellites to show the shifting sands of the Sahara Desert. (B Sun, Aug 30/91)
AP reported that the Baikonur Space Station in western Kazakhstan seemed ready to avoid the problems that harmed nuclear testing at Semipalatinsk. A Soviet space delegation visited the Kazakh capital of Alma Ata in April to conclude a program of scientific, technical, and economic cooperation between the two countries and to build a training school for young cosmonauts in Leninsk. (AP, Aug 30/91)
According to the Press Trust of India, quoting the Indian Space Research Organization, India's second remote-sensing satellite, launched on August 29 by a Soviet rocket from the Baikonur cosmodrome, sent back its first pictures August 30. (AP. Aug 30/91)
The media covered NASA comments on new discoveries about Venus, which appeared to have ongoing geological processes. Jeffrey J. Plaut, a NASA scientist, compared radar images taken by the Magellan spacecraft in November 1990 with those taken in July 1991. The images revealed what Stephen Saunders, the Magellan Project scientist, described as a "giant landslide." (P Inq, Aug 31/91; W Post, Aug 31/91; NY Times, Aug 31/91; LA Times, Aug 31/91; AP, Aug 31/91; UPI, Aug 31/91)
In an article entitled "Freedom's Wobbly Flight," Mark L. Goldstein criticized NASA's large spending on the Space Station at the expense of other NASA programs. He gave a history of the Freedom program, its costs, and its relationship to Congress as well as the criticisms by the scientific community. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
Steve Piacente, Washington correspondent for the Charleston Post-Courier, wrote "Weather Service Modernization: No Goes" describing problems of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA with launching new weather satellites. Lack of effective supervision of contractors and poor engineering workmanship were among the shortcomings. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
Henry S.F. Cooper Jr. in an 18-page article in the New Yorker entitled "Annals of Space - We Don't Have to Prove Ourselves," discussed NASA's programs primarily as seen from the work of two prominent NASA veterans, Maxime A. Faget, chairman of the board of Space Industries International, and Caldwell C. Johnson, the firm's chief designer. (New Yorker, Sep ?/91)
Galileo Galilei, the 17th century Italian astronomer, is to be the first classical scientist to be honored by the Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico. The U.S. spacecraft on its way to Jupiter since 1989, was named in his honor. (C Trin, Sep 1/91)
The Los Angeles Times reported that in order to minimize the impact on California's economy of job losses in the aerospace industry, Governor Pete Wilson sent letters to Congress supporting the B-2 bomber and NASA's Space Station project. (LA Times, Sep 1/91)
The media reported the Air Force announcement that the second attempted launch of an Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments was postponed for at least one month because of a technical problem. (AP, Sep 2/91; NY Times, Sep 3/91; W Post, Sep 3/91; W Times, Sep 3/91; P Inq, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 3/91; C Trin, Sep 3/91; LA Times, Sep 3/91)
The Los Angeles Times covered the fifth annual Conference on Small Satellites, held at Utah State University. Most of the scientists and engineers attending favored NASA using smaller satellites for specific goals rather than larger spacecraft, which they believed to be NASA's trend. (LA Times, Sep 2/91)
The New York Times reported that Soviet space officials told the White House that the Soviet civilian space program might collapse unless it made large sales to the West. Soviet economic problems were the major cause as well as parliamentary attacks on the space program as wasteful. (NY Times, Sep 3/91; UPI, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 4/91; Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
A Chicago Tribune article discussed the progress and problems facing the development of the National Aerospace Plane. One of the difficulties was that above Mach 8, engineers deal with such high speeds that there are no wind tunnels in which simulations can be performed. Furthermore, six separate designs from five major contractors: Rockwell International, General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Pratt and Whitney, and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International were integrated into a single vehicle. More than 1,000 engineers from these firms were assigned to the project. (C Trin, Sep 3/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that NASA engineers were trying to fix an intermittent power failure in the Hubble Space Telescope affecting one of the two ultraviolet detectors housed in the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph. As a result, some 30 percent of research planned for the spectrograph must be postponed. (B Sun, Sep 4/91; LA Times, Sep 9/91)
According to UPI, an Atlas-2 rocket built by General Dynamics Corporation was seriously damaged during a fueling test at the launch pad on August 25. As a result, the rocket's launch, which was to ferry a Defense Satellite Communications System satellite into orbit for the Pentagon, was postponed till November. (UPI, Sep 4/91)
Florida Today described the opening on September 3 at the Kennedy Space Center of a third garage for NASA's four-Orbiter Space Shuttle fleet. The hangar was outfitted with equipment intended for the Air Force's mothballed Shuttle launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, saving NASA about $40 million. (Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Paris Observatory, using data from the Voyager 1 spacecraft, for the first time had described an anti-greenhouse effect on a solar system body. In an article in Science magazine, they also described the temperature structure and energy balance on Titan, Saturn's largest moon. (NASA Release 91-143)
Extensive media coverage preceded the scheduled launching of Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12. The countdown was planned to begin on September 9, but the discovery of a leak in the orbital steering system might delay the mission. The flight was to be the first in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program and was to place into orbit the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). The UARS was to carry 10 scientific instruments, of which four would study the ozone layer. (AP, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 8/91; W Post, Sep 8/91; NY Times, Sep 8/91; P Inq, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 9/91; W Times, Sep 9/91; USA Today, Sep 9/91; C Trin, Sep 9/91; B Sun, Sep 10/91; NY Times, Sep 10/91; P Inq, Sep 10/91; W Times, Sep 10/91; LA Times, Sep 10/91; AP, Sep 10/91; UPI, Sep 10/91)
The media reported the concern of Soviet cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station that the station and the space program in general might be sold because of Russia's economic plight. The role of the new Soviet republics with regard to space was also undetermined. Subsequently, Yuri Semyonov, general designer of the Energia team that managed Mir, said according to Tass, that the Space Station would remain the property of his collective. (NY Times, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 7/91; P Inq, Sep 8/91; B Sun, Sep 8/91; AP, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91)
UPI quoted the publication Aviation Week and Space Technology as saying that a huge Soviet SL-16 Zenit rocket carrying a spy satellite exploded shortly after launch on August 30. (UPI, Sep 7/91)
A local newspaper described the flight of the ER-2 (Earth Resources) giant high-flying spy plane that flew over the San Joaquin-Sacramento Valley. In 4 1/2 hours, the plane of the NASA-Ames Research Center captured more than 7 million acres on film. The photographs were to be a resource for the best use of water supplies in California.  (Bakersfield Californian, Sep 7/91)
According to the New York Times, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration was completing arrangements to get exclusive use of the European weather satellite Meteosat-3. The purpose would be to move it further west to cover the United States more thoroughly if the U.S. weather satellite, GOES-7, were to fail. NASA was several years behind in the development of new U.S. weather satellites, the GOES-NEXT, originally scheduled to begin operating in 1989 but now probably late 1992 at the earliest. Subsequently, several newspapers reported arrangements made for the United States to borrow at least one and possibly more European weather satellites. (NY Times, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91)
In a detailed presentation accompanied by a statistical table, the Wall Street Journal recounted the planned and actual flight dates and costs of NASA space projects to date. It concluded that the UARS flight of Discovery was the only one to stay within its cost projection, but it would be almost two years late. (WSJ, Sep 9/91)
A space publication printed an adapted version of Senator Dale Bumpers' (Democrat from Arkansas) speech when he introduced legislation in July to cut funding on the NASA Space Station drastically. He favored solving U.S. problems on the ground, not in space. The same issue carried remarks of Senator Jim Sasser (Democrat from Tennessee) that the Space Station was something the United States could not afford. Furthermore, the magazine carried an interview with Jim Beggs, chairman of Spacehab Inc. and former NASA administrator, concerning his organization's relationship to NASA. (SP News, Sep 9-15/91)
Lennard A. Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, announced the appointment of Dirk D. Frimout as payload specialist for the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS-1) Spacelab mission, scheduled for early 1992. (NASA Release 91-144)
Lennard Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator, announced that the two largest mirrors for NASA's Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility have been successfully tested in the new X-ray Calibration Facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-145)
NASA also announced that President George Bush would join NASA Administrator Richard Truly in a back-to-school special program for elementary students on NASA Select Television. (NASA Release 91-146)
The media covered extensively final preparations leading up to the evening launch of Discovery in its 13th flight, a record. Biographic data were given concerning members of the mission as well as descriptions of the satellite to be launched to gather ozone information. (B Sun, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 12/91; USA Today, Sep 12/91; P Inq, Sep 12/91; LA Times, Sep 12/91; AP, Sep 12/91; UPI, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91; B Sun, Sep 13/91; P Inq, Sep 13/91; W Post, Sep 13/91; WSJ, Sep 13/91; USA Today, Sep 13/91; W Times, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 13/91; AP, Sep 13/91; UPI, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 14/91)
NASA announced the launching by USA Today, together with NASA and the National Association of Elementary School Principals, of "Visions of Exploration." This was the first multi-media educational program designed to bring the spirit of exploration into the classroom in 1992, the International Space Year. (NASA Release 91-147)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced plans to create a new Office of Space Flight Development. This would allow the existing Office of Space Flight to concentrate on the safety and efficiency of space flight. (NASA Release 91-148)
According to the Los Angeles Times, an ingenious "Mars rover" that Soviet scientists want to send to Mars, was ready to be tested in the Mojave Desert. The desert was selected because it resembles the surface of Mars. (LA Times, Sep 13/91)
The local newspaper carried an article on an area resident, Dale Reed, who said his "lifting-body concept"--an aircraft shape that eliminated the need for wings, influenced the design of the Space Shuttle. He built scale models of his idea and convinced his boss, Paul Bikle, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, to try it on a glider. Reed was a NASA engineer for 32 years and subsequently worked as senior engineer for PRC, Inc., a NASA contractor. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Sep 13/91)
Several newspapers commented on the study by a panel of experts, headed by Edward A. Frieman of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, released by the Federation of American Scientists. The report recommended that NASA scrap plans for six huge scientific platforms to gather data for studies of global warming as part of the Earth Observation System. Instead, experts urged that NASA use smaller satellites that could provide critical data more quickly and more cheaply. (LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; Time, Sep 16/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91)
NASA's launch of the UARS satellite to study the ozone layer was covered extensively by the media. The launch was slightly delayed by communications hitches between ground and the satellite and communications difficulties continued after the launch. Later reports, however, indicated controllers had succeeded in getting the faulty data receiver to work. On September 16 the Discovery temporarily had to move to a lower orbit to avoid possible collision with an old Soviet rocket. (NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91; P Inq, Sep 15/91; W Post, Sep 15/91; AP, Sep 15/91; UPI, Sep 15/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 16/91; USA Today, Sep 16/91; W Post, Sep 16/91; W Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91; P Inq, Sep 17/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter from Norman R. Augustine, former chairman of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, assessing NASA's efforts over the preceding nine months to implement the committee's recommendations. The letter recognized that NASA took "many significant actions" but "much is yet to be accomplished." (NASA Editors' Note N91-60; UPI, Sep 16/91)
According to Aviation Week and Space Technology, quoting the Earth Observing System (EOS) Engineering Review Panel, NASA's plans for EOS satellites A and B "should be completely reconfigured." The panel also stated that the EOS Data and Information System was incorrectly configured and lacked central control of data archiving and distribution. NASA released the report on September 23. The same issue of the magazine reported that NASA was discussing with Martin Marietta reintroducing the Titan 3 booster to launch the EOS spacecraft into polar orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, in the late 1990s. (AvWk, Sep 16/91; NASA Editor's Note N91-64)
The media covered preparations of the Discovery crew for the first Shuttle night landing at Cape Canaveral, scheduled for September 18. As it developed, the bad weather forced a diversion of the Shuttle from Florida, and the actual landing occurred the night of September 18 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. Reportedly, preliminary findings were that the Shuttle was in good shape after its landing. (USA Today, Sep 17/91; AP, Sep 17/91; UPI, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 18/91; USA Today, Sep 18/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; C Trin, Sep 18/91; AP. Sep 18/91; UPI, Sep 18/91; P Inq, Sep 19/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; W Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91; W Post, Sep 19/91; USA Today, Sep 19/91; LA Times, Sep 19/91; AP, Sep 19/91; B Sun, Sep 19/91)
AP reported, as quoted in the Washington Times, that the Soviet cosmonauts were waiting to return home, puzzled by home conditions. Their return was postponed after the republic of Kazakhstan claimed ownership of the territory on which they were supposed to land. Furthermore, the Soviet space program was experiencing financial and administrative difficulties. (AP, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91)
NASA announced the resignation for personal reasons of Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson Jr., an internationally recognized propulsion expert, who served more than 25 years in NASA. (NASA Release 91-149; AP, Sep 17/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; Decatur Daily, Sep 18/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 18/91; Birmingham News, Sep 18/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Sep 19/91; AvWk, Sep 23/91)
President George Bush, speaking to school children over a NASA hook-up, said he would probably be rejected by NASA for a space launch because of his age, 67. (UPI, Sep 17/91; AP, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 18/91)
According to AP, NASA and the Pentagon were undecided how much information they would give about the next Shuttle mission, the November launch of Atlantis, intended to release a satellite designed to spot an enemy missile attack. (AP, Sep 18/91)
A senior U.S. trade official, on condition of anonymity, stated that Japan had drafted a plan to subsidize the entry of several Japanese companies into the commercial satellite-building industry but abandoned the plan under U.S. pressure. Hiroshi Hirabayashi, economics minister at the Japanese Embassy in Washington, confirmed the existence of such a plan but said if implemented it would probably be limited to research satellites. (NY Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91)
NASA issued a preliminary report on findings of the June Spacelab Shuttle mission. The human body's adaptation to weightlessness began on the launch pad and researchers needed to develop new ways to counteract these physiological effects. These effects include weight loss, loss of body fluid, drop in red blood cell production, and reduced heart pumping capacity. (UPI, Sep 19/91; AP, Sep 20/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91; W Post, Sep 20/91; USA Today, Sep 20/91)
NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, had selected H and H Consolidated, Inc. of Hampton, Virginia, for an operation/maintenance and Alteration contract of facilities and equipment services. (NASA Release C91-jj)
Business Week reported that NASA planned to use three giant, 70-foot-tall computer-controlled robots to inspect, clean, dry, and line new and refurbished solid rockets for space flights. Vadeko International, Inc., a Canadian engineering company, was to design and build the robotic system, to be in service in 1993. (Bus Wk, Sep 23/91)
NASA announced the renaming of the Gamma Ray Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, by Space Shuttle Atlantis, in honor of American physicist Arthur Holly Compton. (NASA Release 91-151)
Gerald Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center at a press conference spoke of the findings of the Gamma Ray Observatory to date. He said that an instrument called the Burst and Transient Source Experiment had detected 117 gamma ray bursts since launching. Thse bursts were randomly scattered, not from the center of the Milky Way Galaxy as previously thought. (AP, Sep 23/91; P Inq, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; W Post, Sep 24/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
The Government Accounting Office issued a study criticizing NASA's system of testing spacecraft before launching. It called the system poorly organized with testing practices varying from one center to another because NASA lacked uniform policies. The study dealt with the Hubble Space Telescope and the weather satellites, as well as Space Shuttles. (AP, Sep 23/91; UPI, Sep 23/91; LA Times, Sep 23/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; WSJ, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
The Chicago Tribune featured Elmhurst College professor Frank Mittermeyer who has been growing tomatoes from some 1,000 seeds that orbited Earth for six years and were retrieved by Space Shuttle Challenger in 1990. Mittermeyer noticed the second generation of space tomatoes were not as robust as the first. (C Trin, Sep 23/91)
NASA announced that the first United States-Soviet space art team exchange would occur on September 28 when the U.S. team arrived in Moscow. The purpose was to have each team produce paintings of the other country's space activities. (NASA Release 91-152)
NASA announced that scientists and engineers at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, successfully tested the mini-rover Rocky III in the Avawatz Mountains south of Death Valley. The mini-rover, weighing 52 pounds, was designed to be used on Mars. (NASA Release 91-153; Bus Wk, Sep 9/91)
According to the Washington Times, Aurora Flight Services Corporation of Manassas, Virginia, won a contract from NASA for up to three of Aurora's Perseus A pilotless high altitude research aircraft. (W Times, Sep 24/91)
The media covered NASA spokesman Mitch Varnes' report that during routine structural inspections of Atlantis in the hangar cracks were discovered on the protective panel joints of the wings. As a result, NASA was stripping the special, heat-resistant seals and seeking to discover the source of the cracks. It was uncertain whether the discovery would delay the November launch of Atlantis. (UPI, Sep 25/91; AP, Sep 26/91; UPI, Sep 26/91; NY Times, Sep 27/91; W Times, Sep 27/91; W Post, Sep 27/91; USA Today, Sep 27/91)
The press reported that Space Shuttle Discovery left California on September 24 enroute back to Florida, flying piggyback aboard a jetliner. (LA Times, Sep 25/91; UPI, Sep 26/91; NY Times, Sep 27/91)
NASA announced that Franco Malerba would be Prime Payload Specialist and Umberto Guidoni Backup Payload Specialist for the Tethered Satellite System mission on Space Shuttle Atlantis in the summer of 1992. This is a cooperative mission between NASA and Italy's space agency, Agenzia Spaziale Italiana. (NASA Release 91-154)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite appeared to confirm aircraft and ground-based research about the chemical processes leading to ozone depletion. (NASA Release 91-155)
AP reported that House-Senate legislators agreed to provide $26 billion in 1992 for NASA's planned Space Station. (AP, Sep 26/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 28/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 29/91)
NASA announced that scientists studying data from spacecraft Galileo concluded there were lightning storms on Venus. Science magazine just published eight scientific articles based on Galileo's Venus observations. (NASA Release 91-156; W Post, Sep 30/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly presented the Minority Contractor of the Year Award to Consolidated Industries, Inc., of Huntsville, Alabama, and the Minority Subcontractor of the Year Award to Network Solutions, Inc., of Herndon, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-157)
In response to the House-Senate Conference report on the FY 1992 budget, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA was very grateful for the funding for Space Station Freedom. However, it was disappointed that the total NASA appropriation did not keep up with inflation. (NASA Release 91-158)
The Discovery astronauts held a press conference at which they answered questions about their flight. They indicated it was easy to avoid the Soviet rocket chunk but that space debris could be a major threat to future crews. The amount of haze in the atmosphere from Mount Pinatubo or other sources, particularly struck astronauts who participated in earlier flights and aroused concern for the environment. (AP, Sept 27/91; UPI, Sep 27/91; LA Times, Sep 28/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had successfully tested a 17.5-foot-long solid rocket motor on September 26. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, Boeing donated $300,000 on September 26 toward building a full-size mockup of Space Station Freedom at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the six moons of Neptune discovered by Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989 were given names by the International Astronomical Union's Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams. In addition, Saturn's newest moon, Pan, was discovered by Mark Showalter, a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (P Inq, Sep 28/91)
The Washington Times discussed the viability of the Washington area as a launch/landing site for space rockets. The various space-related industries already found in the area were mentioned, but an engineering school was lacking to provide a local talent pool. (W Times, Sep 29/91)
The Washington Times also dealt with space law and the risks involved in such matters as rocket launches. In the latter connection, it cited Orbital Sciences Corporation and its difficulties. Because most commercial space companies had NASA or the U.S. government as a customer, changes in government had an impact on the legal aspects. (W Times, Sep 29/91)
According to the Washington Post, in an article on the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and their impact on the environment, NASA used 20,000 gallons of CFCs yearly to decontaminate the inside of its Space Shuttles and orbiters and to scrub down the hardware on the launch pads.(W Post, Sep 29/91)
The Washington Times asserted that science fiction based on the work of Isaac Asimov influenced Bib Citron who helped design the Spacehab module through his work for the Space Travel Company. The flight of the first Spacehab module was to be in July 1993. (W Times, Sep 29/91)
According to the Washington Post, new findings of astronomers tended to indicate that the universe was both smaller and younger than previously thought. The result, if the Hubble Space Telescope should be able to provide accurate readings on the matter, might prove that the calculations of the Hubble constant (regarding the age and size of the universe) needed to be revised. (W Post, Sep 30/91)
NASA announced that the Soft x-ray Telescope, one of four instruments on the Japanese Solar-A spacecraft launched August 30, 1991, took its first soft x-ray image of the sun. (NASA Editor's Note N91-68)
In an editorial entitled "Fiscal Realism at NASA," NASA was commended for its reported readiness to stress smaller, less costly missions. In this connection, the paper believed that Space Station Freedom should be scrapped as well as the Earth Observing System platforms. (CSM, Oct 1/91)
The New York Times cited the recent issue of Nature with articles by NASA scientists and others on the possibility of using advanced technologies to make Mars's environment more terrestrial and thus hospitable to humans. A May issue of Life magazine was also cited as evidence of growing scientific interest in the potential habitability of Mars. Nevertheless, serious obstacles remained, in addition to the tremendous costs that would be involved. (NYT, Oct 1/91)
The media covered extensively NASA's receiving $2 billion for the planned Space Station in the House budget action but having a new launch system and the National Aerospace Plane cut drastically. The House voted to give NASA 14.3 billion in FY 1992 and the Senate later approved the compromise bill. (UPI, Oct 2/91; AP, Oct 3/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; NY Times, Oct 3/91; W Times, Oct 3/91; LA Times, Oct 3/91; USA Today, Oct 3/91; CSM, Oct 4/91)
NASA said small cracks were found in the thermal seals on the wings of a second Space Shuttle, the Columbia. The cause of the cracks remained undetermined. (AP, Oct 2/91; Fla Today, Oct 2/91; W Times, Oct 3/91)
A Soyuz rocket blasted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the Mir Space Station carrying an Austrian electronic engineer and the first cosmonaut from the Republic of Kazakhstan, where Baikonur is located. The joint Soviet-Austrian mission was part of a Soviet effort to help pay for the space program with joint international flights. Tass reported the rocket docked with Mir on October 4. On October 10, two Soviet cosmonauts and the first Austrian in space returned to Earth, according to Tass. (AP, Oct 2/91; UPI, Oct 2/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; AP, Oct 4/91; AP, Oct 10/91)
NASA's Soft X-ray Telescope aboard the Japanese Solar-A spacecraft launched from Japan's Kagoshima Space Center on August 30, made its first X-ray images of the sun. The purpose of the mission was to produce pictures of the genesis and life of solar flares to enable scientists to learn more about them. (W Times, Oct 3/91)
NASA announced that the X-29, an unusual research aircraft built to investigate the feasibility of a forward-swept wing design, made its last flight in its high angle of attack research program on September 30 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 91-159; Antelope Valley Press, Oct 4/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the planned creation of the Office of Management Systems and Facilities. Benita A. Cooper was to be the Associate Administrator for this office which was to enhance total quality management. (NASA Release 91-160)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced two key appointments: Arnold D. Aldrich to be Associate Administrator for the new Office of Space Systems Development and Richard H. Petersen to become Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 91-161; AP, Oct 3/91; Daily Press, Oct 4/91; W Post, Oct 10/91)
NASA discovered cracks in the protective thermal layer of the wings of Discovery, the third Space Shuttle to experience this problem. (AP, Oct 3/91; W Times, Oct 4/91)
NASA announced the selection of two new institutions to serve as NASA Specialized Centers of Research and Training (NSCORT). The centers are to be at the University of California, San Diego, and Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories, Berkeley, California. A foreign center, the University of Giessen was tentatively selected but awaited full endorsement and funding by the German government. (NASA Release 91-163)
NASA announced the selection of MK-Ferguson Corporation, Cleveland for a contract to provide engineering, construction, and maintenance services to NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C91-mm)
William B. Lenoir said NASA's manned space flight division must cut expenses by 3 percent each year in the next five years to save $1 billion. The last alternative would be to reduce the number of space flights but that would be "a couple of years away." Later media comments indicated that NASA's budgetary discipline and the slimming down of the Space Station plans appeared to be paying off for NASA in relation to Congress. (AP, Oct 5/91; AvWk, Oct 21/91; W Post, Oct 28/91)
The Baltimore Sun published an article quoting Richard Stolarski, research scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, concerning ozone depletion. He stated that the hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic failed to shrink as was hoped. He wondered whether the same might occur over the North Pole and indicated the need to understand the limits under which ozone depletion occurred. Subsequently, NASA announced the findings of its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, which indicated the ozone depletion in Antarctica was almost as severe as the record year of 1987. (B Sun, Oct 5/91; NASA Release 91-165; AP, Oct 9/91; UPI, Oct 9/91; NY Times, Oct 10/91; USA Today, Oct 10/91; CSM, Oct 10/91; W Post, Oct 11/91)
An editorial in a space publication criticized NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for its handling of GOES meteorological satellites. The magazine maintained that the two agencies failed "in their effort to balance the risk of buying new technology with the need to provide assured satellite service." (SP News, Oct 7-13/91)
NASA announced that its newest Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, launched from Atlantis on August 2, 1991, was operational. This expanded the communications capability required by the increasing number of scientific spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-164; Business Wire, Oct 9/91)
NASA further announced the selection of two additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These were the Center for the Commercial Development of Space in Satellite and Hybrid Communication Networks, University of Maryland Systems Research Center, College Park, and the Space Communications Technology Center, Florida Atlantic University Research Corporation, Boca Raton. In an unrelated action, NASA and Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, agreed to discontinue the Center for Space Processing of Engineering Materials because of decline in research by metals producers. (NASA Release 91-166; B Sun, Oct 10/91)
The Christian Science Monitor commended NASA for naming the orbiting Gamma Ray Observatory the Arthur Holly Compton Gamma Ray Observatory because of the late Nobel Prize laureate's studies of the subject. Moreover, the renaming focused attention on one of NASA's "outstandingly successful missions." (CSM, Oct 9/91)
NASA announced the selection of new Regional Technology Transfer Centers to replace the Industrial Applications Centers whose contracts expire in 1191. The centers were the following: Northeast - Center for Technology Commercialization, Westborough, Massachusetts; Mid-Atlantic - University of Pittsburgh; Mid-West - Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus, Ohio; Southeast - University of Florida, Alachua; Mid-Continent - Texas A and M University, College Station; and Far West - University of Southern California, Los Angeles. (NASA Release 91-167)
NASA announced that the Antarctic ozone levels had reached the lowest values ever observed on October 6 (110, plus or minus 6), according to preliminary data from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-168; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with senior NASA officials in Washington to discuss Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson's interim viewpoints on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices. Thompson's final recommendations and a proposed implementation plan were to follow in early November. (NASA Release 91-169)
NASA announced that beginning October 12, 1992, 500 years after Columbus's discovery of America, NASA would begin the most comprehensive search ever for evidence of intelligent life elsewhere in the universe. The NASA Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) microwave project is to be a ground-based decade-long effort to detect microwave radio transmissions. (NASA Release 91-170; UPI, Oct 11/91)
William J. O'Neil, manager of the $1.4 billion Galileo project at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said Galileo fired its thrusters to put it on a course to take it close to the asteroid Gaspra on October 29. (AP, Oct 10/91; W Times, Oct 10/91; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
The speech of Lennard A. Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, at a September 19 meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, was published in Washington Technology. Fisk first dealt with the causes and effects of negative publicity about NASA and went on to defend NASA's accomplishments and the rationale for NASA's existence as being an absolute rather than a relative one, which made developing a consensus harder. He concluded that "The adventure of space is a vital part of our society. The space program needs to be perceived as the best this country has to offer." (Washington Technology, Oct 10/91)
According to the Los Angeles Daily News, NASA decided to modernize Space Shuttles Atlantis and Discovery in Florida rather than in Palmdale. This development, which was designed to save time and money, would cost the Antelope Valley of California more than 400 jobs. (LA Daily News, Oct 10/91)
The paper carried an article featuring Ali Abu Taha, whom it described as "telling NASA things it would rather not hear" over the preceding five years. He filed suit against NASA, Rockwell International (maker of the Shuttle's orbiter), and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. However, the U.S. District Court in Alexandria, Virginia rejected his three suits. (Washington City Paper, Oct 11/91)
The Daily Press recounted the dedication on October 10 of the 100-ton Variable Density Wind Tunnel as a National Historic Landmark. The ceremony occurred at NASA's Langley Research Center. The wind tunnel was responsible for more efficient wing designs of aircraft and established NASA's predecessor, the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics as a technologically competent organization. (Daily Press, Oct 11/91)
A feature article in the Los Angeles Times discussed the changing qualifications for astronauts. In the early days of NASA they were tough, independent male test pilots. More recently, they became better educated and diverse in backgrounds, men and women and different ethnic origins. A second article described Mae Jemison, NASA's only black female astronaut. (LA Times, Oct 13/91)
The media reported the launch from Cape Canaveral by Orbital Sciences Corporation of a small Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments for the Defense Department. The experiments were intended to help in designing sensors to measure heat-emitting "signatures" of ballistic missiles in flight. (AP, Oct 14/91; W Times, Oct 15/91)
Representative Howard Wolpe wrote in a space trade journal concerning the GOES-NEXT weather satellites. He commended Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher's statement that although GOES-NEXT would not be launched on schedule, it would meet original specifications. He continued to be concerned about a possible five-year gap without a weather detection system and stated that firm commitments of assistance must be obtained from Europe and Japan. He also criticized NASA for lacking a planned prototype instrument for GOES and for its ineffective cost controls. (SP News, Oct 14-20/91)
BDM International, Inc. president Earle C. Williams announced that the McLean, Virginia, firm won a contract to provide technical and management assistance for NASA's Earth Observing System Program. (PR Newswire, Oct 15/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Paul H. Holloway as Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-171)
NASA announced that Pennsylvania State University's Center for Cell Research, State College, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had begun a new space program to enable U.S. industry to enhance the purification and processing of cells, subcellular particles, proteins, growth factors, and other biological products. (NASA Release 91-172)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the award of a contract to the Ball Corporation, Boulder, Colorado, to complete construction of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement for the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release C91-oo; AP, Oct 16/91; PR Newswire, Oct 16/91; B Sun, Oct 17/91; WSJ, Oct 17/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston announced the award of a contract to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, modifying the Space Station Freedom Program Integration Support (Schedule B) contract. Schedule B involved the integration of Space Station components. (NASA Release C91-nn)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) sponsored a workshop of scientists, environmentalists, regulators, and aerospace industry representatives the summer of 1991. As a result, a report was issued on October 17, concluding that rockets blasting into space generate pollutants that deplete stratospheric ozone, increase acid rain, contribute to global warming, and reduce air quality. Jerry Grey, science and technology policy director for the AIAA, said all nations that launch rocket-powered vehicles should contribute to an international effort to reduce the problems. The United States used more solid rockets than any other nation. For example, NASA estimated that each Space Shuttle flight deposited about 75 tons of chlorine into the ozone layer. Subsequently, Reuters interviewed Steve Newmann, chief environmental engineer in NASA's Office of Space Flight. He admitted NASA played a minor role in depleting the ozone layer it was studying but said NASA was working to make its next generation of space vehicles more environmentally friendly. (NY Times, Oct 18/91; B Sun, Oct 28/91)
According to UPI, the new Shuttle Endeavour's maiden voyage in April 1992 faced a significant delay because of numerous problems discovered after it was delivered to the Kennedy Space Center. Among other reasons for the delay were the parts cannibalized from Endeavour to avoid major launch delays of other orbiters. As the Shuttle was inspected, more than 1,400 problem reports were filed regarding work needed. (UPI, Oct 19/91)
NASA scientists connected with the Hubble Space Telescope correction project were quoted with reference to the amount of work to be done. The Hubble science team, subject to top-level NASA approval, was to build a second generation Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WFPC) with only four instead of eight of the powerful electronic light detectors known as charge-coupled devices (CCDs). The proposed change took account of tight money and time pressures but meant that the photographic operation might take 10 to 20 percent longer, according to Ed Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble scientist. The extent of repairs to be made would be decided by the end of 1991 but probably would involve Shuttle astronauts making three or four spacewalks of at least six hours each. (W Post, Oct 20/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91)
Douglas Birch authored a feature article on the Hubble telescope, its findings and its limitations because of the flawed main mirror. Reportedly, the Hubble repair mission is to occur in November or December 1993. Astronomers were also concerned about the telescope's age in terms of its effectiveness. Much of Birch's article centered on an interview with Douglas Duncan, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Institute on the campus of Johns Hopkins University, who used the Hubble telescope spectrograph data extensively. (B Sun Magazine, Oct 20/91)
The Washington Times carried an article on Baikonur, the rocket workers' town in the Soviet Union founded by the military in the same year as the Cosmodrome, 1955. No permanent residents were registered in Baikonur, known as Leninsk, but the city had 100,000 inhabitants crammed into a 4.5 square mile area. Tables of Soviet "space firsts" and "space endurance records" were included. Another article in the same issue described Soviet efforts to sell or rent space gear, including parts of the orbiting Mir Space Station, to ease the financial situation of the space program.
A discussion of the robot explorer Magellan's probe of Venus during its 16 months and more than 3,000 orbits, mapping more than 90 percent of the surface, appeared in the Washington Post. Lead scientist Stephen Saunders of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, which manages the mission, was quoted as saying that scientists were looking for "active plate tectonics" such as occur on earth, such as "continental drift." To date, no such discoveries occurred. (W Post, Oct 21/91)
NASA announced November 13 as the launch date for Consort 4, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments. The experiments was to be launched from the Naval Ordnance Missile Test Station at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, with material from the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. (NASA Release 91-173)
A trade publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly had asked Vice President Dan Quayle to signal strong support to Congress for the X-30 National Aerospace Plane (NASP) program. NASA feared a major cut in funding of the NASP would significantly delay the program. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
The same publication discussed the way in which Michael Griffin, described as "NASA's new moon/Mars czar," was shaking up NASA's space exploration initiative. Reportedly, Griffin wanted to move fast on launching a "relatively inexpensive, high-visibility space mission," such as sending an unmanned spacecraft to scout for a permanent base on the moon. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
Forrest McCartney, director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, said NASA might have to close one of its two Shuttle launch pads to save money. (P Inq, Oct 22/91)
The United Nations (U.N.) reported that the world's ozone layer, particularly over the Antarctic, was thinner than ever and the "hole" over the Antarctic was increasing. However, U.N. scientist Ruman Bojkov said the U.S. Space Shuttle Challenger had not significantly contributed to the situation. Readings were taken by NASA satellites and ground-based spectrometers and the data analyzed by international scientists convened by the U.N. Environment Program and the World Meteorological Organization. Subsequently Environmental Protection Agency Administrator William K. Reilly said "The problem is more serious than we believed." (UPI, Oct 22/91; P Inq, Oct 23/91; W Post, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; WSJ, Oct 23/91; CSM, Oct 23/91; W Times, Oct 23/91; B Sun, Oct 23/91; LA Times, Oct 23/91)
AP quoted President Bush's science adviser, D. Allan Bromley, as saying that declassification of Star Wars technology would enable NASA to begin a $30 billion study of Earth's environment earlier and cheaper. Bromley added that the Defense Department and the Department of Energy would allow the use of some of their inventions for non-military purposes. The most important was a technology that allowed pointing an instrument from space with greater accuracy to a given spot on Earth and holding it, as well as a technique to fly individual satellites, bring them together, and lock them into formation so several satellites can look at the same spot on Earth. (AP, Oct 22/91)
According to a local newspaper, a NASA/Ames research plane equipped with infrared scanners that can cut through smoke gave firefighters their first clear view of the intensity of the fire in the Oakland hills. A videotape of the infrared data helped the firefighters and because the C-130B senses heat, not light, the NASA plane can provide information not available from firefighting helicopters. (San Jose Mercury News, Oct 22/91)
NASA announced that both Voyager spacecraft were still going strong after 14 years, more than two years after Voyager 2 observed Neptune. The two Voyagers were in a new phase, called the Voyager Interstellar Mission, searching for the outer edge of the solar system, the heliopause. (NASA Release 91-174)
NASA announced the naming of M. Rhea Seddon as Payload Commander for Spacelab Life Sciences-2 Space Shuttle mission, scheduled for launch in July 1993. (NASA Release 91-175)
Rockwell International Corporation stated that NASA had awarded it a three-year $453.5 million contract extension to provide maintenance and repair for the Space Shuttles. (UPI, Oct 23/91)
According to AP, the Hubble Space Telescope presents astrophysicists with a mystery: the existence of hydrogen clouds in space that should have dissipated billions of years ago. According to Ed Weiler, NASA's space telescope program manager, this was Hubble's most significant finding to date. (AP, Oct 23/91)
Florida Today reported that Forrest McCartney, who had headed Kennedy Space Center since 1986 would be retiring in about a year. Subsequently, the media reported that McCartney had been asked to step aside early by top NASA managers. (Fla Today, Oct 23/91; UPI, Oct 25/91; AP, Oct 26/91; W Times, Oct 27/91; O Sen Star, Oct 30/91)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was slowly hauled to its launch pad for a scheduled November 19 blastoff, according to UPI. NASA announced its mission was to deploy a Defense Support Program satellite designed to detect nuclear detonations, missile launches, and space launches from a geosynchronous orbit. A number of other experiments are to be performed during the 10-day flight. (NASA Release 91-176; UPI, Oct 24/91)
NASA announced that in conjunction with the Federal Aviation Administration it would sponsor an international government/industry workshop on aircraft icing. The workshop is to be held at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, which has the Lewis Icing Research Tunnel, the world's largest refrigerated icing tunnel. (NASA Note to Editors N91-75)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
According to the press, two members of the House subcommittee that oversees NASA spending, Chairman Bob Traxler, Democrat of Michigan, and ranking minority member Bill Green, Republican of New York, asked NASA Administrator Richard Truly why NASA did not buy a Mir Space Station or other technology from the Soviet Union. NASA replied that the U.S. aerospace industry would not like it. (AP, Oct 25/91; B Sun, Oct 26/91; LA Times, Oct 27/91)
The media covered the Galileo's approach to the asteroid Gaspra, which it was scheduled to fly within 1,000 miles of, making the first relatively close-up pictures of an asteroid. On October 29, Galileo took photographs of Gaspra as it flew by, but because its main antenna remained jammed the images could not be transmitted until the malfunction was fixed. (NY Times, Oct 27/91; W Times, Oct 28/91; P Inq, Oct 28/91; W Post, Oct 30/91; P Inq, Oct 30/91; B Sun, Oct 30/91; O Sen Star, Oct 30/91; Fla Today, Oct 30/91; H Chron, Oct 30/91; H Post, Oct 30/91; C Trin, Oct 30/91; UPI, Oct 30/91)
NASA announced that Dudley McConnell, Associate Director for Applications for NASA's Earth Science and Applications Division, died of an apparent heart attack. (NASA Obituary; Fla Today, Oct 29/91; W Post, Oct 31/91)
NASA announced that it and other institutions such as the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and a number of universities had begun a six-month airborne study to determine the probability that an ozone "hole," similar to the annual phenomenon seen in the Antarctic, would develop in the Northern Hemisphere. (NASA Release 91-178; Fla Today, Oct 29/91)
Quoting the Dallas Times Herald, AP reported on a study being done for NASA by Dr. Charles Pak, head of the Mineral Metabolism Department at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. According to Pak, white males might not be able to withstand long trips in space because their bones tend to deteriorate during extended weightlessness. Young black men were the best candidates for long-term space travel because women, who have smaller bone structure, also lose bone more rapidly. Dr. Stanley Feld, clinical professor at the Medical Center and head of endocrinology at the Presbyterian Hospital, said the important thing was to find ways to stop bone loss in space. (AP, Oct 28/91; Fla Today, Oct 29/91)
According to Florida Today, the Atlantis astronauts were scheduled to arrive at Kennedy Space Center in a few days, to begin preparations and a practice countdown for the Space Shuttle flight. (Fla Today, Oct 28/91; UPI, Oct 31/91)
James T. Rose, Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, announced his plan to leave NASA. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that John G. Mannix would take his place. (NASA Release 91-179)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly spoke on the opening day of the Space Exploration '91 convention in Houston, sponsored by the NASA Alumni League. He said that recent successes by unmanned missions were paving the way for future space initiatives. He also stressed the need for belt tightening over the next several years. (H Post, Oct 30/91; H Chron, Oct 30/91)
NASA unveiled a three-dimensional view of Venus created from images recorded by the Magellan spacecraft. Magellan detected a five-mile high volcano known as Maat Mons, about the size of Earth's largest volcano, Hawaii's Mauna Kea. (P Inq, Oct 30/91; W Post, Oct 30/91; NY Times, Oct 30/91; W Times, Oct 30/91; NY Times, Oct 30/91; Fla Today, Oct 30/91; C Trin, Oct 30/91; AP, Oct 30/91)
Florida Today published figures of Kennedy Space Center spending for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1991. The center spent $1.42 billion in Florida, an increase of 3.6 percent over the previous year. Of that amount, $1.03 billion  went for on-site contractors. (Fla Today, Oct 30/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Robert L. Crippen as the new Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, effective January 1, 1992. Crippen is to replace Forrest S. McCartney. (NASA Release 91-180; AP, Oct 31/91; UPI, Oct 31/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with Columbia Communications Corporation, Honolulu, to delay for up to six months the start of operations under Columbia's lease of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) C-Band capacity. NASA leased to Columbia the C-Band transponders on two geostationary TDRSS satellites to serve commercial international telecommunications customers in the Atlantic and Pacific coastal regions. (NASA Release 91-181)
The media reported that on October 31, a Federal grand jury in Iowa had indicted the Rockwell International Corporation and two of its employees on charges of overbilling NASA for work on the Space Shuttle program. On November 8, NASA announced its suspension of Collins Commercial Avionics, Cedar Rapids, Iowa, a division of Rockwell International from further government contracts because of the indictment. (NY Times, Nov 1/91; WSJ, Nov 1/91; P Inq, Nov 1/91; B Sun, Nov 1/91; W Times, Nov 1/91; AP, Nov 1/91; UPI, Nov 1/91; NASA Release 91-186; AP, Nov 9/91; Fla Today, Nov 11/91; W Post, Nov 11/91; WSJ, Nov 11/91; UPI, Nov 11/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer, quoting AP, reported that a hydraulic fuel tank in one of Space Shuttle Atlantis's solid rocket boosters burst after a test on October 31. However, according to NASA spokeswoman Lisa Malone, the rupture should not delay the scheduled launch of Atlantis. (P Inq, Nov 1/91)
The media discussed Forrest McCartney's being asked by NASA to step aside as head of the Kennedy Space Center so that he could be replaced by Robert Crippen. McCartney said he would have liked to stay on another year, but this was not possible. (W Post, Nov 1/91; W Times, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; AP, Nov 1/91; P Inq, Nov 2/91; UPI, Nov 2/91; NY Times, Nov 3/91; SP News, Nov 4-10/91; O Sen Star, Nov 9/91)
An AP article discussed NASA's Fort Lightning, near Cape Canaveral, where Bill Jafferis manages NASA's lightning research process. By greater understanding of lightning, forecasting could be improved, thus reducing interruptions and delays in Shuttle launches and saving money, equipment, and lives. (W Times, Nov 3/91)
NASA announced that undergraduate engineering students at Mississippi State University, Starkville, had won the competition to build a 50-foot mockup of the X-30/National Aero-Space Plane. (NASA Release 91-182; Fla Today, Nov 10/91)
In repositioning one of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites, TDRS-3, on October 22, it came near a Hughes Communications' Galaxy 1. On October 23 it disturbed GE Americom's Satcom 1R. The result was that cable television nationwide was disrupted. NASA Associate Administrator Charles T. Force said engineers suspected a hardware failure on TDRS caused the problem. (AvWk, Nov 4/91)
NASA announced the successful testing of a new method to measure surface pressure on airplanes during flight; such information provides data for improving plane designs. NASA tests used paint that became iridescent under ultraviolet light. The intensity of the light radiated by the paint, as seen in photographs, results from the flight pressure. (NASA Release 91-183; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 8/91)
Hughes Aircraft Company said its Space and Communications Group had signed a $300 million contract to build three communications satellites for Alpha Lyracom, a private global communications satellite operator. The first satellite was scheduled for launch in May 1994 and is to serve the Pacific Ocean region. (WSJ, Nov 5/91)
Findings presented at the American Astronomical Society's Division of Planetary Sciences conference suggested that Mercury had an ice cap on its north pole, even though it was the planet nearest the sun. The findings surprised the California Institute of Technology scientists who discovered them and were based on August experiments, the first radar photographs of an entire hemisphere of Mercury. The brightest reflection on the planet's north pole indicated a highly reflective substance such as ice over an area of an estimated 150 square miles. (AP, Nov 6/91; B Sun, Nov 7/91; P Inq, Nov 8/91; LA Times, Nov 11/91)
NASA announced that November 19 had been set for the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis, which would carry a full load of military and scientific experiments during its 10-day mission. Of major importance would be its deployment of the latest in a series of Defense Support Program reconnaissance satellites (NASA Launch Advisory; AP, Nov 7/91; UPI, Nov 8/91)
NASA announced the selection of 301 research proposals (from 2,583 received) for immediate contract negotiation in NASA's 1991 Small Business Innovation Research Program. While meeting federal research and development needs, the program aims to stimulate technological innovation. (NASA Release 91-184)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center announced the award to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, of a modification to the Space Station Freedom Schedule A contract. Schedule A provided hardware components for the Space Station and the modification will encompass the Integration, Test, and Verification Environment and Ada Compiler. (NASA Release C91-pp)
AP reported that NASA found a way to circumvent the jammed antenna on Galileo in order to receive photographs of the Gaspra asteroid. Images were being sent with the smaller antenna at a very slow rate. (AP, Nov 8/91; B Sun, Nov 9/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported a NASA announcement on November 8 that its $10 million effort to determine whether a hole in the Earth's protective ozone layer was developing over the North Pole, was delayed by mechanical problems in both the project's aircraft. Mike Kurylo, manager of NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Program, said the DC-8 jet had a crack in its landing gear and the high-altitude ER-2 aircraft was grounded for a problem with its wings. In addressing the same subject, the New York Times quoted the project's chief scientist as saying three ER-2 planes would be used to survey the ozone layer at high altitudes. (B Sun, Nov 9/91; NY Times, Nov 10/91)
The Baltimore Sun quoted Anne Thompson, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center with reference to the interconnectedness of the atmosphere's mounting problems: global warming, ozone depletion, and smog. As examples she pointed out that some hydroxyl-enhancing gases contributed to acid rain; others contributed to the greenhouse effect, while at the same time, hydroxyl played a vital role in stemming depletion of the Earth's ozone layer. (B Sun, Nov 9/91)
The media quoted Aviation Week and Space Journal magazine as saying that a $70 million cost overrun had doubled the price of two NASA spacecraft being developed to study the interaction between the Earth and the sun. The craft were being built for use in the 17-nation International Solar Terrestrial Physics Program. NASA officials reportedly confirmed the cost increases. (AP, Nov 10/91; W Times, Nov 11/91; Fla Today, Nov 11/91; B Sun, Nov 11/91)
Dramatic pictures were published of NASA spacecraft Magellan's findings on Venus. These included several of a peak that may be an active volcano surrounded by fresh lava, as well as the first global map of Venus. (Newsweek, Nov 11/91)
The British journal Nature carried an article by Rodney A. Viereck and Edmond Murad of Phillips Laboratory, a space research center at Hanscom Air Force Base, Bedford, Massachusetts. Their findings indicated that the probable reason for the eerie orange glow of the Shuttles was caused by oxygen in the upper atmosphere striking nitric oxide on the Shuttle's skin, forming excited nitrogen dioxide, which radiates light when it moves off the surface. (NY Times, Nov 12/91; Xinhua, Nov 12/91)
NASA announced that its latest target in efforts to understand the global climate and predict future patterns are the cirrus clouds. In mid-November, atmospheric scientists from NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, to lead were researchers to Coffeyville, Kanasas, where ground, airborne, and satellite measurement platforms were to conduct intensive cirrus cloud investigation for 25 days. (NASA Release 91-187)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, announced the appointment of former NASA deputy director J.R. Thompson Jr. as executive vice president. He was to manage the new Orbital office in Huntsville, Alabama, near Marshall Space Flight Center. (AP, Nov 12/91; W Post, Nov 13/91; W Times, Nov 13/91; Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 14/91)
A University of Alabama, Huntsville-managed sounding rocket launch was canceled on November 12 when an electrical problem occurred with one experiment. The launch of the Consort 4 from the White Sands New Mexico Missile Range was reset for November 16. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; AP, Nov 13/91)
The Air Force Eastern Space and Missile Center became the 45th Space Wing on November 12. The East Coast launch organization was responsible for facilities at Patrick, Cape Canaveral, Antigua, and Ascension. (Fla Today, Nov 13/91)
NASA announced that its research plane F-16XL demonstrated laminar airflow over a significant part of its wing while flying at supersonic speeds. This could increase flight efficiency and reduce fuel consumption. The experiment occurred in a series of 28 flights at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. In this connection, the New York Times wrote about wind shear problems faced by aircraft, leading to airline disasters, and NASA's work on three predictive systems made by Lockheed Corporation, Rockwell International, and Turbulence Prediction Systems. (NASA Release 91-188; Daily Press, Newport News, Nov 20/91; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 21/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
NASA released the first photograph of an asteroid, that of Gaspra, taken by Galileo October 29. (NASA Release 91-189; UPI, Nov 14/91; W Post, Nov 15/91; NY Times, Nov 15/91; W Times, Nov 15/91; USA Today, Nov 15/91; B Sun, Nov 15/91; LA Times, Nov 15/91; P Inq, Nov 15/91; AP, Nov 15/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released an internal agency report on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices, prepared by former Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson. Thompson focused on three thrusts: building on NASA field organizations as Centers of Excellence in specific areas of science, technology, and development; a reminder to "stick to basics" in engineering disciplines, and program management and realignments of certain NASA Headquarters office responsibilities to achieve more efficient program execution. (NASA Release 91-190; AP, Nov 15/91)
An article in Florida Today referred to former NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's proposal that some 100 top Shuttle program managers around the country be moved to Kennedy Space Center under a consolidation plan NASA was considering. The recommendations were to be discussed at a December 9-10 meeting with NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (Fla Today, Nov 15/91)
NASA announced the holding of a second national technology transfer conference at the San Jose Convention Center December 3-5. Sponsored by NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundation, Technology 2001 would showcase leading-edge technologies from the space agency and other federal agencies. (NASA Release 91-191)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for NASA's office of Space Systems Development, met with all staff at the Reston, Virginia Space Station Freedom office. He said NASA intended to maintain a strong and effective team at Reston during the Space Station Freedom development period. (NASA Release 91-192; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 15/91; W Post, Nov 16/91; Washington Technology, Nov 21/91)
AP reported that after a delay caused by a battery failure in one of the experiments, a three-ton Starfire 1 rocket blasted off from the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico. After its 15-minute flight peaking at 185 miles above Earth, researchers recovered the rocket's payload in the missile range 50 miles from the launch pad. The rocket spent seven minutes in microgravity, an area of little gravity on the edge of space, where nine experiments were conducted. (AP, Nov 16/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to preparations for the launch of Shuttle Atlantis, scheduled for November 19. Coverage included mention of a "spy camera" designed to take detailed pictures of installations on Earth from space. (P Inq, Nov 17/91; W Times, Nov 17/91; USA Today, Nov 18/91; B Sun, Nov 18/91; W Times, Nov 18/91; NY Times, Nov 18/91; C Trin, Nov 18/91; LA Times, Nov 18/91; AP, Nov 18/91; UPI, Nov 18/91; NY Times, Nov 19/91; USA Today, Nov 19/91; W Post, Nov 19/91; UPI, Nov 19/91)
The Huntsville Times indicated that NASA and consumers in general had much in common, namely a situation of being caught in a recession when careful budgeting was necessary. Nonetheless, many NASA programs, such as Magellan's probe of Venus, and the Hubble Space Telescope, were continuing their good work. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 17/91)
The Washington Post featured the space biology team at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, which has created a stir with a government-patented invention that allows large quantities of many types of human cells to be grown by removing the force of gravity. NASA's Rotating Wall Bioreactor had great potential for improving patient treatment and may grow still more cells when used in space. In this connection, NASA announced that the rotating wall vessel developed at the Johnson Space Center's Biotechnology Program, would be tested in space during the Atlantis flight. (W Post, Nov 18/91; NASA Release 91-195)
Thirteen European countries--Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland--met to discuss European Space Agency plans that were threatened by Germany's lack of funds. The German research budget was short $930 million because of an economic slowdown and the huge costs of German unification. The space agency's German Ariane rocket boosted at least 17 satellites into space and according to Germany's ZDF television network, was assured of funds. The question of funds for other projects, for which Germany and France were major funders, remained unclear. (AP, Nov 18/91; Science and Technology, Nov 25/91)
Robert Brown and Riccardo Giacconi of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore wrote an article favoring NASA's shift toward a more balanced program of small, intermediate, and large missions. The reason was that important research goals must be pursued with appropriate tools, including large spacecraft. For example, the Hubble Space Telescope, which was proving so valuable, needed a larger spacecraft as was to be the case with the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility under development. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
A space journal reported that Vice President Dan Quayle had asked David Thompson, former NASA engineer and current chairman, president, and chief executive officer of Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, to take the post of NASA Deputy Administrator. Thompson was considering the matter. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91)
The Washington Post highlighted NASA's encouragement of education and research by its so-called Get Away Special (GAS) program in which it carried space experiment canisters into space for nominal fees. The cost, set in 1976, ranged from $3,000 to $10,000, depending on the canister size. However, these fees recently were more than doubled, making them prohibitive for many educational institutions. Robert Tucker, NASA's director of space transportation services, indicated that neither the old nor the new prices represented the true cost, which NASA subsidized. (W Post, Nov 19/91)
NASA announced the selection of seven Historically Black Colleges and Universities to receive Core Research Center grants to develop further their research capability and research infrastructure. The institutions were: Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta; Fisk University, Nashville; Florida A&M University, Tallahassee; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia; Howard University, Washington, D.C.; North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro; and Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-193)
NASA officials told UPI that a 1993 Shuttle flight would end with a fully automatic, hands-off landing to test untried systems that might be needed if pilots were not up to the task after a long-duration mission (UPI, Nov 19/91)
On the night of November 19, NASA delayed the launch of Atlantis for at least five days because of the malfunction of a navigation unit in the satellite rocket that provided liftoff. (P Inq, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; W Post, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 20/91; LA Times, Nov 20/91; AP, Nov 20/91; UPI, Nov 20/91)
A mysterious object was scheduled to fly near Earth in December. Scientists do not know whether it is a new type of asteroid or a 20-year-old Apollo rocket that shot past the moon and was returning home. Subsequently, it was reported to be a tiny asteroid in circular Earth orbit. However, further reporting by another team of observers indicated it was more probably a cartwheeling rocket carcass. (W Times, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 21/91; P Inq, Dec 1/91; W Post, Dec 9/91)
A U.N.-sponsored study, the committee for which was co-chaired by Robert Watson, a NASA scientist, provided the first evidence of a summertime thinning of the Earth's protective ozone layer over parts of the Northern Hemisphere, including the United States. The findings were based on both ground and satellite data, according to Watson in a briefing. Evidence showed 3 percent of the summertime ozone layer and 6 percent of the wintertime ozone layer were lost over the middle-latitude regions during the 1980s; similar results were expected for the 1990s.
Robert Brown and Paul A. Vanden Bout, astronomers at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Charlottesville, Virginia, using the 12-meter telescope on Kitt Peak, Arizona, in July discovered carbon monoxide in a strange object previously found by researchers in Ursa Major. A huge gas cloud, at the fringe of the universe, it might be linked to a galaxy in formation. (P Inq, Nov 21/91; LA Times, Nov 25/91)
NASA announced that the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had selected EER Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, to provide vehicle, launch, and recovery services for the next series of Consort suborbital rocket missions. (NASA Release 91-194)
At a news conference at Goddard Space Flight Center, researchers from NASA and from the Soviet Central Aerological Observatory near Moscow announced the success of the first U.S.-Soviet space effort in 16 years. The engineer's model of the first Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS--U.S. technology-transfer laws prohibited the launch of a state-of-the-art TOMS aboard a Soviet satellite) was launched aboard a Soviet satellite August 15, and was sending back "high-quality data", according to Soviet deputy director Vyacheslav Khattatov. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; NY Times, Nov 23/91)
NASA's proposed launch on Columbus Day 1992 of an extended Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI) was described in some detail. SETI's seven-year duration was to have two phases, a "targeted search" directed from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, using the world's largest radio telescope in Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and an all-sky survey, run by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena over a five-year period, beginning with NASA's Deep Space Network radio observatory in Goldstone, California. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 29/91)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
A feature article dealt with NASA's management overhaul, which it described as nearly complete and based on recommendations of Congress, the Augustine panel, and the most recent report of former Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson. (W Post, Nov 25/91)
The Los Angeles Times described at some length the Yellow Creek Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Facility, to be located on the Tombigbee Waterway of the Tennessee Valley Authority, in the home district of Jamie L. Whitten, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. The $3 million project was to introduce a solid rocket system that was mandated by Congress but which NASA's advisory panel said was not needed and might not be as reliable as existing systems. The unemployment rate in this district of northern Mississippi was more than 20 percent, and critics maintained this was the reason for the facility being constructed here. (LA Times, Nov 25/91)
The media reported that the National Space Council decided that the new Landsat satellite to study environmental changes on earth and military movements, Landsat VII, would be funded by NASA and the Defense Department. Landsat VII was to resemble Landsat VI, which was scheduled for launch in late 1992. NASA Administrator Richard Truly testified at a congressional hearing on the subject November 26. (WSJ, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; W Times, Nov 27/91)
NASA announced that the first demonstration of digital radio broadcasting via satellite to a mobile vehicle, would occur December 2-6 in Washington, D.C. The presentation represented a joint effort of NASA and the U.S. Information Agency's Voice of America. (NASA Release 91-196)
The Baltimore Sun discussed a cooperative program between NASA and the Italian Space Agency, which was to supply the satellite. The program involved a tethered satellite, a concept developed by engineers at Martin Marietta Corporation. Martin Marietta developed the boom that was to deploy the satellite, which would be connected to the Shuttle by a long "string" or cable. The first mission was to include an electrodynamics test in which the satellite and tether were to be used to generate electricity. (B Sun, Nov 28/91)
NASA announced that its John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, had awarded EG&G Florida, Inc., a one-year extension of its contract for base operations services. (NASA Release C91-qq)
According to a feature article in the Aviation Safety Journal, a major way for pilots to learn how to respond to emergency situations was through the Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS). This system, initiated by the Federal Aviation Association in 1975, enabled pilots to profit from the experience of others. (Aviation Safety Journal, Fall 91)
NASA's Kevin Tucker described NASA's role in its Aviation Safety and Automation (AS/A) program. Begun in 1989, the program was to develop a technology to improve the safety of the national airspace system, by maximizing effectiveness and safety of automation without compromising human authority. (Aviation Safety Journal, Fall 91)
Media coverage was extensive of NASA's cutting short by three days the mission of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of a failed navigational unit. Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, December 1. The Shuttle landed in good condition although it lost a small electrical connector part on landing. (W Post, Dec 1/91; W Times, Dec 1/91; NY Times, Dec 1/91; B Sun, Dec 1/91;P Inq, Dec 1/91; P Inq, Dec 2/91; NY Times, Dec 2/91; W Post, Dec 2/91; W Times, Dec 2/91; B Sun, Dec 2/91; USA Today, Dec 2/91; AP, Dec 2/91; C Trin, Dec 2/91; UPI, Dec 2/91; B Sun, Dec 3/91; NY Times, Dec 3/91; W Times, Dec 3/91; USA Today, Dec 3/91)
A spy satellite monitoring center, officially known as the Onizuka Air Force Base, near Sunnyvale, California, needed no longer to be considered top secret. The center controlled 80 Pentagon military and spy satellites but this responsibility was gradually being transferred to the Consolidated Space Operations Center at Falcon Air Force Base in Colorado. According to a government report, the transfer would not be complete until 1993. (LA Times, Dec 2/91)
An editorial in a space journal advocated that NASA wind down its program for the construction of the National Aerospace Plane, the X-30, for which it has no funds, rather than wait until 1993 to decide. Instead the journal advocated NASA's focusing on "research and development that would continue its already impressive advances in materials and propulsion technology." (SP News, Dec 2-8/91)
NASA announced that a soccer ball-shaped carbon molecule might be the perfect propellant for a spacecraft engine that produced thrust by expelling charged atoms or molecules. Stephanie D. Leifer, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, and Winston A. Saunders of the California Institute of Technology proposed to use the molecule Carbon 60 as a fuel in ion engines. (NASA Release 91-197)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of H. Lee Beach Jr. as Deputy Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-198)
NASA's Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) program was featured in the Christian Science Monitor. Harvard University professor Paul Horowitz, designer of the Planetary Society equipment, was cited as an enthusiastic listener for signals from space over the past eight years. (CSM, Dec 4/91)
NASA announced that early results from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) confirmed the link between the presence of chlorine monoxide and the depletion of ozone in Earth's upper atmosphere. The UARS was launched by Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12, 1991. (NASA Release 91-199)
The Antelope Valley Press reported on NASA's testing of extensively modified F-16 jets as the first swept-winged aircraft to make laminar flow flights at supersonic speeds. Laminar flow was the even travel of air over an aircraft's surface when in flight. The tests would provide useful data for avoiding turbulence in commercial airline flights. (Antelope Valley Press, Dec 5/91)
NASA Associate Administrator Spence Armstrong met with Marshall Space Flight Center officials on December 4. He said NASA's programs put it in a good position to continue to attract top engineering talents. NASA would need to attract engineers from several previously underrepresented groups, including blacks, women, the disabled, and other minorities. (Htsvl Tms, Dec 5/91)
NASA announced that the Italian Space Agency (ASI) would design and develop two Mini Pressurized Logistics Modules for Space Station Freedom under a memorandum of understanding signed with NASA in Washington. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly signed on behalf of NASA and Luciano Guerriero, President of ASI, signed on its behalf. The two agencies also agreed to work toward expanding their relationship, including the provision of a Mini Laboratory. (NASA Release 91-200)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of an extension to the United Technologies Corporation's Hamilton Standard Division's Extravehicular Mobility Unit hardware contract. (NASA Release C91-rr)
NASA announced the naming of two additional NASA astronauts and three payload specialists to the crew for the Spacelab Life  Sciences-2 mission, set for launch in mid 1993. (NASA Release 91-201)
NASA held a news briefing designed to show that Space Station Freedom was back on track. NASA Administrator Richard Truly indicated that the final design of the station would be streamlined in weight and electrical power and would rely on robots for repairs. (USA Today, Dec 6/91; W Post, Dec 6/91; W Times, Dec 6/91; AP, Dec 6/91)
An Atlas-2 rocket boosted an $85 million European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) 2 communications satellite into orbit from Cape Canaveral. The satellite was the third in a series of French-built relay stations designed to route television and radio telephone signals across Europe. (UPI, Dec 7/91)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, mounted atop NASA's Boeing 747 Shuttle carrier, began its two-day flight back to Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (AP, Dec 7/91; W Times, Dec 8/91)
AP reported that statistically it was inevitable that astronauts would be obliged to make detours to avoid space junk. It happened twice within the previous three months, most recently with Atlantis a week and a half earlier, when it had to dodge 3,200 pounds of rocket debris. Under mission rules adopted after the Challenger explosion in 1986, astronauts must distance themselves from orbiting objects if they are expected to pass within a security zone that is 3.1 miles long, 1.2 miles wide, and 1.2 miles deep. NASA estimated there was one chance in 100,000 that a detectable object would collide with a spacecraft once inside that zone. (AP, Dec 9/91; NY Times, Dec 10/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, presented a check for $87,500 to the Challenger Center for Space Science Education to support a national educational teleconference to be aired in the fall of 1992 on Discovery Networks. (Business Wire, Dec 10/91; LA Times, Dec 12/91)
The Washington Post, quoting Edward Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble Space Telescope scientist, said that a computer programming error caused the Hubble to shut itself down temporarily on December 9. The problem was not considered serious and should result in losing only two days of scientific observations. NASA announced on December 12 that the Hubble resumed science data collection as of that morning and returned safely from its standby condition or safe mode, a capability built into all NASA spacecraft. In connection with the Hubble, the Baltimore Sun reported a problem with its spectrograph, which NASA believed it solved by leaving the power supply units for both ultraviolet detectors on all the time. (W Post, Dec 11/91; UPI, Dec 11/91; AP, Dec 11/91; W Times, Dec 12/91; NASA Release 91-204; C Trin, Dec 12/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; B Sun, Dec 13/91)
NASA announced the award to members of three Space Shuttle crews of the Vladimir M. Komarov Diploma by the National Aeronautic Association for their "outstanding achievements in the field of exploration of outer space. The awards were from the Council of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale. The crews receiving the awards were the January 1990 STS-32 mission, which retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility; the December 1990 STS-35 mission, which carried the ASTRO-1 astrophysics observatory; and the October 1990 mission STS-41, which deployed the joint NASA/European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft to study the sun. (NASA Release 91-202 Revised; Fla Today, Dec 15/91)
NASA announced a recent agreement between its Office of Commercial Programs and the University of Alabama, Huntsville (UAH), that would provide additional flight research opportunities on the Space Shuttle for NASA's 17 Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). In support of this, Instrumentation Technology Associates, Inc., Exton, Pennsylvania, signed a commercial agreement with UAH to provide the university's Consortium for Materials Development in Space CCDS, with flight hardware that would be flown on five Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 91-203)
Paul Hays, scientist in charge for NASA of one of 10 instruments on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS), launched by Discovery on September 15, said the UARS discovered surprisingly violent, continent-size 200-mile-per-hour windstorms in a rarely studied part of the atmosphere known as the mesosphere. (AP, Dec 12/91; C Trin, Dec 13/91; P Inq, Dec 14/91; W Post, Dec 16/91; LA Times, Dec 16/91; NY Times, Dec 17/91)
The Aerospace Industries Association said on December 11 that the U.S. aerospace industry would post record sales of $140 billion in 1991, but that employment during the year dropped 8 percent to 1.16 million workers. (LA Times, Dec 12/91)
Joseph Stickle, chief engineer at NASA's Langley Research Center, was quoted in connection with NASA's role in promoting small planes. He said that the annual convention of the Experimental Aircraft Association, held in Oshkosh, Wisconsin, was a place where NASA featured its innovations that would make small planes safer, such as a spin-resistant design, lightning-protection technology, or airfoils. (WSJ, Dec 12/91)
The media covered the refusal of a Federal judge on December 12 to order the public release of the audio tape of the last moments of the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986, saying it would violate the privacy of the victims' families. (NY Times, Dec 13/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; USA Today, Dec 13/91; W Times, Dec 13/91; AP, Dec 13/91)
William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said NASA hoped to cut the operating cost of its Space Shuttle program by 15 percent over a five-year period. It planned to do this by eliminating a layer of management and merging the offices of the Program Directorate in Washington, Level I, with the Program Office located at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Level II. The reorganization plan as yet lacked final approval. (W Times, Dec 13/91; Fla Today, Dec 13/91)
NASA announced the development by its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, of a new, more accurate, airborne radar system for topographic mapping of the Earth's surface. The instrument, called TOPSAR for topographic synthetic aperture radar, would be about three times more accurate than existing topographic mappers and had many commercial and scientific uses, according to Howard Zebker of the Pasadena laboratory. (NASA Release 91-205)
NASA announced that researchers at its Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, had developed a laser-based system for measuring winds above launch sites. The system called CLAWS, for Coherent Launch Site Atmospheric Wind Sounder, was created by the Spacecraft Controls Branch, Flight Systems Directorate, and Lockheed. CLAWS was used in the September 12 launch of Space Shuttle Discovery and might eventually replace weather balloons as a means of gathering data aloft. (NASA Release 91-206)
The Cleveland Plain Dealer reported that NASA's Lewis Research Center on December 13 refused to sign cleanup orders for nine sites within the Brook Park complex that were contaminated with hazardous materials. NASA officials indicated they wished to continue talks with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and that signing the orders would mean waiving their right to appeal. Moreover, they complained the agreement did not limit the sum the Ohio EPA could charge for overseeing the cleanup. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Dec 14/91)
The Chicago Tribune carried an article dealing with the boon that the blurred vision of the Hubble Space Telescope was proving to researchers. Some dozen teams of scientists took Hubble data and using their computer enhancement programs produced clearer images. In the process they have raised their own profiles in a sometimes obscure research field. (C Trin, Dec 15/91)
According to the Washington Post, for the fourth time since April, NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena were trying to free the antenna on the robot explorer Galileo. The scientists deduced that three of the 18 ribs of the antenna were stuck in the closed position. Being unable to deliver direct force, they sought to "shake" the structure by alternately heating and cooling it. On December 14-15, NASA tried again to free the jammed antenna without success. (W Post, Dec 15/91; UPI, Dec 16/91; W Post, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91; USA Today, Dec 18/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, announced a contract award to
The Christian Science Monitor reviewed NASA's nine proposed Space Shuttle missions for 1992. It noted the strong international flavor of the missions, including the ascent of the first Italian Space Agency astronaut aboard Atlantis in July 1992. Astronauts from Canada and the European Space Agency were to fly on several missions. In August, Japan's first professional astronaut was to ride on the new orbiter Endeavour, scheduled to debut in May as replacement for the Challenger. Other proposed missions and their scheduled dates were outlined. (CSM, Dec 19/91)
The New York Times reported that Edward C. Aldridge Jr., president of McDonnell Douglas Electronic Systems, who served on the National Space Council that made recommendations on NASA's programs, was to become president and chief executive of Aerospace, a federally financed research and development center in El Segundo, California. (NY Times, Dec 19/91)
The media stated that Space Shuttle Discovery was rolled to the launch pad to prepare for its scientific research mission in late January 1992. (AP, Dec 19/91; W Times, Dec 20/91; USA Today, Dec 20/91; LA Times, Dec 20/91)
NASA announced the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite was scheduled to be launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on May 28, 1992. The delay in the originally scheduled launch time was caused by the need for Modular Antenna Pointing System acceptance testing, which was completed, and software/hardware verification, which remained to be completed. (NASA Release 91-207)
NASA announced the appointment of Leonard S. Nicholson as Director, Space Shuttle program, replacing Robert L. Crippen who is to be Director, Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 91-208; AP, Dec 16/91; W Times, Dec 17/91; USA Today, Dec 17/91; Fla Today, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91)
The Wall Street Journal discussed the January 1989 offer by Nikolai Ponomarev-Stepnoy, leader of a Soviet design team that built a top secret military spy satellite, the Topaz-2, to sell, for a few million dollars, the Topaz-2 with the satellite's lightweight nuclear reactor. Moscow had no money to develop the reactor for commercial use but the paper deplored the U.S. delay in taking up the offer. The above discussion followed up on a statement by the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Office, reported on December 11, that the office stopped its share of funding for a space-based nuclear reactor projected to cost $1.6 billion by 2002. The reactor program, called SP-100, was shared by NASA and the Department of Energy. Instead the Pentagon office was inclined to go with the Soviet-style process represented by the Topaz, for which it earmarked $15 million. (WSJ, Dec 11/91; WSJ, Dec 17/91)
NASA released a lengthy report summarizing its 1991 activities. In addition to the various space flights and satellites deployed, the report covered the following fields: NASA management; space science and applications, with specific reference to Mission to Planet Earth, astrophysics, life sciences, solar system exploration, space physics, and ground-based research; space flight, including the Space Shuttle and flight systems; space systems development, stressing Space Station Freedom; exploration; aeronautics and space technology, including the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane; commercial programs, covering the commercial use of space, technology utilization, and small business innovation research; international relations; space communications; education; safety and mission quality; and FY 1992 NASA appropriations. (NASA Release 91-209)
Stephanie E. Meyers, Director of the Office of Commercial Space Transportation in the Office of Transportation, set forth the role of her office and the goals for commercial space. She saw the goals as the creation of space and ground systems essential to space operations in low Earth orbit. These ground systems needed to be adequate to support launches. Second, there must be government-owned and privately-owned launch vehicles to carry freight and passengers to the Space Station. In addition, commercial space companies faced obstacles in pursuing business in this very competitive industry and fair-trade relationships needed to be established. (Washington Technology, Dec 19/91)
NASA announced the selection of 70 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. The high technology firms were located in 21 states. (NASA Release 91-210)
An article critical of NASA for emphasizing space at the expense of the domestic aviation industry appeared in the Los Angeles Times. An example cited was Boeing's need to use a wind tunnel research facility operated by the Royal Aerospace Establishment in Britain to test its new top-secret 777 passenger jet because NASA had shut its decrepit wind tunnel in Sunnyvale, south of San Francisco. The aeronautics community reportedly felt neglected because only 6 percent of NASA's budget was allocated to aeronautics. As a result, there was little government support for research and development in U.S. general aviation, which has suffered in relation to government support given by other countries to their aviation industries. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, the Soviet space program was facing a difficult future. The main elements of the Soviet space program were concentrated in three republics: Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. Rockets were built primarily in Ukraine, control centers and instrument manufacturing plants were mainly in Russia, and the principal launch facility, the Baikonur Cosmodrome, was in Kazakhstan. Marcia S. Smith, the Soviet space expert on the staff of the Congressional Research Service, said those three republics agreed in early October they could operate by themselves. However, the economic situation became worse, causing increasing criticism. Nevertheless, communications satellites were essential to produce foreign investments and maintain a link with the outside world. Space research had technological spinoffs in areas such as computers, transportation, communications, and propulsion. Therefore, U.S. experts did not believe the former Soviet states would allow the space program to die. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
James C. Fletcher, who twice served as NASA Administrator (April 1971 - May 1977, May 1986 - April 1989), died of cancer. (AP, Dec 23/91; W Post, Dec 24/91; NY Times, Dec 24/91; W Times, Dec 24/91)
The General Accounting Office (GAO) report on NASA indicated it needed to improve contract oversight to reduce cost overruns and schedule delays. According to the GAO, one in every three NASA contracts experienced cost overruns and two in five experienced delays. The conclusion was based on audits at Marshall, Kennedy, Goddard, and Johnson field centers based on a statistical sample of 317 active or administratively closed-out contracts between 1984 and 1989. (Htsavl Tms, Dec 23/91)
NASA announced details of Space Shuttle mission STS-42, a worldwide research effort in the behavior of materials and life in weightlessness. This would be the 15th flight of Discovery and was scheduled for launch on January 22, 1992 from Edwards Air Force Base, California. Scientists from NASA, the European Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, the French National Center for Space Studies, the German Space Agency, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan cooperated in planning experiments aboard the International Microgravity Laboratory-1, which Discovery was to carry. This was to be the first of eight Space Shuttle flights planned for 1992, five of which were to feature international participation. (NASA Release 92-211)
In an article on the Antarctic, Robert Bindschadler, a NASA glaciologist, was quoted as pointing to his photos that marked two huge streams, 30 miles wide, of solid ice. He planned to drive stakes into the ice along a 90-mile line just below the mouth, and return two years later to see how far the stakes moved. By comparing the outflow of ice with measurements of snow accumulation in the interior, scientists can calculate whether the ice sheet is shedding ice. (WSJ, Dec 24/91)
The New York Times printed a feature article concerning the effects of El Nio and of the volcanic eruption of Mount Pinatubo on global climate. Reportedly, most climatologists agreed that the tiny drops of sulfuric acid and water produced by Mount Pinatubo's gaseous cloud would exert a cooling effect on the planet. NASA's James E. Hansen, of the Goddard Institute of Space Studies in New York, attempted to calculate the magnitude of this cooling. Based on a computerized simulation of the global climate, he placed the expected cooling at about 1 degree Fahrenheit--about enough to cancel out, temporarily, the global warming that occurred over the last 100 years. (NY Times, Dec 24/91)
Ivan Bekey, a NASA space power expert, was quoted by the New York Times in connection with an article on solar power from space. Bekey said that power beaming was not a problem. Rather, the difficulty was getting a large enough satellite into orbit. Currently large satellites ran between 20,000 to 30,000 pounds whereas a satellite to enable developing solar power would need to be some 100 times larger than that. Another possibility would be to mine the silicon for the solar cells and the aluminum for the structure from the moon. Those materials might make up 90 percent of the mass, meaning less weight would need to be launched from Earth. Bekey foresaw that developing power from space would be 20 or 30 years away. (NY Times, Dec 25/91)
The U.S. Space Surveillance Network, inside Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado, originally designed to serve as an early warning system against missile attacks, was described. The organization now mainly is engaged in tracking 7,000 pieces of orbiting space debris, to which some 240 new pieces were added each year. Efforts were being made internationally to develop new technologies to track space debris. In all, more than 100 spacecraft fragmented while in orbit, including at least 12 satellites deliberately destroyed by the United States and the Soviet Union during weapons testing. (P Inq, Dec 26/91)
The Los Angeles Times indicated that various scientific teams from the United States, Japan, and Europe, were trying to develop solar-sail spacecraft to race to the moon. At the time of writing, the Russian Federation was ahead of the other teams and planned to launch a test craft in October 1992. None of the research teams was government-sponsored and financing was a problem. Theoretically, the sail craft were to be propelled through space by tiny solar particles called photons. (LA Times, Dec 27/91)
UPI reported that although the Soviet Union no longer existed officially, the Soviet Space exhibit in Fort Worth, Texas, had not changed its name, nor would this happen when the space show move to St. Louis in early January. The exhibit proved very popular and attendance was up 60 percent; no official figures were given. (UPI, Dec 28/91)
According to AP, Ron Williams, who was chief pilot in a five-month research project sponsored by NASA to determine whether the Arctic had the same kind of ozone hole detected over the Antarctic five years previously, was about to fly his ER-2 plane from Bangor, Maine, with a ton of scientific instruments aboard. (AP, Dec 28/91; W Times, Dec 29/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer described the Temple University Hospital study on behalf of NASA to determine whether amino acid supplements could retard muscle loss. If so, astronauts on long space flights might not need to devote so many hours to exercise. Eighteen volunteers were being cycled through the six-day bed rest program, in groups of three. (P Inq, Dec 31/91)
